Created: 2024-06-27T19:50:38.835953
Name: Recreational_water_quality_and_health:_Protecting_your_health
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environment/recreational-water/protecting-health.html
Package ID: 04079572-855c-49e1-91d7-63fa8da9eae2
Keywords: ['Recreational water quality', 'health', 'Protecting your health', 'up-to-date', 'monitoring results', 'swimming advisories', 'local health department', 'or municipal websites', 'Pack protective gear', 'Follow all posted signs', 'swimming advisories', 'warnings for specific hazards', 'rules about pets', 'changing tides', 'strong currents', 'Report your illness', 'local public health unit']
Notes: Before your visit, Check for up-to-date water quality monitoring results and swimming advisories on local health department or municipal websites. Pack protective gear such as: hats, sunglasses, sunscreen, personal flotation devices (if needed). Talk to your health care provider about the risks of taking part in recreational water activities if you're more susceptible to infections, such as: a senior, someone with a weakened immune system. Follow all posted signs.  After leaving the area. Shower with soap and water as soon as you can after spending time in the water or on the beach. This will wash away microorganisms and any other contaminants. If you become ill after your visit, talk to your healthcare provider. Report your illness to your local public health unit. This can help identify outbreaks of disease related to the recreational water area.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Recreational water and health: Protecting your health - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Healthy living Health and the environment Water quality and health Recreational water and health: Protecting your health Overview Hazards Managing risk Protecting your health Cyanobacteria and their toxins Technical resources How to protect yourself before, during and after a visit to a recreational water area. On this page Before your visit During your visit After leaving the area Before your visit Check for up-to-date water quality monitoring results and swimming advisories on local health department or municipal websites. Pack protective gear such as: hats sunglasses sunscreen personal flotation devices (if needed) Talk to your health care provider about the risks of taking part in recreational water activities if you're more susceptible to infections, such as: a senior someone with a weakened immune system During your visit Follow all posted signs, like: swimming advisories warnings for specific hazards rules about pets Be aware of any potential hazards in the area, such as: changing tides strong currents deep waters close to shore Remember that some hazards may not have warning signs. When in the water, remember to: wear proper safety and protective equipment, such as: wetsuits (in cold water) personal flotation devices (when necessary) avoid swimming when you have open sores or wounds, to help prevent infections avoid swallowing water, regardless of the water quality, to minimize the risk of getting sick Don't poop in the water and stay out of the water if you have diarrhea. Harmful microorganisms in feces can get into the water and make others sick. Dry off with a towel after being in the water to help remove any contaminants from your skin. Always wash your hands with clean water and soap, or use hand sanitizer, before consuming any food. Sand can contain microorganisms that can make you sick. To reduce exposure, you can: use beach towels to provide a clean surface to sit on encourage your children to keep sand out of their mouths Dispose of your garbage properly. Litter can attract animals to the area and cause injuries for beach users. Take measures to protect yourself from heat illnesses and overexposure to the sun's UV rays. Learn more about: Sun safety basics After leaving the area Shower with soap and water as soon as you can after spending time in the water or on the beach. This will wash away microorganisms and any other contaminants. If you become ill after your visit, talk to your healthcare provider. Report your illness to your local public health unit. This can help identify outbreaks of disease related to the recreational water area. Page details Date modified: 2024-06-13 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy