Created: 2024-06-04T17:20:59.009986
Name: Simulated_composite_diets
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/0490749d-b0b0-410a-9577-a903c6cec2be/resource/94b92abf-6557-4947-be25-894d98a62831/download/addendum-new-2023-estimated-energy-requirements.pdf
Package ID: 0490749d-b0b0-410a-9577-a903c6cec2be
Keywords: ['Nutrition', "Canada's Food Guide", 'Canada’s Dietary Guidelines', 'Diet simulations']
Notes: Health Canada simulated diets that followed recommendations in Canada’s Dietary Guidelines and helped meet nutrient needs of people living in Canada at different life stages.  These simulated composite diets were part of the evidence used to develop the information in Applying Canada’s Dietary Guidelines. 

Excel spreadsheets providing details on the simulated diets and their nutrient content are available below. The information in the methodology document should be reviewed prior to consulting the Excel spreadsheets.

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Addendum: New 2023 Estimated Energy Requirements
Summary: New 2023 Estimated Energy Requirements had a small impact on simulated composite diets
but do not result in changes to Applying Canada’s Dietary Guidelines
Simulated composite diets to support the application of Canada’s Dietary Guidelines
Health Canada simulated diets to determine what combinations of foods encouraged in Canada’s Dietary
Guidelines provide adequate amounts of key nutrients while considering flexibility in food choices. These
simulated composite diets were part of the evidence used to develop the information in Applying
Canada’s Dietary Guidelines.
Excel spreadsheets providing details on the simulated diets and their nutrient content can be found on
the Government of Canada’s Open data portal. The information in the Methodology - Simulated
composite diets document should be reviewed prior to consulting these Excel spreadsheets.
Three types of diets were created: Omnivore diets with and without healthy beverages and lacto-ovo
vegetarian diets.
Estimated Energy Requirements Update
In January 2023, the National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine published the “Dietary
Reference Intakes for Energy” report which includes new formulas to calculate Estimated Energy
Requirements (EER).
For more details on new EER, please see: Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy | The National Academies
Press.
Calculation of new reference EER values
Health Canada used the new formulas to calculate updated reference EER values. The new EER formulas
are stratified by age, sex and categories of physical activity and the formulas’ input are age, height, and
weight.
The new reference EERs were calculated using the same median height and median normal weight from
the 2015 Canadian Community Health Survey - Nutrition used for the previous calculations with the old
EER formulas. Similar to before, the physical activity level (PAL) category for those who have a
sedentary level of activity (“inactive”) was used. The new reference EER values were calculated for each
Dietary Reference Intake (DRI) age/sex group and then compared to the total amount of energy in the
simulated composite diets.
1
Impact on simulated composite diets
A simulated composite diet was identified as being impacted by the new reference EERs when the
energy content was above or below the new EER range by more than 100 kcal for a given age-sex group.
Omnivore diets with healthy beverages:
The amount of energy in the simulated composite diets of males and females 14-18 years of age was
approximately 300 kcal less than the new EER range.
The next largest difference was the simulated composite diets of males 31-50 and females 71 + which
were about 100kcal less than the new EER range.
All other diets were less than 100 kcal of the new EER range.
Omnivore diets with no healthy beverages:
The energy content of the simulated composite diets for those 2-3 years of age was approximately 100
kcal greater than the new EER range.
Similar to the omnivore diets with healthy beverages, the amount of energy in the simulated composite
diets of males and females 14-18 years of age was approximately 300 kcal less than the new EER range.
The simulated composite diets of males 19-30 and females 31-50 were about 100kcal less than the new
EER range.
Lacto-ovo vegetarian diets:
The energy content of the simulated composite diets for males and females 14-18 years of age was
approximately 250 kcal less than the new EER range.
The amount of energy in the simulated composite diets of males 19-30 years of age was approximately
100 kcal less than the new EER range.
Implications
Given the non-prescriptive and flexible nature of Applying Canada’s Dietary Guidelines, Health Canada
determined that adjustments to the simulated composite diets were not required.
For the simulated composite diets where the energy content is less than the new EER range, about 1-2
additional Reference Amounts of a combination of vegetables and fruit, whole grains, and/or protein
foods can be added to the diet. In particular, for the diets of 14 – 18-year-olds, since there is
approximately 250-300kcal difference with the new EER range, this allows for increased flexibility in food
choices.
2
The simulated composite omnivore diet with no healthy beverage for those 2-3 years of age was
examined to determine if the energy content could be reduced by 100 kcal while maintaining alignment
with the guiding principles (see methodology) and nutrient content within targets. This was achieved
when, for example, a small amount from each of whole grains, vegetables and fruit, and fats and oils was
removed from the diet.
Overall, the new Estimated Energy Requirements did not have an impact on the information in Applying
Canada’s Dietary Guidelines.
The simulated composite diets continue to illustrate that combinations of foods encouraged in the 2019
Canada’s food guide provide adequate amounts of key nutrients while considering flexibility in food
choices for different age and sex groups.
[END]
3
