Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:42.945246
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2021-2022:_Cosmetic_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-cosmetic-regulations.html
Package ID: 052c5a03-168a-4fad-863d-11db107d6442
Keywords: ['Consumer Product-Safety Program', 'Food-and-Drugs Act', 'Cosmetic Regulations', 'compliance verification project', 'compliance of cosmetic-products', 'specific requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of cosmetic products with specific requirements of the Food and Drugs Act and the Cosmetic Regulations. 
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Cosmetic Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Cosmetic Regulations Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Food and Drugs Act (FDA) and its Cosmetic Regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of cosmetic products with specific requirements of the Food and Drugs Act and the Cosmetic Regulations. Confirmation of stop sale of cosmetic products notified to be containing sodium bromate (prohibited for use in cosmetics as indicated on the Cosmetic Ingredient Hotlist (Hotlist), was carried out. In addition, the labels of curling products hair dyes, waving or straightening products, notified to be containing Thioglycolic Acid (TGA) and its salts, were reviewed to determine the presence of precautionary statements as prescribed on the Hotlist. For this project, compliance verification was determined through a review of documents requested from establishments by Health Canada inspectors. Over the course of the 2021 to 2022 fiscal year, Health Canada followed up with 93 companies on 376 products notified as containing sodium bromate and/or TGA and its salts. The stop sale of 40 products notified as containing sodium bromate and 3 products notified as containing both sodium bromate and TGA and its salts was confirmed. The evaluation of 57 different product labels for TGA and its salts was carried out. The compliance verification resulted in 3 stop sales, 8 s top distributions and 17 commitments to correct labels. A total of 306 products were discontinued (i.e., no longer sold on the Canadian market), 3 notifications were amended and there were 39 instances in which no corrective action was required. As a result of the large number of products discontinued, and instances where no corrective action was required, the below table only includes the corrective actions taken during this project. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Académie clin d'œil Sérum de haute qualité Académie clin d'œil (Bromate de sodium uniquement) Labelling issues identified Stop Sale by Académie clin d'œil Dolly Lash Lift Dolly Lash Lift - Perming Lotion LBD Boutique Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by LBD Boutique Inc. Farmavita Life The Perm "1" FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Labelling issues identified Stop Distribution by FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Farmavita Life The Perm "2" FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Labelling issues identified Stop Distribution by FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Farmavita Life Liss Strong FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Labelling issues identified Stop Distribution by FARMAVITA CANADA/Naturadif Feladyca Inline H (Perm)- Hair Straightening Cream Kingdom Beauty Supplies Labelling issues identified Commitment by Kingdom Beauty Supplies Feladyca Inline H (Perm)- Hair Straightening Cream Kingdom Beauty Supplies Labelling issues identified Commitment by Kingdom Beauty Supplies Global beauty products Ltd Beautiful brows and lashes, Crème effet liftant L.D. Beauté distributions inc Labelling issues identified Stop Sale by L.D. Beauté distributions inc L'anza Healing Texture Sure Success Acid Perm Part B Wave lotion Davexlabs, LLC Labelling issues identified Commitment by Davexlabs, LLC Lisap Lisap Ultimate 2 Straightening Cream for Sensitized or Coloured Hair Lisap Canada Produits De Beaute Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by Lisap Canada Produits De Beaute Inc. Lisap Lisap Ultimate 1 Straightening Cream for Natural Hair Lisap Canada Produits De Beaute Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by Lisap Canada Produits De Beaute Inc. Matrix Biolage Acid Wave Lotion L'Oreal Canada Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by L'Oreal Canada Inc. Megix 10 Hair Color Cream Create Images North America Labelling issues identified Commitment by Create Images North America Misencil Lotion Permanente BG Beauté Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by BG Beauté Inc. Misencil Lotion Fixante BG Beauté Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by BG Beauté Inc. Mon Platin Professional' Multi System Hair Straightening Kit Bottle-1 Classic Straightening Cream M.A.Y. Cosmetics Inc. Labelling issues identified Commitment by M.A.Y. Cosmetics Inc. Oligo Professional Koko Colour Solution47 Oligo Professional Labelling issues identified Commitment by Oligo Professional One N' Only Moisturizing Alkaline Waving Lotion Contains Argan oil Beauty Quest Group Labelling issues identified Stop distribution by Beauty Quest Group (BQG) One N' Only Acid Extra Body Waving Lotion Contains Argan oil Beauty Quest Group Labelling issues identified Stop distribution by Beauty Quest Group (BQG) One N' Only Argan Oil Fast 10 Permanent Hair Color Kit 6CA Beauty Quest Group Labelling issues identified Stop distribution by Beauty Quest Group (BQG) One N' Only Shiny Silver Perm and One 'N Only Exothermic Perm Beauty Quest Group Labelling issues identified Stop distribution by Beauty Quest Group (BQG) Paimore Digital Acid (Lotion 1) Russ's Salon Labelling issues identified Commitment by Russ's Salon Paimore Digital Theta (Lotion 1) Russ's Salon Labelling issues identified Commitment by Russ's Salon Paon Seven Eight Hair Color, Color Cream Bill Beauty & Health Products Labelling issues identified Commitment by Bill Beauty & Health Products Retex System Bio Ionic Retex System Retexturizing Cream, Agent 1 Metro Beauty Supply Ltd. Labelling issues identified Stop sale by Metro Beauty Supply Ltd. The Lash Shop Lift Lotion 10622117 Canada Inc. (The Lash Shop) Labelling issues identified Stop distribution by 10622117 Canada Inc. Wave by Design Professional Strength Rearranger4 McBride Research Labs Labelling issues identified Commitment by McBride Research Labs West Trends Rebonding Cream- #1 Rebonding Cream Kingdom Beauty Supplies Labelling issues identified Commitment by Kingdom Beauty Supplies Disclaimer: Inspectors apply a systematic bias during the selection of establishments and samples. Inspectors do not select products randomly; instead, they select the ones that are more likely not to meet health and safety requirements due to observed characteristics. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, Health Canada does not consider the findings of CV projects to reflect overall market compliance, unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria measured in this project. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-07-24 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy