Created: 2023-08-15T20:12:09.195457
Name: Appearance_at_the_Standing_Senate_Committee__on_Official_Languages_(OLLO)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/05418112-84ba-4725-a671-7033df825676/resource/b2b2b210-c9e3-4577-a9ad-2278bf0b4871/download/appearance-at-ollo-proactive-discloser-eng.pdf
Package ID: 05418112-84ba-4725-a671-7033df825676
Keywords: ['Minority Languages', 'Health Care', 'Service']
Notes: •	This will be the 29th time that OLLO has met during this Parliament. The Committee recently completed a study on Francophone immigration to minority communities, and are now set to conduct the following studies concurrently, with the appearance on April 17th being the first meeting for the minority-language health services study:
 
1.	Matters relating to minority-language health services; and,
2.	Application of the Official Languages Act and of the regulations and directives made under it, within those institutions subject to the Act.

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Appearance at the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages (OLLO)
Minister Duclos
Minority-Language Health Services
Monday, April 17, 2023
STANDING SENATE COMMITTEE ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGES (OLLO):
STUDY ON MINORITY LANGUAGE HEALTH SERVICES
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Minister Duclos
April 17, 2023
A – OVERVIEW DOCUMENTS
1. Scenario Note
2. Summary of Key Messages
B – FUNDING
3. Healthcare Funding Agreements and Transfers
4. Territorial Health Investment Fund
C – ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTHCARE
5. Bill C-13 – QP Note; Issue Sheet; Senate Committee Report
6. Canada Health Act
7. Access to Bilingual Healthcare
8. Research on Bilingual Access to Healthcare
9. Facilitating Research in French
10. Health Product Shortages (incl. labelling issues)
D – HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES
11. HHR Crisis
12. Training of Healthcare Professionals
13. Foreign Credential Recognition Program
E – ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE FOR VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES
14. LTC Homes/Standards
15. Palliative/Home Care
16. Virtual-Rural Healthcare
17. Support for 2SLGBTQI+ Communities
18. Advancing Reconciliation in Canada’s Health Systems
19. Abortion Access
20. Healthy Aging, Seniors, and Dementia
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING SENATE COMMITTEE ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGES (OLLO) –
MINORITY-LANGUAGE HEALTH SERVICES
April 17, 2023
MEETING SCENARIO
• The following officials will appear at the meeting:
o Health Canada
Jocelyne Voisin, Assistant Deputy Minister (Strategic Policy Branch)
Nathalie Valdés, Manager, Official Language Community Development Bureau
o PHAC
Mark Nafekh, Director General (Centre for Health Promotion, Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Branch)
• At the discretion of the Chair, the meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will
have 5 minutes to deliver. Committee members will question you and/or officials for the remainder of
the first hour. Officials will remain for the second hour for additional questioning.
o Unlike the House of Commons, Senate Committees do not have an organized allotment of
questions, and the provisioning of questions and their order is at the discretion of the Chair.
o At OLLO, the first round of questions is generally 5 minutes per Senator. Senators usually indicate
to the Chair during the meeting that they want to be added to the list of questioners, and they are called
on by the Chair in the order their interest was noted. If Senators go over their time, they can be added to
a second round of questions.
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will be the 29th time that OLLO has met during this Parliament. The Committee recently
completed a study on Francophone immigration to minority communities, and are now set to conduct
the following studies concurrently, with the appearance on April 17th being the first meeting for the
minority-language health services study:
1. Matters relating to minority-language health services; and,
2. Application of the Official Languages Act and of the regulations and directives made under it,
within those institutions subject to the Act.
• The Committee is currently composed of nine senators, including the chair. The Committee has
two Conservative (CPC) senators, who caucus with the Conservative Party in the House of Commons,
three senators affiliated with the Independent Senators Group (ISG), one senator affiliated with the
Canadian Senators Group (CSG), one senator affiliated with the Progressive Senate Group (PSG), and one
non-affiliated senator. Membership on Senate committees varies more than is seen in the House and it is
likely that this composition may not reflect the actual presence at the table during the April 17th
meeting. Most OLLO members participate in the meetings in French.
• On March 7th, the Hon. Senator Cormier moved, seconded by the Hon. Senator Miville-
Dechêne, moved the following motion:
o That the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages be authorized to examine and report
on minority-language health services, including matters related to the following:
(a) the inclusion of language clauses in federal health transfers;
(b) population aging, including the ability to obtain health care, long-term care and home care in
one’s own language, which encompasses linguistic resources to support caregivers, the quality of life of
seniors and disease prevention;
(c) access to minority-language health services for vulnerable communities;
(d) the shortage of health professionals in public and private facilities serving official language
minority communities and the language skills of health care personnel in these facilities;
(e) the needs of francophone post-secondary institutions outside Quebec and anglophone post-
secondary institutions in Quebec respecting recruitment, training and support for future graduates in
health-related fields;
(f) telemedicine and the use of new technologies in the health sector, including the associated
language challenges; and
(g) the needs for research, evidence and solutions to foster access to health care in the language
of one’s choice; and,
o That the committee submit its final report to the Senate no later than October 31, 2024, and
that the committee retain all powers necessary to publicize its findings for 180 days after the tabling of
the final report.
• The Senate did not debate the motion before adopting it, nor was it discussed at the Committee
in a public facing setting. The motion was adopted on March 9th.
• The Committee is likely to express particular interest in the possibility of including a provision on
language rights in federal health transfers, as well as the continued and improved use of telemedicine in
remote areas (including anglophone communities in remote regions of Quebec, and English/French
populations in remote regions of New Brunswick, particularly in relation to ageing populations). The
Committee also recently completed a study on francophone immigration, and the topic of foreign
credential recognition may be raised.
• The Committee intends to approach the study from a broader perspective, hearing first from the
federal Government, before narrowing in on each point of the motion with witnesses from provincial
and territorial stakeholders.
• The Official Languages Act was amended in 2005 to state that federal institutions have a duty to
ensure that measures are taken to implement the commitments in Part VII of the Act, in particular to
support and assist the development of official language minority communities. Bill C-13, An Act to
amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses
Act and to make related amendments to other Acts has just finished being considered at the House of
Commons Standing Committee on Official Languages (LANG), and will soon be reported back to the
House of Commons. The bill would recognise health care as an essential sector for enhancing English and
French linguistic minority Communities.
• OLLO began studying Bill C-13 in June 2022, issuing a report that was tabled on November 17,
2022. The Committee’s review of the bill included a recommendation that the Government adopt a
modernized Official Languages Act. The Committee’s recommendations reflect an in-depth study the
Committee did on modernizing the Act from 2017 to 2019. The 2019 report included a recommendation
that the Act be amended to “state what measures the Treasury Board “must” take to advance the
equality of status and use of English and French in Canadian Society…. and provide that: these measures
include the following strategic sectors: health, justice, immigration, economic development, community
media and arts and culture…” The Committee’s recommendations repeatedly referred to a model set out
in New Brunswick’s Official Languages Act.
• On January 28, 2022, the Federal Court of Appeal unanimously ruled that complaints from the
Fédération des francophones de la Colombie-Britannique (FCFA) regarding Part VII of the Official
Languages Act were well-founded, and that the next Canada-British Columbia Labour Market
Development Agreement be revised to reconstitute the network of employment assistance services with
the participation of Francophone communities. The FCFA calls for a modernized OLA and for language
clauses to be included in FPT transfer agreements. The Federal Government has chosen not to appeal
the decision, and intends that the changes to the text of the OLA through Bill C-13 be followed by the
creation of new regulations on positive measures that would serve as guidance in consulting and
considering the needs of official language minority communities.
• Other Senate committees have studied related issues. In 2017, the Standing Senate Committee
on Social Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI) studied the role of automation in the healthcare system.
The study took a broad look at integrating new technologies into the Canadian health care system. The
Library of Parliament notes that the Committee’s final report did not address language issues, making it
likely that this is an avenue that OLLO will seek to explore in their hearings.
NEXT STEPS
• The Committee is expected to hold multiple meetings over the next year on this study before it
concludes. Pursuant to the terms of the motion adopted in the Senate on March 9, the Committee must
submit a final report by October 31, 2024. The Committee is expected to request to hear from multiple
stakeholders and non-governmental organizations. PRO will be monitoring the study for developments
relevant to the health portfolio.
Table of Contents
FUNDING
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND (THIF)
ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTHCARE
BILL C-13, AN ACT TO MODERNIZE THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT
THE CANADA HEALTH ACT AND MINORITY LANGUAGE RIGHTS
ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
RESEARCH ON BILINGUAL ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE
FACILITATING RESEARCH IN FRENCH
HEALTH PRODUCT SHORTAGES
HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES
HHR CRISIS AND THE LANGUAGE SKILLS OF HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
TRAINING OF HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
FOREIGN CREDENTIAL RECOGNITION PROGRAM 13
ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE FOR VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES
LONG-TERM CARE AND OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
OBTAINING HOME CARE AND PALLIATIVE CARE IN THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF CHOICE
ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES IN RURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES
SUPPORT FOR 2SLGBTQI+ COMMUNITY
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH SYSTEMS
ABORTION SERVICES
SENIORS, AND DEMENTIA
FUNDING
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
• We are providing additional funding of nearly $200 billion over 10 years for health care,
including $25 billion through new bilateral agreements to address provincial and territorial health system
needs.
• The new bilateral agreements will be underpinned by key principles, including equal access for
equity-seeking groups and individuals, including those in official language minority communities.
• Building on lessons from previous bilateral agreements, provinces and territories will need to
describe in their action plans how federal funds will be used to strengthen health care and to provide
equality of access for under-served groups and individuals, including those in official language minority
communities.
• Provinces and territories will also work toward overarching results for the shared health
priorities, measured through a set of key common headline indicators and supported by disaggregated
data.
• In addition, Health Canada supports access to health services for official language minority
communities through the Official Languages Health Program, which will provide $192.2 million over five
years.
IF PRESSED ON BILATERAL AGREEMENTS (GENERAL)
• We are providing $46.2 billion in new funding to provinces and territories to address immediate
pressures on the health care system and to transform it for the long-term.
• This new funding includes $25 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories, to support
shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements focused on four priorities:
o family health services,
o health workers and backlogs,
o mental health and substance use, and
o a modernized health system.
• This builds on continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared priorities,
supported by targeted federal investments from Budget 2017 to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and Budget 2021 to improve the standard of
care in their long-term care facilities.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography, which includes supporting official
language minority communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES HEALTH PROGRAM (GENERAL)
• In addition, the Official Languages Health Program will provide $192.2 million over five years
aimed at improving access to health services for official language minority communities. Since 2003, the
Program’s funding has supported, among others:
o the addition of approximately 10,000 new bilingual health professionals in provincial and
territorial health systems outside Quebec;
o the English language training of more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec;
o the implementation of a health card that identifies the user’s official language of preference; and
o the creation and implementation of a linguistic norm in health facilities, in collaboration with the
Health Standard Organization (HSO).
TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND (THIF)
• The Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported the territories in delivering health care in
the North, where each faces high costs to provide necessary care for their residents.
• Territories have used funding delivered through the Territorial Health Investment Fund to
develop and implement key health system improvement projects in area such as collaborative care,
primary care, and health human resources and capacity building, including the provision of culturally-
appropriate health services, such as programs to support the participation of Nunavut Inuit
paraprofessionals within the health workforce.
• In the Yukon, funding has been used to support the establishment of the Constellation Health
Centre, which is the first centre in the territory to provide bilingual primary care services, in English and
French.
• Budget 2023 announced $350 million over ten years to renew the Territorial Health Investment
Fund, beginning in 2023-24, in recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivering health care
in the territories.
This renewal will allow territories to further implement innovative projects within their health systems
and ensure Northerners have access to the health care they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE AMOUNT OR DURATION OF THE RENEWED FUNDING
• The Budget 2023 announcement of $350M over ten years for the Territorial Health Investment
Fund will provide stable and predictable funding for territories to support necessary costs they incur,
including medical travel, and projects that can address the innovative delivery of health care in a
northern and remote context.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with territories to ensure they are supported
as they look to implement key initiatives funded by the Territorial Health Investment Fund.
ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTHCARE
BILL C-13, AN ACT TO MODERNIZE THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES ACT
• The Official Languages Act has not been substantially revised since 1988 and needs to be
modernized and strengthened to keep pace with a society marked by new demographic and social
realities.
• Our government recognizes in this Bill that French is in a minority situation in Canada and North
America, due to the predominant use of English, and takes actions to protect and promote it.
• Bill C-13 embodies the vision and commitments of our Government to our two official
languages. This Bill proposes significant enhancements to improve the vitality of our official language
minority communities and promotion of our two languages across Canada.
THE CANADA HEALTH ACT AND MINORITY LANGUAGE RIGHTS
• The Canada Health Act establishes the requirements provincial and territorial health insurance
plans must meet to qualify for full funding under the Canada Health Transfer.
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have universal access to medically necessary health
care services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• Health Canada works to improve access to minority language health services through the Official
Languages Health Program, which was launched in 2003.
IF PRESSED ON THE SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES HEALTH PROGRAM
• Activities funded under the Program include: the integration of bilingual health personnel
through postsecondary training; the development of strategies and partnerships with health system
stakeholders through community networking; as well as projects aimed at improving access to bilingual
health services.
ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
• The federal government and Health Canada recognize that access to bilingual health services is
an important issue because language is a determining factor in obtaining appropriate, quality and safe
health care.
• Health Canada has invested $192.2 million from 2018 to 2023 to support community
organizations, as well as colleges and universities, to implement initiatives to improve access to health
care for OLMCs in the official language of choice.
• Thanks to Health Canada investments since 2003:
- approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals have been added to provincial and territorial
health systems to serve Francophone minority communities;
- more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec have taken language training to better serve
English-speaking communities in the province;
- a health card identifying the patient's preferred language has been implemented in Prince
Edward Island; and,
- a language standard has been created and implemented in a number of health facilities across
the country.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced that it would increase health funding
for provinces and territories by nearly $200 billions over 10 years. One of the principles of these
agreements with the provinces and territories will be to take into account the needs of OLMCs as groups
seeking equity in access to health services.
• In addition, the 2023 Budget confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million
that the OLHP will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to
support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as to enhance the capacity to
train additional bilingual nurses and personal care workers, given the most pressing needs in these key
sectors following the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT IS HEALTH CANADA DOING TO ENSURE THAT FRANCOPHONES AND
ANGLOPHONES IN A MINORITY SITUATION HAVE ACCESS TO HEALTH SERVICES IN THEIR LANGUAGE
• The Government is committed to improving access to health services for all Canadians across
Canada, in the official language of their choice. This commitment is reflected in the announcement on
February 7, 2023, in which the Federal Government announced that it would increase health funding for
provinces and territories by close to 200 billion over 10 years. One of the principles provinces and
territories have agreed to as part of receiving this funding is to take into account the needs of equity-
seeking groups and individual in terms of access to health services, including OLMCs.
• In addition, through other existing funding mechanisms, such as the Official Languages Health
Program (OLHP), Health Canada is also committed to investing in strengthening health networks working
on minority language issues in all provinces and territories, the training of new bilingual health
professionals and the implementation of new projects to improve access to health services in the
minority language in Canada.
• Among other things, with an investment of $206.7 million between 2023-2028 from the OLHP in
the context of the new federal action plan on official languages, Health Canada is maintaining its
commitment to improving access to health services for the Anglophone population of Quebec and
Francophones outside Quebec in the official language of their choice.
RESEARCH ON BILINGUAL ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE
• Our Government recognizes the need for health data on official language minority communities
(OLMCs).
• That is why our Government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, invested over
$1 million in research to understand the health issues of French- and English-speaking Canadians who
live in communities where they are a linguistic minority.
• This includes research at the Institut du Savoir Montfort in Ottawa to analyze healthcare access
barriers, as well as health information needs of OLMCs across Canada.
FACILITATING RESEARCH IN FRENCH
• Our government recognizes the challenges faced by Francophone researchers in accessing
services in the official language of their choice.
• That is why the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or CIHR, has taken specific actions to
promote health research in French, including accommodation measures for French-language
applications.
• Additionally, CIHR has put in place equalization measures for its Project Grant program – its
largest research funding competition – to ensure that the proportion of French grants funded is at least
equal to the proportion of applications submitted in French.
IF PRESSED ON THE VALUE OF GRANTS AWARDED TO FRENCH-LANGUAGE APPPLICATIONS COMPARED
TO THE VALUES AWARDED TO ENGLISH-LANGUAGE APPLICATIONS…
• From 2000-2022, CIHR’s largest competition for research funding (Project Grants) provided
successful French applications and English applications on average, 72% of the budgets requested.
• French applications have typically requested smaller amounts than English applications, and thus
the values awarded to French applications are lower. Since 2000, French applications have requested an
average of $ 531,345 versus an average of $ 775,709 requested by English applications.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ACFAS REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS…
• In line with recommendations from Acfas, CIHR maintains equalization measures for French-
language applications.
• The success rate of applications submitted in French is in line with the overall success rates for
the competition.
HEALTH PRODUCT SHORTAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed health products is a top priority for our
Government.
• Significant efforts were made throughout the pandemic to respond to health product supply
disruptions; the recent shortage of pediatric analgesics demonstrates the need for continued vigilance.
• In 2021 and 2022, additional regulations came into force that provide new tools to help prevent
and alleviate health product shortages and to safeguard the supply.
• Health Canada has also bolstered its capacity to mitigate and prevent the impacts of health
product shortages through the creation of an internal Drug Shortages Task Force.
• We continue to work with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient groups and
international partners to monitor supply, to minimize the impact of shortages, and to prevent them
where possible.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PREVENT FUTURE SHORTAGES
• Health Canada has bolstered capacity to address the issue of immediate shortages by
establishing an internal Drug Shortages Task Force. We are also exploring medium-to-longer-term policy
options to improve Canada’s health product supply resilience.
• The Department remains focused on doing everything possible to ensure Canadians have access
to the health products they need, when they need them.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO ENSURE IMPORTED HEALTH PRODUCTS HAVE
SAFETY INFORMATION AVAILABLE IN BOTH OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
• Ensuring that Francophones in Canada have access to important safety information in French is
something Health Canada takes very seriously.
• Health Canada regulations require that bilingual safety information be made available for all
imported drugs and medical products, including those imported to address a shortage.
HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES
HHR CRISIS AND THE LANGUAGE SKILLS OF HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
• By supporting and developing our health care workforce, we can ensure that the many
Canadians who are waiting for needed care can get it as quickly as possible. Investing in the training and
retention of bilingual staff helps ensure that services are offered in the official language of choice and
has a positive impact on the quality and safety of care offered to OLMCs, as well as on their health
outcomes.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced an investment of close to $200 billion
over 10 years, including $46.2 million in new funding for provinces and territories through a top-up to
the Canada Health Transfer and tailored bilateral agreements to improve health care services for
Canadians. One of the priorities of this funding is to continue to support the health workforce and
reduce delays caused by COVID-19.
• To access this funding, provinces and territories are also encouraged to commit to streamlining
foreign credential recognition for internationally educated health professionals and promoting labour
mobility, starting with cross-jurisdictional credential recognition for key health professionals.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada’s Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program will
also receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as
enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
• Under the OLHP, Health Canada also provides support to post-secondary training institutions to
improve the availability of bilingual health service providers across the country, particularly in regions
where OLMC needs are the greatest.
o The Consortium national de formation en santé (CNFS), which includes a national secretariat and
16 post-secondary institution members outside Quebec, offers more than 100 French-language health
programs in eight provinces and works with health institutions to offer internships and placements to its
students.
o McGill University offers language training to health care providers based in Quebec, as well as
scholarships and internships to integrate bilingual health professionals in regions where there is a
significant need for English-language health services.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY
• New health care funding announced in February prioritizes a resilient and sustained health
workforce that delivers high-quality, effective and safe health services to Canadians who need them.
• This investment will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the recruitment and retention of health care workers in the public health care system.
• As part of the training component of the Official Languages Health Program, the CNFS reported
that approximately 10,000 new health professionals have been trained in French since 2003 by member
institutions and that 96% of their graduates offer health services in French. McGill University has
provided language training to more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec to better meet the needs
of English-speaking communities in that province.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS RELATING TO KNOWLEDGE AND USE OF THE MINORITY OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
AMONG HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
• In Canada outside Quebec, the number of health care workers aged 55 and over who know
French has more than doubled since 2001. At the same time, the proportion of people who know French
is decreasing among both younger health care workers (15 to 29 years old) and older health care workers
(55 years and older). Despite the decline in the level of knowledge of French outside Quebec, younger
health care workers still know and use the minority language at a higher rate than older health care
workers.
• In Quebec, health care workers who know English age just as quickly. However, contrary to what
happens for knowledge of French outside Quebec, young health care workers in Quebec who know the
minority language are increasing, both in number and proportion.
TRAINING OF HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS
• It is essential that official language minority communities be able to communicate with health
professionals in the official language of their choice in order to ensure the safety and quality of the care
they receive.
• Since 2003, Health Canada has funded the training of approximately 10,000 new bilingual health
professionals capable of serving French-speaking minority communities, as well as the language training
of more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec to serve the English-speaking communities of this
province.
• Health Canada will continue to support initiatives to train and retain bilingual health
professionals to address the persistent health services access issues faced by official language minority
communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPORTANCE OF TRAINING BILINGUAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
• In 2023-2028, Health Canada will invest $206.7 million under the Official Languages Health
Program to improve access to health services for official language minority communities.
• Of this amount, more than $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual
health professionals.
• This funding envelope includes additional investments of $1.6 million to train more bilingual
nurses and orderlies, able to serve Francophone minority communities, given the most pressing needs in
these key sectors, following the COVID-19 pandemic.
FOREIGN CREDENTIAL RECOGNITION PROGRAM
• Through the Foreign Credential Recognition Program, the Government helps address
employment barriers specific to skilled newcomers.
• The Program provides funding to support employment services, loans, and improvements to
foreign credential recognition processes to help skilled newcomers get jobs and have their foreign
credentials recognized.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $115 million over five years, with $30 million ongoing, to
expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally trained health
care professionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in their field.
• This new funding will help alleviate Canada’s health human resource crisis by supporting the
integration of internationally educated health care professionals into the Canadian labour market.
ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE FOR VULNERABLE COMMUNITIES
LONG-TERM CARE AND OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
• Every senior in Canada deserves to live in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they
live, and this includes having access to health services in their official language of choice.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in long-term care
homes across Canada; these challenges are exacerbated for those living in OLMCs.
• To help address this, we announced a $3 billion investment over five years to support provinces
and territories in their efforts to ensure standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes
are made.
• The federal government also announced the creation of a new Safe Long-Term Care Fund. This
fund transferred $1 billion to the provinces and territories to protect people living and working in long-
term care.
• The Government of Canada is now looking at developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help
ensure seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction. In the
coming months, the Government of Canada will move forward with consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on the Safe Long-Term Care Act.
• To support OLMCs, Health Canada will invest 206.7 million under the Official Languages Health
Program to improve access to health services for official language minority communities, including long-
term care services.
• Of this amount, at least $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual health
professionals.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNEMENT WILL IMPROVE ACCESS TO LTC FOR OLMCs
• Health Canada’s Official Languages in Health Program (OLHP) is designed to help reduce
linguistic and cultural barriers to health services for Francophone and Anglophone minority communities
in Canada.
• The program promotes collaboration and innovation in the areas of training and retention of
bilingual health professionals and supports community health networking activities and innovative
projects to promote access to health services in the official minority language.
• Between 2023-2028, Health Canada will invest 206,7 million under the OLHP to improve access
to health services for official language minority communities.
• Of this amount, at least $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual health
professionals. This funding envelope includes additional investments of $6.5 million to train more
bilingual nurses and personal support workers, able to serve Francophone minority communities, given
the most pressing needs in these key-sectors following the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CARE SYSTEM FUNDING
• We announced that we will increase health funding to provinces and territories by close to $200
billion over 10 years to strengthen our public health care system.
• This includes $7.8 billion over five years for long-term care, home and community care, and
mental health and substance use.
• New funding includes $1.7 billion over five years to support wage increases for personal support
workers and related professions.
• These investments will provide access to safe long-term care and home care so Canadians can
age safely.
• Bilateral agreements will allow provinces and territories to respond to the specific needs of their
populations, including equity-seeking individuals and groups such as OLMCs.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE
• The federal government is working with provinces and territories to help make improvements in
long-term care, while respecting their jurisdiction.
• The Government is appreciative of the work of CSA Group and the Health Standards
Organization (HSO) and welcomes these new long-term care standards as it reflects the importance of
long-term care to all Canadians.
• Together, the standards focus on the delivery of safe, reliable, and high-quality long-term care
services, safe operating practices and infection prevention, and control measures in long-term care
homes.
• These standards followed consultations, including several virtual general meetings, including one
specific to Francophones and people from Quebec with long-term care experience and incorporate
considerations related to the diversity of the population served, including considerations related to
language and culture.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
• The Government of Canada is also committed to doing more to support seniors across the
country. We know Canadians want to age closer to home and family, but also expect long-term care to
be safe, when needed.
• As such, our government is looking at developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure
seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• In the coming months, we will move forward with consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act, which will include representatives of
organizations that work with OLMCs.
OBTAINING HOME CARE AND PALLIATIVE CARE IN THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF CHOICE
• The Government of Canada recently announced an investment of nearly $200 billion over 10
years in the health sector, including $1.7 billion to support hourly wage increases for personnal support
care workers and related occupations.
• To complement the investments the federal government has made to improve the working
conditions and wages of personal support workers, Budget 2023 proposes to provide up to $50 million
over five years, starting in 2023-24 to Employment and Social Development Canada to develop and test
innovative solutions to strengthen the retirement savings of personal support workers without
workplace retirement security coverage.
• At the same time, the federal government is providing (since 2017) $6 billion over 10 years to
the provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care services for all Canadians,
including in OLMCs.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada's Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program
will also receive $14.5 million to support not-for-profit organizations that serve these communities as
well as improving the capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support workers.
• One of the challenges for OLMC members is to receive home services and palliative care in the
official language of choice, which has an impact on the quality and safety of care, on health outcomes
and their experience of end of life. Between 2023 and 2028, the OLHP will provide at least $124 million
over five years to train more bilingual health professionals, including personal support workers and
nurses who provide care in community settings, including home care and end-of-life care.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT
• Our government is committed to strengthening our health care system, especially for vulnerable
members of our communities – this includes home care and OLMC members.
• Budget 2021 announced an investment of $90 million over three years to launch the “Aging Well
at Home” initiative to help community organizations provide practical support to help low-income and
vulnerable seniors to age in place.
• Federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027 will
also advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on
supportive care needs, including services needed to respond to equity-seeking groups such as OLMCs.
• Health Canada, through the OLHP, has been supporting initiatives across Canada since 2003 to
increase the availability of bilingual health professionals who can meet the health needs of OLMC
patients, particularly in priority health areas such as home care and palliative care.
• Health Canada, through the OLHP, has been supporting initiatives across Canada since 2003 to
increase the availability of bilingual health professionals who can meet the health needs of OLMC
patients, particularly in priority health areas such as home care and palliative care.
IF PRESSED ON HOME CARE OR END OF LIFE CARE FOR OLMCs IN THEIR OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF CHOICE
• There are significant knowledge gaps regarding access to home care and palliative care by
OLMCs in the official language of choice.
• Access to telehealth services can contribute to home and palliative care by, for example,
providing some support to caregivers who turn to these services. These services should be bilingual.
• Community health centers offering services in the minority language are also a very helpful
resource when they are known and used by patients from OLMCs. The use of telehealth lines and
community resources can help reduce the number of emergency room visits by patients, for example,
since many of their needs can often be met in the community. The promotion of services in the minority
language is therefore essential to support patients in the community.
ACCESS TO HEALTH CARE SERVICES IN RURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that Canadians living in rural communities, including
official language minority communities, have a harder time accessing needed health care services,
including virtual care services.
• Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s plan to provide nearly $200B over 10 years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding, to strengthen the
public health care system.
• Budget 2023 also proposes to provide $45.9 million over four years, starting in 2024, 2025, with
nearly $12 million ongoing to expand the reach of the Canada Student Loan Forgiveness program to
more rural communities, to encourage more doctors and nurses to practice in rural and remote
communities.
• Furthermore, Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million
that Health Canada’s Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program
will also receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well
as enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
• Through disaggregated data, including on official languages, we will track the results of those
efforts and their impact on official language minority communities.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
• In response to the pandemic, the Government worked with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by over $200M in funding.
• Since then, virtual care has become an important way for Canadians, including those in rural and
remote communities, to get the care they need, when they need it.
• As laid out in Budget 2023, the government will provide $25 billion over ten years through a new
set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health system needs, such as
expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and reducing backlogs, increasing
mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health systems, including supporting virtual
care in rural and remote communities.
IF PRESSED ON TEAM-BASED CARE AS WAY OF INCREASING ACCESS TO FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES IN
RURAL COMMUNITIES…
• Transforming how family health services are delivered will be key to increasing access to those
services, particularly for Canadians living in rural and remote communities.
• Like virtual care, team-based care can play a key role in expanding access to family health
services.
• The historic investments announced in Budget 2023 enable provinces and territories to
transform the way family health services are delivered in ways that make sense to their official language
minority communities, often located in rural contexts.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES IN RURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES…
• Our government recognizes that Canadians living in rural and remote communities, including
those in official language minority communities, face specific challenges in getting access to the family
health services they need, when and where they need it.
• We are working with all interested partners to find solutions. The Coalition for Action for Health
Workers provides practical input and ideas on concrete actions that all levels of government can
implement for the health workforce.
Budget 2023 announced $46.2 billion in new funding to provinces and territories, $25 billion over ten
years of which will be delivered through a new set of bilateral agreements to address individual
provincial and territorial health system needs, such as expanding access to family health services,
supporting health workers and reducing backlogs, increasing mental health and substance use support,
and modernizing health systems, including in rural and remote communities.
• Budget 2023 also confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada’s Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program will also
receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as
enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
• In addition, Budget 2023 proposes to provide $45.9 million over four years, starting in 2024,
2025, with nearly $12 million ongoing to expand the reach of the Canada Student Loan Forgiveness
program to more rural communities, to encourage more doctors and nurses to practice in rural and
remote communities.
SUPPORT FOR 2SLGBTQI+ COMMUNITY
• The Government of Canada is committed to addressing stigma and discrimination against
2SLGBTQI+ populations, including 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities, and reducing the social and
health inequities that they face.
• This work is important because we know that intersecting systems of discrimination create
barriers to employment, housing, social support, health, and social services, and threaten the personal
safety and overall well-being of 2SLGBTQI+ individuals.
• We also know that 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities in Canada have reported experiencing
two-fold discrimination, isolation, and limited availability of health and social services that are both
2SLGBTQI+ affirming and available in French.
• To address the unique needs of these populations, we are investing in research, health
promotion and disease prevention programs, as well as initiatives to improve health care. This includes
programs to address mental health, gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health.
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH SYSTEMS
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous communities
and organizations and other health system partners in the development of measures to address anti-
Indigenous racism in health systems. This includes support for activities such as anti-racism and
discrimination training, tools and resources for health professionals, and standards and guidelines for
cultural safety.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health-related needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
Peoples are engaged in actions to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination where
Indigenous Peoples are respected and safe and support Indigenous partners to undertake meaningful
engagement on the development of policy and programs for health priorities.
IF PRESSED
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous and health system partners to identify and
support Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism and discrimination across Canada’s
health systems.
ABORTION SERVICES
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• In addition, this Government has invested $8 million to date under the Sexual and Reproductive
Health Fund to support access to abortion, with renewed funds proposed under Budget 2023.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
• While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done
to improve access in many areas of the country.
• Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan to
eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
• New Brunswick will continue to be subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions as long as the
province refuses to cover insured surgical abortion services provided at private clinics, resulting in
patient charges.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND
• This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health services more
accessible, with an emphasis on populations experiencing the highest risks and greatest barriers,
including Indigenous people, racialized populations, members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, women, and
youth.
• That is why Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years to establish the Sexual and
Reproductive Health Fund. An additional $36 million has been proposed in Budget 2023 to renew the
fund for three years (starting in 2024-25). This fund supports community-based organizations that help
make access to abortion, as well as other sexual and reproductive health care information and services,
more accessible for vulnerable populations.
SENIORS, AND DEMENTIA
• The Government of Canada is committed to keeping all seniors in Canada healthy, safe and
socially connected, and to helping them maintain their independence and remain in their homes as long
as possible, including those living in Official Language Minority Communities.
• In 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy. The strategy places
an emphasis on considering the specific needs of individuals living in Official Language Minority
Communities in designing and delivering dementia-related initiatives.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s Dementia Strategic Fund supports the Dementia Strategy.
Proposals for funding are encouraged to consider a focus on Official Language Minority Communities.
• For example, under the Dementia Strategic Fund, the Agency is funding dementia-related
projects on risk and stigma reduction for Francophone minorities living in British Columbia, Alberta,
Saskatchewan, New Brunswick and Yukon, and for Anglophones in Quebec.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS (FOCUS ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGE)
ISSUE
• The Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages will undertake a study to examine the
federal government's support for minority-language health services, including the inclusion of language
clauses in federal health transfers.
• The Federal Court of Appeal recently called for a modernized Official Languages Act and for
language clauses to be included in provincial and territorial agreements.
• Health Canada leads on the delivery of bilateral funding agreements with provinces and
territories to improve health care for Canadians in targeted areas.
• Health Canada’s Official Languages Health Program supports initiatives aimed at improving
access to health services in the minority official language for official language minority communities.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s plan to provide nearly $200 million in additional
funding over ten years in health transfers to provinces and territories. This amount includes $46.2 billion
in new funding through new Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the
needs of each province and territory, personal support worker wage support, and a 10-year renewal and
increase of the Territorial Health Investment Fund.
• This funding builds on the 2017 investment of $11 billion over ten years ($4.8 billion remaining)
to help provinces and territories improve home and community care, and mental health, and $3 billion
to strengthen long-term care from Budget 2021.
• As outlined in the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan from February 7,
2023, the tailored bilateral agreements will respect each government’s jurisdiction and will be
underpinned by key principles, including:
o Reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples, recognizing their right to fair and equal access to quality
and culturally safe health services free from racism and discrimination anywhere in Canada, including
seamless service delivery across jurisdictions, requires meaningful engagement and work with
Indigenous organizations and governments; and
o Equal access for equity-seeking groups and individuals, including those in official language
minority communities.
• Bilateral agreements will include an action plan describing planned activities, expenditures and
expected results and timelines. As these action plans are developed, provincial and territorial officials
are asked to consider and identify how different population characteristics such as age, gender, and
official languages can be factored into the design of their planned initiatives.
• Agreements will also contribute to achieving overarching results for the shared health priorities,
measured through a set of key common headline indicators and supported by disaggregated data.
• This approach is consistent with the federal commitment to support and enhance the vitality of
official language minority communities, while respecting provincial and territorial responsibility for the
organization and delivery of health care services.
• Health Canada’s Official Languages Health Program will invest $192.2 million over five years in
contribution funding under the Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028.
• Since 2003, the Program’s funding has supported, among others:
o the addition of approximately 10,000 new bilingual health professionals in provincial and
territorial health systems outside Quebec;
o the English language training of more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec;
o the implementation of a health card that identifies the user’s official language of preference; and
o the creation and implementation of a linguistic norm in health facilities, in collaboration with the
Health Standard Organization (HSO).
KEY MESSAGES
• We are providing additional funding of nearly $200 billion over 10 years for health care,
including $25 billion through new bilateral agreements to address provincial and territorial health system
needs.
• The new bilateral agreements will be underpinned by key principles, including equal access for
equity-seeking groups and individuals, including those in official language minority communities.
• Building on lessons from previous bilateral agreements, provinces and territories will need to
describe in their action plans how federal funds will be used to strengthen health care and to provide
equality of access for under-served groups and individuals, including those in official language minority
communities.
• Provinces and territories will also work toward overarching results for the shared health
priorities, measured through a set of key common headline indicators and supported by disaggregated
data.
• In addition, Health Canada supports access to health services for official language minority
communities through the Official Languages Health Program, which will provide $192.2 million over five
years.
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL BILATERAL AGREEMENTS)
• We are providing $46.2 billion in new funding to provinces and territories to address immediate
pressures on the health care system and to transform it for the long-term.
• This new funding includes $25 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories, to support
shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements focused on four priorities:
o family health services,
o health workers and backlogs,
o mental health and substance use, and
o a modernized health system.
• This builds on continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared priorities,
supported by targeted federal investments from Budget 2017 to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and Budget 2021 to improve the standard of
care in their long-term care facilities.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography, which includes supporting official
language minority communities.
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL OFFICIAL LANGUAGES HEALTH PROGRAM)
• In addition, the Official Languages Health Program will provide $192.2 million over five years
aimed at improving access to health services for official language minority communities. Since 2003, the
Program’s funding has supported, among others:
o the addition of approximately 10,000 new bilingual health professionals in provincial and
territorial health systems outside Quebec;
o the English language training of more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec;
o the implementation of a health card that identifies the user’s official language of preference; and
o the creation and implementation of a linguistic norm in health facilities, in collaboration with the
Health Standard Organization (HSO).
BACKGROUND
Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s plan to provide nearly $200 billion over ten years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new Canada
Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each province and
territory, personal support work wage support, and a Territorial Health Investment Fund.
GDP-Driven Growth: As the Canada Health Transfer's escalator is based on GDP growth, an additional
$141.8 billion is projected to be provided over the next ten years through the Canada Health Transfer,
over and above the $45.2 billion provided in 2022-23.
Canada Health Transfer Top-Up: The federal government will provide $2 billion in 2022-23 to address
urgent pressures in emergency rooms, operating rooms, and pediatric hospitals, building on $6.5 billion
in top-ups provided throughout the pandemic.
Canada Health Transfer Five Per Cent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up payments
to achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five per cent per year for the next five years. The
last top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of the five-year
period, resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.1 billion over ten
years in additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years through a
new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health system needs, such
as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and reducing backlogs,
increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health systems.
These new agreements build on the approach used in the previous home and community care and
mental health and addiction services agreements. Agreements contribute to achieving overarching
results for the shared health priorities, measured through a set of key common headline indicators and
supported by disaggregated data. Provinces and territories will describe in their action plans how funds
will be spent incremental to current activities, and how the activities will address the needs of
underserved and disadvantaged populations, including official language minority communities.
Personal Support Worker Wage Support: The federal government will provide $1.7 billion over five years
to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related professions.
Territorial Health Investment Fund: The federal government will provide $350 million over ten years in
recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivering health care in the territories. This
represents $35 million per year, an increase from the previous $27 million.
Previous bilateral agreements on home and community care and mental health and addictions services:
In 2017, the federal government committed $11 billion over 10 years specifically targeted to improve
home and community care, and mental health and addiction services and provinces and territories
agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
At that time, the federal government negotiated and signed Agreements with each province and
territory that set out details of how each jurisdiction would use federal funding to improve access to
home and community care, and mental health and addiction services. Initial agreements expired after
five years and new agreements covering fiscal year 2022-23 were established.
Currently, $4.8 billion of the $11 billion commitment remains available to support targeted provincial
and territorial efforts to improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction
services over the next four fiscal years (2023-24 to 2026-27).
A further $3 billion was proposed in Budget 2021 for Health Canada to help provinces and territories
ensure standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. This funding will be
available to provinces and territories over five fiscal years (2023-24 to 2027-28).
Official Languages Health Program (OLHP):
The OLHP, launched in 2003, aims to improve access to health services for OLMCs and is part of the
Government of Canada Action Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028. It funds a variety of initiatives
across the country, in collaboration with provincial, territorial and regional health authorities as well as
with OLMC organizations such as the Association des collèges et universities de la francophonie
canadienne - Consortium national de formation en (ACUFC-CNFS), McGill University, the Société Santé en
français (SSF), and the Community Health Social Services Network (CHSSN).
The Program currently includes the following three mutually reinforcing components:
4. Training and retention of health professionals
Health Canada provides support to post-secondary training institutions in order to improve the
availability of bilingual health service providers across the country and more particularly in regions
where the needs of OLMCs are greatest.
The Association des collèges et universités de la francophonie Canadienne, Consortium national de
formation en santé component (ACUFC-CNFS), which includes a national secretariat and 16 post-
secondary member-institutions outside Quebec, offers over 100 French-language health programs in
eight provinces and works with health facilities to offer internships and placements for its students and
graduates.
McGill University offers language training to health providers currently employed in Quebec's health care
system, as well as bursaries and internships for integrating bilingual health professionals in regions
where there is significant need for English-language health services.
5. Health Networking
Health networks work with various partners (communities, decision-makers, health managers, health
professionals, and post-secondary institutions) to develop concrete solutions to improve access to health
services for OLMCs. Targeted recipients for this component include the Société Santé en français (SSF),
with its 16 networks across all provinces and territories (except Quebec) for French-speaking minority
communities and the Community Health and Social Services Network (CHSSN), with its 23 networks
across Quebec for English-speaking minority communities.
6. Health services access projects
Projects under the current funding phase use innovative approaches to improve access to health services
for OLMCs.
SSF and CHSSN support projects under the following components: integration of health human
resources; knowledge development and dissemination (including activities and tools for data collection,
needs assessments and research); and improving community health (through increased access to health
services).
Health Canada also funded other not-for-profit organizations and provinces and territories in the areas of
home and community care, mental health and addictions services, palliative care and end-of-life care.
The Program is aligned with Health Canada's mandate to help Canadians maintain and improve their
health. It also contributes to the Department's obligation to ensure that positive steps are taken to
strengthen the vitality of English and French linguistic minority communities in Canada and to support
and assist their development, in accordance with the Government of Canada’s commitment under Part
VII of the Official Languages Act.
TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND (OFFICIAL LANGUAGES)
ISSUE
• The Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages will undertake a study to examine the
federal government's support for minority-language health services, including the inclusion of language
clauses in federal health transfers.
• Health Canada’s Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported initiatives aimed at improving
access to health services in the minority official language for official language minority communities,
including the establishment of a new bilingual health care centre in the Yukon.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2023 lays out the federal government's plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten
years in health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new
Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each province and
territory, personal support worker wage support, and a Territorial Health Investment Fund.
• Budget 2023 provided a total of $350 million over ten years, beginning in 2023-24 to support a
ten-year renewal of the Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF) (an incremental $175 million to the
amount announced February 7, 2023), in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health
care in the territories.
• Funding will be used to strengthen health care systems and improve health outcomes through
health care system innovation. It may also be used to offset medical travel costs incurred by each
territory.
• Funding under the THIF has been used to support initiatives aimed at improving access to health
services in the minority official language for official language minority communities, including the
establishment of the Constellation Health Centre in Whitehorse, Yukon, the first bilingual primary health
care centre in the territory.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported the territories in delivering health care in
the North, where each faces high costs to provide necessary care for their residents.
• Territories have used funding delivered through the Territorial Health Investment Fund to
develop and implement key health system improvement projects in area such as collaborative care,
primary care, and health human resources and capacity building, including the provision of culturally
appropriate health services, such as programs to support the participation of Nunavut Inuit
paraprofessionals within the health workforce.
• In the Yukon, funding has been used to support the establishment of the Constellation Health
Centre, which is the first centre in the territory to provide bilingual primary care services, in English and
French.
• Budget 2023 announced $350 million over ten years to renew the Territorial Health Investment
Fund, beginning in 2023-24, in recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivering health care
in the territories.
• This renewal will allow territories to further implement innovative projects within their health
systems and ensure Northerners have access to the health care they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE AMOUNT OR DURATION OF THE RENEWED FUNDING…
• The Budget 2023 announcement of $350M over ten years for the Territorial Health Investment
Fund will provide stable and predictable funding for territories to support necessary costs they incur,
including medical travel, and projects that can address the innovative delivery of health care in a
northern and remote context.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with territories to ensure they are supported
as they look to implement key initiatives funded by the Territorial Health Investment Fund.
BACKGROUND
Territorial Health Investment Fund
The Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF) recognizes the particular challenges of health care delivery
in the North. The objective of the THIF is to support territorial governments’ efforts to innovate and
transform their health care systems and ensure Northerners have access to the health care they need.
There are two streams of funding under the current THIF:
• the Innovation Funding Stream to support territorial efforts to innovate and transform their
health care systems; and
• the Medical Travel Stream to offset medical transportation costs to ensure Northerners have
access to the health care they need.
Budget 2021 renewed the THIF for two years, with $54M in new funding for 2021-22 and 2022-23. Of
that funding, $12.8M was allocated to the Yukon ($6.4M per year, with $2.1M for medical travel and
$4.3M for innovation), $14.2M to the Northwest Territories ($7.1M per year, with $5.0M for medical
travel and $2.1M for innovation), and $27M to Nunavut ($13.5M per year, with $9.2M for medical travel
and $4.3M for innovation).
In 2021-22, key activities included:
• The Northwest Territories undertook work under its Primary Health Care Reform Initiative,
including associated demonstration projects, and began the first of two years of work to implement a
System Sustainability Plan, with a goal of strengthening health care service delivery in the territory.
• Yukon developed new cultural safety and humility training, continued to work towards the
launch of integrated and collaborative bilingual health service delivery models, and continued its rollout
of the Yukon’s integrated electronic health record system. It also continued to focus on implementing the
transformative recommendations set out in Putting People First (the report of the Independent Expert
Panel on the comprehensive review of health and social services in the Yukon).
• Nunavut supported work in its priority areas of health human resources and capacity building,
including initiatives to support the participation of Nunavut Inuit paraprofessionals within the health
workforce. It also continued to focus on its tuberculosis program, and the further implementation of the
community oral health program.
Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s significant long-term federal investments of close to $200
billion over 10 years through the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians funding
package. The federal government will provide $350 million over ten years for the Territorial Health
Investment Fund, beginning in 2023-24, in recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivery
health care in the territories.
Question Period Card
Minister of Official Languages and Minister responsible for the Atlantic Canada Opportunities Agency
Issue
Tabling of a Bill to modernize and strengthen the Official Languages Act
Update
January 17, 2023
Source
N.A.
Synopsis
On March 1st, 2022, the Minister of Official Languages and Minister responsible for the Atlantic Canada
Opportunities Agency tabled Bill C-13 An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of
French in Federally Regulated Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts in the
House of Commons.
Recommended response
• The Official Languages Act has not been substantially revised since 1988 and needs to be
modernized and strengthened to keep pace with a society marked by new demographic and social
realities.
• Our government recognizes in this Bill that French is in a minority situation in Canada and North
America, due to the predominant use of English, and takes actions to protect and promote it.
• Bill C-13 embodies the vision and commitments of our Government to our two official
languages. This Bill proposes significant enhancements to improve the vitality of our official language
minority communities and promotion of our two languages across Canada.
Background
• On March 1st, 2022, the Minister of Official Languages and Minister responsible for the Atlantic
Canada Opportunities Agency tabled Bill C-13 An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the
Use of French in Federally Regulated Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts (Bill
C-13) in the House of Commons.
o Debate at second reading ended on May 30, 2022.
o The House of Commons Standing Committee on Official Languages (LANG) is currently
conducting a clause-by-clause review of the Bill.
o LANG has previously invited witnesses (75) including Ministers Fraser and Fortier (December 6,
2022), and Ministers Petitpas Taylor and Rodriguez (December 8, 2022), and received 48 briefs.
o The Senate Standing Committee on Official Languages (OLLO) conducted a pre-study of the
contents of the bill, having heard 9 witnesses and having reviewed 25 briefs, and tabled its final report
on November 17, 2022.
• On June 2nd, 2022, the Parliamentary Budget Officer released an independent analysis of the
financial cost of Bill C-13. The study was commissioned by the OLLO. Articles report that for the private
sector, the PBO estimates one-time compliance costs of $240 million and recurring costs of $20 million
per year.
• In a letter sent to the LANG Committee on June 9, 2022, Quebec's former Minister responsible
for Canadian Relations and Francophonie proposed amendments, on behalf of the Government of
Quebec, to Bill C-13 to incorporate certain specificities related to the Charter of the French Language. Bill
C-13 includes the key measures of the previous version of the Bill (C-32) including recognition of
provincial and territorial linguistic realities, increased support for French across Canada, including
Quebec, a significant strengthening of the powers of the Treasury Board and the Commissioner of
Official Languages, and a ten-year review clause.
• Bill C-13 goes further, also proposing significant reinforcements from the previous Bill:
o A strengthening of the provisions relating to Francophone immigration.
o A strengthening of the provisions linked to federal institutions taking positive measures.
o A strengthening of the provisions in connection to the English-speaking communities in Québec.
o An additional strengthening of Treasury Board’s powers with regards to official languages.
o The addition of precision linked to emergency situations.
o The addition of the principle of interpretation as to the restorative nature of linguistic rights.
o A transfer of dispositions relating to the federally regulated private businesses in a new law.
o A new power entrusted in the Commissioner of Official Languages to impose administrative
monetary penalties to certain privatized or Crown corporations in the field of transportation who
communicates and offer services to travelers.
o Strengthening of the judicial decisions provisions to obtain immediate translation of more
federal court decisions.
• On February 19, 2021, the Government of Canada unveiled its official languages reform paper,
English and French: Towards Substantive Equality of Official Languages in Canada. This document, which
followed a pan-Canadian consultation process that began in March 2019, outlines the government's
vision for a modernized OLA. This document outlines the federal government's intentions, which include
a series of legislative, regulatory and administrative measures.
• On April 19, 2021, the Government of Canada presented its Budget 2021: A Recovery for Jobs,
Growth and Resilience. It announced that it would invest $389.9 million over three years, beginning in
2021-2022, to support official languages. Among other things, it granted $6.4 million to Canadian
Heritage and $2.3 million to the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat over two years to modernize the
OLA. In addition, $16 million for 1 year upon Royal Assent of the Bill was announced in the Economic and
Fiscal Update 2021 to allow for the short-term implementation of certain key provisions.
• The November 23, 2021 Speech from the Throne stated that both official languages are part of
our identity and shape our country and that it is crucial to support official language minority
communities and to protect and promote French not only outside Quebec, but also within it.
• The OLA came into force in 1969 and gave equal status and use to English and French not only in
Parliament and courts, but also throughout the federal administration. In September 1988, the OLA was
reviewed in depth. This new version incorporated and clarified the language rights and principles
enshrined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982, and included, notably, a new part -
Part VII - which contained a new commitment by the Government of Canada to promote English and
French in Canadian society. The most recent milestone in the evolution of the OLA was passed in 2005,
adding obligations to implement federal government’s commitment under the Part VII.
BACKGROUND
• The Official Languages Act (OLA) came into force in 1969 and gave equal status and use to
English and French not only in Parliament and courts, but also throughout the federal administration.
• In September 1988, the OLA was reviewed in depth to incorporate and clarify the language
rights and principles enshrined in the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms, 1982, and included a
new part - Part VII - which contained a new commitment by the Government of Canada to enhance the
vitality of English-and French-speaking minority communities in Canada, as well as to foster the full
recognition and use of both English and French in Canadian society.
• In 2005, an obligation for federal institutions to take “positive measures” to implement the
federal government's commitments under the Part VII was added to the OLA.
• In February 2021, the Government of Canada unveiled its official languages reform paper,
English and French: Towards Substantive Equality of Official Languages in Canada. This document, which
followed a pan-Canadian consultation process that began in March 2019, outlined the government's
vision for a modernized OLA, including a series of legislative, regulatory and administrative measures.
• In June 2021, the Government introduced Bill C-32, An Act for the Substantive Equality of French
and English and the Strengthening of the Official Languages Act. However, this Bill eventually died on the
order paper.
• On March 1st, 2022, the Minister of Official Languages and Minister responsible for the Atlantic
Canada Opportunities Agency tabled Bill C-13 An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the
Use of French in Federally Regulated Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts in
the House of Commons.
o Debate at second reading ended on May 30, 2022.
o The House of Commons Standing Committee on Official Languages (LANG) is currently
conducting a clause-by-clause review of the Bill.
• Bill C-13 includes key measures such as:
o the recognition of provincial and territorial linguistic realities;
o increased support for French across Canada (including Quebec);
o a significant strengthening of the powers of the Treasury Board and the Commissioner of Official
Languages; and
o a ten-year review clause.
• Bill C-13 also proposes new measures that were not included in Bill C-32, such as:
o A strengthening of the provisions relating to Francophone immigration.
o A strengthening of the provisions linked to federal institutions taking positive measures under
Part VII.
o A strengthening of the provisions in connection to the English-speaking communities in Québec.
o The addition of precision linked to emergency situations.
• The modernized OLA will be supported by investments under the government of Canada’s Action
Plan for Official Languages 2023-2028 totalling $3.8 billion including $347,7 million dollars in additional
funding announced in Budget 2023.
DIRECT OR POTENTIAL IMPACTS OF BILL C-13 ON HEALTH CANADA
Bill C-13 recognizes key sectors for official language minority communities (OLMCs), including the health
sector, and encourages federal institutions to take positive measures to support OLMCs in these sectors.
• Health Canada is well positioned to respond to this new provision, namely through its Official
Languages Health Program (OLHP).
• The Program, created in 2003 under the government of Canada’s Action Plan for Official
Languages, includes three mutually reinforcing components:
o Training and Retention of Bilingual Health Professionals
o Health Networking
o Health services access projects
• Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192,2 million that the OLHP
will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program will also receive $14,5 million to support non-profit
organizations that serve these communities as well as enhance capacity to train additional bilingual
nurses and personal support care workers.
• In addition to the OLHP, bilateral agreements with provinces and territories, stemming from the
government’s plan to provide nearly $200 billion in additional funding over ten years in health transfers
to provinces and territories (including $46.2 billion in new funding), will respect each government's
jurisdiction. One of the principles that provinces and territories have agreed to in order to receive this
funding is to take into account the needs of equity-seeking groups and individuals in terms of access to
health services, including OLMCs.
• While developing their action plans as part of the bilateral agreements, provinces and territories
will need to consider and identify how different population characteristics such as age, gender, and
official languages can be factored into the design of their planned initiatives.
• Health Canada will also continue to consult OLMCs on their needs and priorities through ad hoc
consultations as well as through regular meeting of the Federal Health Portfolio Consultative Committee
for OLMCs in Canada. The Committee includes representatives from OLMCs, as well as Health Canada,
the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
• Recent priorities that have been discussed by the Committee include:
o The aforementioned renewal of the OLHP and bilateral health agreements with provinces and
territories;
o Home care, palliative care and mental health services in OLMCs; and
o The impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic on OLMCs.
Bill C-13 specifies that all legal obligations related to official languages apply at all times, including during
emergencies.
• This provision was included in reaction to controversies regarding the temporary withdrawal of
bilingualism requirements on drugs and other health or personal hygiene products during the COVID-19
pandemic.
• On this issue, Health Canada will continue to prioritize making important information available in
English and French when considering importation of foreign products if labelled only in one language.
This will ensure the safe use of imported products and make the information available to consumers in
both official languages.
• For example, the following measures have been taken to mitigate potential impacts on
Francophone consumers following the importation of infant and children’s acetaminophen and
ibuprofen products with unilingual English labelling:
o A dedicated page on the Government of Canada’s website, available in both official languages,
that describes the shortage issue and give practical advice to consumers (e.g. Shortage of infant and
children's acetaminophen and ibuprofen);
o A tearaway sheet in both official languages, with the necessary information and a QR code that
consumers can scan in pharmacies.
o A commitment from the companies to using the controls at their disposal to enhance the
distribution of bilingual product to Quebec and minority French language communities across Canada,
with assistance from Health Canada.
• The Department engaged Quebec counterparts who agreed with these measures on the
condition that they would be able to review the translations and that the English labelled product from
the Unites States be distributed only to pharmacies (e.g., not grocery stores without pharmacies) to
ensure that pharmacists can assist parents and caregivers who require support in understanding
instructions for use.
• As has been done with the Government of Quebec for Francophones in that province, it would
also be possible to consider consulting organizations representing OLMCs for additional advice, on an ad
hoc basis, when situations require the Department to make decisions that could affect OLMCs, such as
the temporary withdrawal of bilingualism requirements on drugs or other health or personal hygiene
products.
Bill C-13 also requires that the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration adopt a policy on francophone
immigration that includes objectives, targets and indicators.
• Although this requirement does not affect the Minister of Health directly, a draft paper,
presented by Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC) at a meeting of the Committee of
Assistant Deputy Ministers on Official Languages, indicated that IRCC identified francophone immigrants
with health credentials as a priority group for integration in OLMCs.
• If the need arises, potential collaborations between IRCC and Health Canada could be developed
using the OLHP. For example:
o Postsecondary institutions who are members of the Consortium national de formation en santé
(one of the OLHP’s targeted recipients), could provide training to francophone immigrants with health
credentials for credential recognition and/or to help acquire the necessary skills to work in the health
sector in Canada.
o The Société Santé en Français, another targeted recipient under the OLHP, along with other
community organizations working in francophone immigration, could provide assistance in the
integration of these immigrants in OLMCs
REPORT OF THE STANDING SENATE COMMITTEE ON OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
ON THE SUBJECT MATTER OF BILL C-13, AN ACT TO AMEND THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES
ACT, TO ENACT THE USE OF FRENCH IN FEDERALLY REGULATED PRIVATE BUSINESSES
ACT AND TO MAKE RELATED AMENDMENTS TO OTHER ACTS
On 1 March 2022, the Government introduced in the House of Commons Bill C-13, An Act to
amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private
Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts. On 31 May 2022, the Standing
Senate Committee on Official Languages (the Senate Committee) was authorized to examine
the subject matter of the bill.
Introduction
The Senate Committee held eight meetings, heard 41 witnesses, and received 22 briefs, one
follow-up and one briefing binder as part of its pre-study of Bill C-13.1 It examined a number of
issues and proposed amendments, but focused on the following provisions:
Part 1 of Bill C-13 to amend the Official Languages Act (OLA), in particular amendments to:
the purpose;
Part VII; and
the powers of the Commissioner of Official Languages.
Part 2 of Bill C-13 enacting the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act
(UFA).
In the course of its pre-study of Bill C-13, the Senate Committee identified the following seven
main issues.
1. The special status of French and the vitality of
Quebec’s English-speaking communities
The evidence and briefs overwhelmingly support the commitment to protect and promote
French. While some dispute the premise that French is in decline in Quebec,2 it is generally
accepted that French is in a minority situation in Canada and North America due to the
predominant use of English and that this recognition has a place in an amended OLA.
However, individuals and organizations from Quebec’s English-speaking communities fear the
harmful effects that this recognition could have on the vitality of their communities.3 They
oppose the legislative asymmetry in Bill C-13 and question the territorialization of language
1 Detailed lists of witnesses heard and briefs received can be found in Appendices A and B.
2 Quebec Anglophone Heritage Network (QAHN); Quebec Federation of Home and School Associations
(QFHSA).
3 Quebec Community Groups Network (QCGN); Task Force on Linguistic Policy (TFLP); QFHSA; Robert
Leckey;
Quebec English School Boards Association (QESBA).2
rights through the recognition of specific provincial and territorial linguistic dynamics. They feel
these two approaches mark a turning point in the way Canadian language policy is developed.
Others, on the other hand, feel the asymmetrical approach is justified, as its purpose is to
entrench recognized case law principles such as the substantive equality of the two official
languages.4 Bill C-13 includes this principle among those that should guide the interpretation of
the OLA, along with the principle that language rights must be interpreted broadly and liberally
and in light of their remedial nature. Some witnesses therefore find that Bill C-13 takes a
balanced approach.5 Others, however, are concerned that the OLA objective of equality of
status and use of the two official languages will be impacted.6 The Commissioner of Official
Languages (the Commissioner) does not seem concerned about this and even proposes
adding substantive equality as an interpretative principle in the new UFA.7
Quebec’s English-speaking communities are therefore calling for additional safeguards to
ensure that the OLA does not diminish their constitutional rights. This could take the form of a
new interpretive principle in the OLA.8 Others would like to see the addition of an interpretive
principle relating to provincial and territorial linguistic dynamics or to the protection and
promotion of French.9 In light of these competing visions, it seems that Bill C-13 needs to be
clarified so that the commitment to protect and promote French does not conflict with the
objective of supporting the development of English and French linguistic minority communities
so as to protect them.
One proposal to reduce uncertainty is to define “English and French linguistic minority
communities” in the OLA. This expression could be defined generally as “a linguistic minority in
a given province or territory” or specifically by “French-speaking minority communities outside
Quebec” or “English-speaking minority communities in Quebec.”10 However, concerns were
raised that such a definition may not be sufficiently inclusive.11
Furthermore, the evidence and briefs disagree on the appropriateness of including references
to the Charter of the French Language (CFL) in the OLA and the UFA. Opposition to such
references is especially strong in light of the Quebec National Assembly’s recent passage of An
Act respecting French, the official and common language of Québec, which makes use of the
notwithstanding clause. Most individuals and organizations from Quebec’s English-speaking
communities called for references to the CFL to be removed from Bill C-13.12 They fear that
their inclusion in the preamble and in Part VII of the OLA legitimizes a restrictive approach by
the federal government towards their communities.
Witnesses also pointed out that the principles supported by the federal and provincial
legislation are at odds. The federal act aims to protect linguistic minority communities while
4 Linda Cardinal; Érik Labelle Eastaugh; Michel Doucet; Benoît Pelletier.
5 Linda Cardinal; Michel Doucet; Benoît Pelletier.
6 QCGN; TFLP; Quebec English-Speaking Communities Research Network (QUESCREN); QAHN; QFHSA;
Robert
Leckey; QESBA.
7 Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages (OCOL).
8 QCGN; TFLP; QUESCREN; Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation (CEDEC).
9 Government of Quebec; Benoît Pelletier.
10 Fédération des communautés francophones et acadienne du Canada (FCFA); Power Law; QCGN;
QFHSA.
11 Michel Doucet.
12 QCGN; TFLP; QUESCREN; QAHN; QFHSA; QESBA.3
the Quebec act aims to protect the French-speaking majority in a given territory, which makes
the reference to the CFL questionable. 13 The reference to Quebec seems unusual, since
references to other provinces in Bill C-13 are to constitutional provisions, making the CFL the
only provincial language regime mentioned in the bill. Despite strong disagreement, calls were
made to further align the federal regime with Quebec’s.14
Lastly, Bill C-13 enacts the UFA, which provides for rights and duties respecting the use of
French as a language of service and a language of work in relation to federally regulated
private businesses in Quebec and then, two years later, in regions with a strong francophone
presence. Some witnesses welcomed a law for private businesses that is separate from the
OLA.15 But others questioned whether this law applies equally to anglophones and
francophones.16 One expert does not believe that the UFA puts the rights of English-speaking
consumers in Quebec at risk, even though it does not actively promote those rights.17 However,
English-language organizations in Quebec believe that a bilingual regime should be applied
Canada-wide, not restricted to specific regions.18
The evidence and briefs show that imposing a dual regime on federally regulated private
businesses in Quebec could create confusion. Bill C-13 allows these businesses to opt out of
the UFA. The Quebec government is calling for the provincial regime as defined in the CFL to be
applied exclusively.19 Yet an English-language organization in Quebec is calling for the
application of the UFA with no opt out.20 The Commissioner wants section 6 of the UFA to be
re-examined to reduce public uncertainty.21 In practice, many businesses are already voluntarily
applying the CFL’s provisions.22 A lack of cooperation between the two levels of government
may open the door to recourse where the provisions of the two regimes contradict each
other.23 These legal debates could cause uncertainty for employers.24
There is still a great deal of uncertainty regarding the UFA’s application in regions with a strong
francophone presence because this will be defined by regulation. However, witnesses expect
offer of service to be based on significant demand, as is the case for federal institutions.25 In
New Brunswick, one expert expects to see the provisions apply not only to regions with a
strong francophone presence, but to the entire province.26 The Commissioner expects greater
consistency between the provisions of the OLA and those of the new UFA.27 In short, while the
13 The Honourable Michel Bastarache; Power Law; Michel Doucet; Robert Leckey.
14 Government of Quebec; Benoît Pelletier.
15 OCOL; David Robitaille.
16 QCGN; TFLP; CEDEC.
17 David Robitaille.
18 QCGN; TFLP; QFHSA; CEDEC.
19 Government of Quebec.
20 QCGN.
21 OCOL.
22 Canadian Bankers Association (CBA); Federally Regulated Employers – Transportation and
Communications
(FETCO).
23 David Robitaille; Benoît Pelletier.
24 FETCO.
25 FCFA.
26 Michel Doucet.
27 OCOL.4
new language obligations for federally regulated private businesses are welcomed, there is
some debate about whether they should apply to just one language or to specific regions.
2. Federal–provincial/territorial cooperation
In its reform document, English and French: Towards a substantive equality of official languages
in Canada, the federal government commits to strengthening accountability in federal–
provincial/territorial agreements. This long-standing issue goes beyond the two official
language minority communities, with both anglophones and francophones calling for lasting
solutions.
Many witnesses pressed for provisions on binding language clauses in the OLA, including the
addition of transparency and accountability measures.28 Others believe that this issue can be
resolved through administrative measures or greater federal leadership.29 One expert was
unconcerned about how to address the issue, but acknowledged its importance and said it was
not a constitutional impediment.30 Still others fully opposed language clauses or recognized
that such legislative changes would be difficult to get accepted in Quebec.31
It’s worth noting that the Fédération des francophones de la Colombie-Britannique has sought
leave to appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada on the issue of language clauses in devolution
agreements. Rather than waiting for clarification from the courts, some witnesses argued that
the federal government should be authorized to deal directly with official language minority
communities when necessary, in cases where language clauses are not respected.32 According
to one expert, the content and requirements of such agreements should be defined at
minimum.33
Bill C-13 recognizes the importance of cooperating with the provinces and territories and
devotes a whole new section to this in the OLA. Conflicting amendments are called for in new
subsection 45.1(1) of the OLA. While one provincial government wants consultation with the
provinces strengthened,34 francophone organizations want it better defined so that it does not
become an impediment to taking positive measures and to the presence of strong institutions
serving English and French linguistic minority communities.35 According to one expert,
amendments are needed to better define federal–provincial/territorial cooperation and foster
the exchange of best practices.36
Intergovernmental cooperation also involves services provided by third parties. Witnesses
recommended that section 25 of the OLA be amended to more easily identify third parties
28 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; Société Santé en français (SSF); Fédération culturelle
canadiennefrançaise (FCCF); Fédération des francophones de la Colombie-Britannique (FFCB); Fédération
de la jeunesse
canadienne-française (FJCF); Michel Doucet; QCGN; OCOL.
29 Linda Cardinal; the Honourable Michel Bastarache; Association des collèges et universités de la
francophonie
canadienne (ACUFC).
30 Érik Labelle Eastaugh.
31 Government of Quebec; Benoît Pelletier.
32 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; FFCB.
33 François Larocque.
34 Government of Quebec.
35 FCFA; ACUFC.
36 Hélène Asselin.5
acting on behalf of federal institutions.37 This would include a statement about the provinces
and territories, which Bill C-13 does not currently provide. The Commissioner proposes
extending obligations for services provided by third parties to the UFA.38
As mentioned in the previous section of this report, Quebec’s English-speaking communities
have also called for the removal of references to the CFL from new section 45.1(1).39 The
Government of Quebec is opposed to this and is even demanding that a framework agreement
be concluded with the federal government to promote the implementation of Part VII of the
OLA so as to respect the specificity of Quebec and recognize that French is the official and
common language of that province. 40
Lastly, one expert wants to see references to New Brunswick’s constitutional provisions
expanded to include the principle of offering bilingual services throughout the province.41 This
would ensure greater consistency in the application of New Brunswick’s constitutionally
recognized language regime.
3. Agency responsible for implementing and coordinating
the Official Languages Act
Bill C-13 redefines and strengthens the implementation and coordination responsibilities of the
OLA. Some of the Treasury Board’s previously discretionary responsibilities become statutory,
and the Treasury Board is called upon to exercise new powers with respect to implementing
positive measures under Part VII. Canadian Heritage is formally assigned the role of
government-wide coordination of the OLA, in addition to being responsible for implementing
the new UFA.
The evidence and briefs differ on which institution should be responsible for implementing and
coordinating the OLA. Some want all powers transferred to the Treasury Board.42 Others called
for continued shared responsibility between Canadian Heritage and the Treasury Board or
proposed strengthened interdepartmental coordination mechanisms.43 Still others questioned
the capacity of the Treasury Board to fulfill this new role, given its lack of leadership on issues
such as language of work and language training, where progress is slow.44 Some witnesses
were non-committal, and did not take an official position.45 One expert pointed out that the
Treasury Board does not deliver programs, that it cannot have authority over the programs and
policies of other departments, and that its role is to audit and oversee the administrative
requirements of other departments.46
37 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; OCOL.
38 OCOL.
39 QCGN; TFLP; QUESCREN; QAHN; QFHSA; QESBA.
40 Government of Quebec.
41 Michel Doucet.
42 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; SSF; FCCF; FFCB; FJCF; OCOL; Hélène Asselin.
43 Linda Cardinal; the Honourable Michel Bastarache.
44 Michel Doucet; Public Service Alliance of Canada (PSAC).
45 Érik Labelle Eastaugh; QCGN.
46 Linda Cardinal.6
The Commissioner believes that the Treasury Board’s powers should be expanded to cover all
of Part VII.47 Along with other witnesses, he called for the removal of the Treasury Board’s
ability to delegate its powers to deputy heads of federal institutions.48 In short, while there is
strong support for strengthening the implementation and coordination responsibilities of the
OLA, the issue continues to prompt debate.
4. Restoring the demographic weight of
francophone minority communities
The evidence and briefs support the inclusion in Bill C-13 of provisions to require the adoption
of a policy on francophone immigration that includes objectives, targets and indicators.
However, many witnesses raised concerns about the policy’s objective and said it should aim
to restore the demographic weight of francophone minorities, not just maintain or increase it.49
The Quebec government wants to clarify the policy’s objective by ensuring that it respects
federal-provincial agreements on immigration, including the one in effect in Quebec.50 One
expert suggested broadening the scope of the policy to strengthen the French fact across the
country.51 The Commissioner wants the policy to apply to the entire immigration continuum
and to all categories of immigrants.52 He added that the policy must be accompanied by
transparency, accountability and consultation mechanisms, to which one expert responded
that setting out specific consultation measures was not necessary because general
consultation obligations already exist in Part VII of the OLA.53
In addition to these legislative proposals, administrative proposals were made: more ambitious
francophone immigration targets to make up for lost time, programs suited to the needs of
francophones, and measures to take advantage of the potential pool of francophone foreign
students.54
Lastly, Bill C-13 provides that the provisions of the new policy on francophone immigration will
come into force by order in council. The Commissioner recommends a deadline for the coming
into force of the policy.55
5. Expanded powers of the Commissioner of Official Languages
Bill C-13 provides the Commissioner with new powers to ensure federal institutions comply
with the OLA, and federally regulated private businesses with the UFA. Depending on the
regime and circumstances, the Commissioner may use alternative dispute resolution, enter into
compliance agreements, make orders, impose administrative monetary penalties or make
public the summary, findings and recommendations of his investigations. The evidence and
47 OCOL.
48 OCOL; FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque.
49 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; Érik Labelle Eastaugh; FFCB; FJCF; OCOL.
50 Government of Quebec.
51 Hélène Asselin.
52 OCOL.
53 OCOL; Érik Labelle Eastaugh.
54 FCFA; Linda Cardinal; Érik Labelle Eastaugh; FFCB; ACUFC.
55 OCOL.7
briefs supported expanding these powers, but called for additional clarification in some
respects. The Commissioner himself proposed several amendments to improve the powers at
his disposal.
As to orders, the Commissioner sought the ability to make an order in his investigation report
without first making recommendations to the federal institution.56 Other witnesses
recommended that these powers be extended to Part VII of the OLA, rather than just to Parts IV
and V as currently provided for in Bill C-13.57 On the other hand, an organization representing
airports expressed concerns about the nature and scope of the order-making powers and
wanted them to be better defined.58 The Commissioner also recommended that the de novo
review for orders be removed from Bill C-13.59
As to administrative monetary penalties, one expert considered the Commissioner’s new
powers a good thing, provided they’re used appropriately.60 However, there could be confusion
in the roles of judge and jury that the Commissioner will have to play. This same expert doubts
that penalties, regardless of amount, will truly encourage better compliance. The
Commissioner recommended that the amount of the penalty be paid into a Linguistic Duality
Fund rather than to the Receiver General.61 He also recommended that the penalties apply to all
federal institutions with obligations under Parts IV and V of the OLA, as well as to federally
regulated private businesses subject to the UFA, a proposal that was supported by other
witnesses.62 Here again the Commissioner called for the removal from Bill C-13 of the de novo
review for administrative monetary penalties.63 He also recommended a deadline for the
coming into force of administrative monetary penalties.
The evidence and briefs pointed out that the language provisions applicable to the
transportation sector vary depending on the type of institution or business. Clarification in this
regard is therefore recommended. For example, Air Canada recommended that the obligations
applicable to airlines – including the Commissioner’s powers over them – be standardized.64
This could be done by expanding the application of administrative monetary penalties to other
carriers or by ensuring that offer of service is determined by significant demand for all airlines.
The Commissioner himself believes that there are significant disparities in the obligations
applicable to the travelling public and called for several changes in this area.65 He pointed to
the fragmented, even inconsistent, nature of the regimes applicable to the travelling public and
the restrictive interpretation of these provisions by the federal institutions that interact with
them. He suggested that the Federal Court’s decision in Thibodeau v. St. John’s International
Airport Authority be used as a model for reviewing these provisions. Port authorities called for
56 OCOL.
57 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; Michel Doucet.
58 Canadian Airports Council (CAC).
59 OCOL.
60 Michel Doucet.
61 OCOL.
62 OCOL; Hélène Asselin; Air Canada.
63 OCOL.
64 Air Canada.
65 OCOL.8
clarification of the definition of “services to the travelling public” in new section 65.2 of the
OLA.66
An organization representing airports raised concerns about the possible impact of
administrative monetary penalties on airports’ operations, as they control only a small portion
of the services provided to the travelling public.67 Port authorities question the fact that their
language obligations differ from those of airport authorities.68 This is because their enabling
legislation sets out different language obligations. The port authorities went so far as to ask to
be excluded from the application of Part VII of the OLA, but suggested that this be done
through an amendment to the Canada Marine Act rather than the OLA. They also asked to be
protected from vexatious or bad faith complaints from the public.
As to the powers applicable to federally regulated private businesses, amendments to the UFA
are called for to clarify the parameters of the Commissioner’s investigative powers, including
the deadline for referring a complaint to the Canada Industrial Relations Board.69 Again,
amendments are required to protect businesses from vexatious or bad faith complaints from
the public.70
In addition, one expert pointed out that alternative dispute resolution mechanisms are not
necessarily appropriate in the context of language rights and may have little effect since the
balance of power favours the majority, not minorities.71 Compliance agreements were
welcomed.72 However, the Commissioner wants the complainant to be able to seek recourse if
they feel their rights have been violated despite a compliance agreement, even if the
Commissioner himself considers that the agreement has been respected.73 An organization
representing airports welcomed the amendments to section 58 of the OLA, which will save time
by not having to deal with outdated or already resolved issues.74 Lastly, the Government of
Quebec was the notable exception, asking that the Commissioner exercise his powers in a
manner consistent with federal, provincial and territorial measures for the promotion and
protection of French.75
6. Regulations
Many details regarding the implementation of Bill C-13 will depend on regulations, including
Part VII, some UFA provisions and administrative monetary penalties. Regulatory power is
currently provided for under Parts V and VI of the OLA, but the federal government has not
committed to regulatory action under either of those parts. Some want the government to take
action and make regulation-making mandatory under Parts IV, V, VI and VII.76 The only
66 Association of Canadian Port Authorities (ACPA).
67 CAC.
68 ACPA.
69 FETCO.
70 FETCO.
71 Michel Doucet.
72 Michel Doucet; OCOL; CBA.
73 OCOL.
74 CAC.
75 Government of Quebec.
76 OCOL; Hélène Asselin.9
commitment in the reform document concerns Part VII, but with no specific time frame. The
Commissioner encourages the government to quickly enact regulations.77
Expectations regarding regulations are high, as the understanding of many of the provisions of
Bill C-13 depends on them. This will also impact the costs of its implementation.78 Many
witnesses stressed the importance of consultation in this context.79 The Commissioner even
recommended that this obligation to consult be included in the OLA.80
Witnesses debated whether to take the time to amend the OLA and the UFA or to expediate the
bill’s passage by leaving the details to regulations. For some, legislative amendments are
critical to make progress towards equality of the two official languages and avoid further
setbacks without having to wait for the next periodic review prescribed by new section 93.1 of
the OLA.81 One expert believes that this new provision on the 10-year review of the OLA should
set out an obligation for the government to respond to the review within a prescribed period.82
The Commissioner also wants an obligation to consult set out in this provision.83
As mentioned in previous sections of this report, the Commissioner recommends a deadline on
the coming into force of the administrative monetary penalty regime.84 He also recommends
amendments to the OLA itself rather than in future regulations, especially with respect to
designating the organizations covered by this regime. He suggested using the Accessible
Canada Act as a model.
An organization representing banks felt that timelines for implementing the UFA and its
regulations should be flexible.85 Witnesses suggested that certain criteria should be considered
in developing the regulations, for example the definition of regions with a strong francophone
presence, number of employees and the entities to be subject to administrative monetary
penalties.86
7. Positive measures
Bill C-13 sets out many changes to Part VII of the OLA for which there is strong support in the
evidence and briefs. However, amendments were recommended to clarify the nature of the
duty of federal institutions to take positive measures and how the duty is to be carried out.
In drafting Bill C-13, the federal government took into account the Federal Court of Appeal’s
decision in Canada (Commissioner of Official Languages) v. Canada (Employment and Social
Development). However, according to the evidence and briefs, some provisions undermine this
decision, and additional amendments were therefore called for. As mentioned in previous
77 OCOL.
78 Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer.
79 FCFA; OCOL; FETCO.
80 OCOL.
81 FCFA; Power Law, OCOL.
82 Michel Doucet.
83 OCOL.
84 OCOL.
85 CBA.
86 FCFA; David Robitaille; OCOL.10
sections of this report, the Commissioner recommends that Treasury Board responsibility be
extended to Part VII in its entirety, not just to positive measures.87
Many witnesses recommended that the duty to take positive measures be strengthened by
removing the words “that it considers appropriate” from new subsections 41(5) and 41(7) of
the OLA.88 Some suggested replacing the word “appropriate” with “necessary.”89 The
Commissioner recommends that federal institutions be required to take positive measures
based on impact analyses, in an ongoing manner, and not be limited to “structuring” decisions
or to decisions with “direct” negative impacts.90 One expert said that positive measures are an
ongoing duty that applies in all contexts and must not be left to the discretion of federal
institutions.91 He said that new paragraph 41(7)(b) of the OLA is a step backwards from the
Federal Court of Appeal’s decision, since it does not require the negative impacts of a potential
decision made by a federal institution to be eliminated, but simply considered. He and other
witnesses want amendments to clarify this provision.92
Calls were also made for the provisions of new subsection 41(8) of the OLA regarding
consultations with official language minority communities to be strengthened. The provisions
dealing with dialogue and consultation activities in Bill C-11, An Act to amend the Broadcasting
Act and to make related and consequential amendments to other Acts, which is still before
Parliament, were cited as examples. Some witnesses want them incorporated into Bill C-13 as
is.93 The idea is to ensure effective consultation with linguistic minority communities by
drawing inspiration from Aboriginal rights, for example the Supreme Court of Canada decision
in Haida Nation v. British Columbia (Minister of Forests).94
Lastly, while new section 41(6)(c)(v) of the OLA sets out a list of sectors essential to the vitality
of linguistic minority communities that positive measures can support, there were calls for the
list to be more comprehensive. For example, the list could include support for public health, the
arts, heritage, economic development, labour market development, youth and research.95 There
were also calls to clarify that support for these critical sectors is a minimum obligation that
reflects the mandate of federal institutions.96 The Commissioner recommends that the scope
of new paragraph 41(6)(c) be defined by regulation.97
Conclusion
After undertaking an in-depth study on modernizing the OLA from 2017 to 2019 and proposing
practical recommendations to the federal government for reviewing its provisions, the Senate
Committee welcomes the long-awaited introduction of Bill C-13. Reaction to the bill was mixed
87 OCOL.
88 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; Érik Labelle Eastaugh; QCGN; QFHSA; OCOL.
89 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque.
90 OCOL.
91 Érik Labelle Eastaugh.
92 Érik Labelle Eastaugh; FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; SSF; FFCB; FJCF.
93 FCFA; Power Law; François Larocque; FCCF; QESBA.
94 Power Law; QESBA.
95 SSF; FCCF; CEDEC; FJCF; QUESCREN.
96 FCFA; Power Law.
97 OCOL.11
but generally positive. However, the Senate Committee notes that views vary on how to protect
and promote the rights of linguistic minorities.
Bill C-13 must:
recognize that the security and vitality of the French language requires special attention;
take measures to promote the substantive equality of use and status of English and French;
continue to protect the rights of English and French linguistic minority communities across
Canada; and
support the development and enhance the vitality of official language minority
communities.
It is also clear that the set of measures in support of the official languages must respond and
adapt to the challenges faced by these languages in regions across the country. Actions in this
regard must be taken to protect the vitality of both official languages and to encourage their
development by and for the members of Canada’s official language minority communities.
In its deliberations on Bill C-13, the Senate Committee calls on the Government of Canada to
consider the issues raised in this report without delay. The adoption of a modernized OLA is
long overdue. The Senate Committee is eagerly looking forward to studying Bill C-13 once it
receives its referral by the Senate. In addition, should the bill pass both Houses of Parliament
and receive Royal Assent, the Senate Committee is committed to monitoring its
implementation and progress to ensure that the issues it raised are addressed, including during
regulatory development.i
APPENDIX A – WITNESSES
Name of Organization and Spokesperson(s) Date
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer
Yves Giroux, Parliamentary Budget Officer
Karatina Michalyshyn, Analyst
Quebec Community Groups Network 13.06.2022
The Honourable Joan Fraser, Board Member and former senator
Eva Ludvig, President
Marion Sandilands, Counsel
Fédération des communautés francophones et acadienne du
Canada
Liane Roy, President
Alain Dupuis, Executive Director 16.06.2022
FETCO
Derrick Hynes, President and Chief Executive Officer
Reno Vaillancourt, Chair
Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages
Raymond Théberge, Commissioner of Official Languages
Pierre Leduc, Assistant Commissioner,
Policy and Communications Branch
Isabelle Gervais, Assistant Commissioner,
Compliance Assurance Branch
Pascale Giguère, General Counsel
Air Canada 20.06.2022
David Rheault, Vice President,
Government and Community Relations
Marc Barbeau, Executive Vice-President
and Chief Legal Officer
Canadian Airports Council
Chris Phelan, Vice President,
Government and Industry Affairsii
Name of Organization and Spokesperson(s) Date
As an Individual
Linda Cardinal, Associate Vice-Rector of Research,
Université de l’Ontario français
26.09.2022
As an Individual
Érik Labelle Eastaugh, Associate Professor and Director,
International Observatory on Language Rights, Université de
Moncton
As an Individual
François Larocque, Professor and Research Chair on Language
Rights, Faculty of Law, Common Law Section, University of
Ottawa
As an Individual
David Robitaille, Full Professor, Civil Law Section,
Faculty of Law, University of Ottawa
Canadian Bankers Association
Eric Prud’homme, Director, Quebec Region
Charles Docherty, Assistant General Counsel
Fédération des associations de juristes d’expression française de
common law
Daniel Boivin, President
03.10.2022
As an Individual
The Honourable Michel Bastarache,
former Judge of the Supreme Court of Canada
As an Individual
Benoît Pelletier, Distinguished Professor, Civil Law Section,
Faculty of Law, University of Ottawa
Société Santé en français
Antoine Désilets, Director General
Association des collèges et universités de la francophonie 17.10.2022
canadienne
Martin Normand, Director,
Strategic Research and International Relationsiii
Name of Organization and Spokesperson(s) Date
Fédération culturelle canadienne-française
Nancy Juneau, President
Marie-Christine Morin, Executive Director 17.10.2022
Fédération des francophones de la Colombie-Britannique
Lily Crist, Chair of the Board of Directors
Power Law
Mark Power, Lawyer
Darius Bossé, Lawyer
24.10.2022
As an Individual
Michel Doucet, Professor emeritus, Faculty of Law,
Université de Moncton
Fédération de la jeunesse canadienne-française
Marguerite Tölgyesi, President
As an Individual
Robert Leckey, Dean and Samuel Gale Professor,
Faculty of Law, McGill University
Quebec English School Boards Association
Dan Lamoureux, President
Russell Copeman, Executive Director
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation
John Buck, President and Chief Executive Officer
Public Service Alliance of Canada
Alexandre Silas, Regional Executive Vice-President
Rosane Doré Lefebvre, Communications Officer 31.10.2022
Association of Canadian Port Authorities
Daniel-Robert Gooch, President and Chief Executive Officeriv
APPENDIX B – BRIEFS
Asselin, Hélène, Bill C-13 – Brief submitted to the Senatorial Standing Committee on Official
Languages, 15 June 2022.
Association of Canadian Port Authorities, Submission to the Stansding Senate Committee on
Official Languages Regarding Bill C-13, 14 September 2022.
Barreau du Québec, Comments and observations – Bill C-13 — An Act for the Substantive Equality
of Canada’s Official Languages, May 2022.
Cardinal, Linda, Brief Presented to the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages,
26 September 2022.
Chief Justices of the Federal Court of Appeal, the Federal Court and the Court Martial Appeal
Court of Canada, Letter to the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages, 13 June 2022.
Collège Mathieu, Letter to the Chair of the Senate Committee on Official Languages,
27 September 2022.
Community Economic Development and Employability Corporation, Presentation to the
Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages on its examination of the subject matter of Bill
C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally
Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts,
24 October 2022.
Court Challenges Program, Letter to the Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Official
Languages, 22 April 2022.
Court Challenges Program, Brief Regarding Bill C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act,
to enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related
amendments to other Acts, 3 November 2022.
Fédération des communautés francophones et acadienne du Canada, Proposed amendments
to Bill C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally
Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts, May 2022.
FETCO, FETCO submission relating to Bill C-13 (An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to
enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related
amendments to other Acts), 9 June 2022.
Government of Quebec, The Government of Quebec’s Proposed Amendments to Bill C-13, An Act
to Amend the Official Languages Act, to Enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated
Businesses Act and to Make Related Amendments to Other Acts, 1 June 2022.
Office of the Commissioner of Official Languages, Brief to the Standing Senate Committee on
Official Languages: Bill C-13: An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of
French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other
Acts – Seizing a Historic Opportunity: For a Complete Modernization of the OLA, 20 June 2022.
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer, Cost Estimate for Bill C-13: An Act for the Substantive
Equality of Canada’s Official Languages, 2 June 2022.v
Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer, Follow-up to 13 June 2022 Meeting, 15 June 2022.
Power Law, Bill C-13: Essential ingredients of a successful modernization of the Official
Languages Act remain absent, Briefing Binder Submitted to the Standing Senate Committee on
Official Languages, 24 October 2022.
Quebec Anglophone Heritage Network, English-speaking Quebec: an Integral Part of Quebec and
Canadian Society – A Brief submitted to the Senate Committee on Official Languages,
17 October 2022.
Quebec Community Groups Network, Brief to Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages
– Bill C-13, An Act for the Substantive Equality of Canada's Official Languages, June 2022.
Quebec English School Boards Association, Brief Presented to the Standing Senate Committee
on Official Languages as part of its examination of the subject matter of Bill C-13, An Act to
amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private
Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts, 24 October 2022.
Quebec English-Speaking Communities Research Network, Brief to the Standing Senate
Committee on Official Languages on the Topic of Bill C-13, An Act to Amend the Official
Languages Act, to Enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to
Make Related Amendments to Other Acts, October 2022.
Quebec Federation of Home and School Associations, A Response to C-13: An Act to amend the
Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act
and to make related amendments to other Acts, Brief Submitted to the Standing Senate
Committee on Official Languages, 17 October 2022.
Sign Language Institute of Canada, Bill C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to
enact the Use of Signed languages in Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make
related amendments to other Acts (short title: Act for the Substantive Equality of Canada’s Official
Languages) – Proposed amendments to Bill C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to
include Signed Languages, Brief to the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages,
October 2022.
Task Force on Linguistic Policy, Legislative Brief to Senate Standing Committee on Official
Languages – Bill C-13, An Act to amend the Official Languages Act, to enact the Use of French in
Federally Regulated Private Businesses Act and to make related amendments to other Acts (short
title: An Act for the Substantive Equality of Canada’s Official Languages), September 2022.
The Advocates’ Society, Letter to the Chair of the Standing Senate Committee on Official
Languages, 19 October 2022
THE CANADA HEALTH ACT AND MINORITY LANGUAGE RIGHTS
ISSUE
• The Minister will be appearing on April 17th before the Standing Senate Committee on Official
Languages on the subject of minority-language health services and may be asked about the Canada
Health Act in the context of minority language rights.
KEY FACTS
• The Canada Health Act establishes broad principles (public administration, comprehensiveness,
universality, portability, and accessibility) for publicly funded health insurance plans the provinces and
territories must fulfill to receive their full cash contributions under the Canada Health Transfer.
• The principles of the Act are broadly defined so as not to encroach on provincial and territorial
jurisdiction in the direct delivery of health care services.
• The provinces and territories are responsible to organize and deliver health care services how
they see fit to best meet the needs of their residents, including the language in which health services are
delivered.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada’s Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program will also
receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as
enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canada Health Act establishes the requirements provincial and territorial health insurance
plans must meet to qualify for full funding under the Canada Health Transfer.
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have universal access to medically necessary health
care services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• Health Canada works to improve access to minority language health services through the Official
Languages Health Program, which was launched in 2003.
IF PRESSED ON THE SERVICES PROVIDED UNDER THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGES HEALTH PROGRAM…
• Activities funded under the Program include: the integration of bilingual health personnel
through postsecondary training; the development of strategies and partnerships with health system
stakeholders through community networking; as well as projects aimed at improving access to bilingual
health services.
BACKGROUND
The Canada Health Act establishes broad principles (public administration, comprehensiveness,
universality, portability and accessibility) for publicly funded health insurance plans the provinces and
territories must fulfill to receive their full cash contributions under the Canada Health Transfer (CHT).
Adherence to these broad requirements ensures all Canadians have universal coverage for medically
necessary insured services, based on medical need and not on the ability to pay, regardless of where
they live in Canada.
The Act does not, however, dictate how the CHT payments are to be used or what health services must
be provided, and how they are delivered. The principles of the Act are broadly defined so as not to
encroach on provincial and territorial jurisdiction in the direct delivery of health care services. The
provinces and territories have the jurisdiction to organize and deliver health care services how they see
fit to best meet the needs of their residents, including the language in which health services are
delivered.
Established in 2003, Health Canada’s Official Languages Health Program supports access to health
services for English-speaking communities in Quebec and French-speaking communities elsewhere in
Canada, in the official language of choice. Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing
funding of $192.2 million that Health Canada’s Official Languages Health Program will receive between
2023 to 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve
these communities as well as enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support
care workers.
Funded initiatives will focus on:
• Enhancing the availability of bilingual health service providers across the country through post-
secondary and language training, to better serve these communities.
• Developing strategies and partnerships with health system stakeholders to improve access to
health services for members of official language minorities communities (OLMCs) in Canada through
community networking.
• Supporting innovative projects to improve access to health services for OLMCs, in their official
language of choice.
ACCESS TO BILINGUAL HEALTH SERVICES FOR OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
ISSUE
• Limited or non-existent access to bilingual health services is a recurring issue for official language
minority communities (OLMCs), particularly in rural and remote regions. Since language is essential for
effective communication between patients and health service providers, this lack of access to health
services in the minority official language has negative impacts on the safety and quality of care that
OLMCs receive.
KEY FACTS
• According to the results of one consultation conducted on behalf of Health Canada, 77% of
Francophone respondents residing outside Quebec said they had difficulties accessing health services in
the official language of their choice. This proportion rose to 80% of English-speaking respondents
residing in Quebec.
• Many Francophone minority communities live in rural areas and this has an impact on their
access to health services in their official language of choice. For example, in British Columbia, 14.7% of
the Francophone population lives in rural areas, compared to 37.2% in Saskatchewan, 59.8% in Nova
Scotia, and 51.2% in New Brunswick (2016 Census).
• The Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) received $192.2M in funding under the
Government of Canada’s Action Plan for Official Languages 2018-2023: Investing in Our Futur to
contribute to improving access to health services for OLMCs.
• Since 2003, approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals able to serve Francophone
minority communities have received training and more than 12,000 health professionals have received
language training to serve Quebec's English-speaking communities.
• A 2021 Statistics Canada study on the knowledge and use of the minority official language by
health care workers indicates that the proportion of health care workers who know French outside
Quebec decreased from 2001 to 2016.
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government and Health Canada recognize that access to bilingual health services is
an important issue because language is a determining factor in obtaining appropriate, quality and safe
health care.
• Health Canada has invested $192.2 million from 2018 to 2023 to support community
organizations, as well as colleges and universities, to implement initiatives to improve access to health
care for OLMCs in the official language of choice.
• Thanks to Health Canada investments since 2003:
- approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals have been added to provincial and territorial
health systems to serve Francophone minority communities;
- more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec have taken language training to better serve
English-speaking communities in the province;
- a health card identifying the patient's preferred language has been implemented in Prince
Edward Island; and,
- a language standard has been created and implemented in a number of health facilities across
the country.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced that it would increase health funding
for provinces and territories by nearly $200 billions over 10 years. One of the principles of these
agreements with the provinces and territories will be to take into account the needs of OLMCs as groups
seeking equity in access to health services.
• In addition, the 2023 Budget confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million
that the OLHP will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to
support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as to enhance the capacity to
train additional bilingual nurses and personal care workers, given the most pressing needs in these key
sectors following the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT IS HEALTH CANADA DOING TO ENSURE THAT FRANCOPHONES AND
ANGLOPHONES IN A MINORITY SITUATION HAVE ACCESS TO HEALTH SERVICES IN THEIR LANGUAGE …
• The Government is committed to improving access to health services for all Canadians across
Canada, in the official language of their choice. This commitment is reflected in the announcement on
February 7, 2023, in which the Federal Government announced that it would increase health funding for
provinces and territories by close to 200 billion over 10 years. One of the principles provinces and
territories have agreed to as part of receiving this funding is to take into account the needs of equity-
seeking groups and individual in terms of access to health services, including OLMCs.
• In addition, through other existing funding mechanisms, such as the Official Languages Health
Program (OLHP), Health Canada is also committed to investing in strengthening health networks working
on minority language issues in all provinces and territories, the training of new bilingual health
professionals and the implementation of new projects to improve access to health services in the
minority language in Canada.
• Among other things, with an investment of $206.7 million between 2023-2028 from the OLHP in
the context of the new federal action plan on official languages, Health Canada is maintaining its
commitment to improving access to health services for the Anglophone population of Quebec and
Francophones outside Quebec in the official language of their choice.
BACKGROUND
When it comes to health services, OLMC members are still not served equitably compared to their
majority-language counterparts. OLMC patients seeking health services in the minority language are
often faced with a number of issues, including a shortage of health professionals able to provide services
in the minority language. Recruiting bilingual health professionals who can serve OLMCs in their official
language of choice remains a major challenge, particularly in rural and remote areas, as does promoting
the minority official language and bilingualism in the workplace.
The results of a consultation conducted on behalf of Health Canada noted that 77% of Francophone
respondents residing outside Quebec said that they had challenges accessing health services in the
official language of their choice. This proportion rose to 80% of Anglophone respondents living in
Quebec.
The ratio of health professionals to OLMC patients must also be considered, as it does not always meet
the needs of OLMCs, especially on the outskirts of large urban centers. This particularly affects
Francophone minority communities, where 14.7% of British Columbia’s Francophone population lives in
rural areas, compared to 37.2% in Saskatchewan, 59.8% in Nova Scotia and 51.2% in New Brunswick
(Census 2016).
On the other hand, although some health professionals have primary and secondary education in the
minority official language, working in that language can be a challenge unless they have completed their
post-secondary training in it.
Despite the evidence on inequalities in access to health services in the language of choice, changes in
practice are still not systematically integrated, thus affecting the well-being and health potential of
Francophone patients outside Quebec and Anglophone patients in Quebec.
OLMC patients therefore remain at a disadvantage in terms of equitable access to health services.
Moreover, the access to health services for these patients is varied, in that the experiences of OLMCs
vary from one province and territory to another, or even from one region to another. Despite this
diversity, there are common efforts across Canada by several groups working to improve access to health
services for patients and the quality of services provided by health professionals.
Several studies conducted for Health Canada indicate that language is indeed a determining factor in
obtaining appropriate, quality, and safe health services. Good communication between patients and
their health care providers is therefore essential to achieving optimal health outcomes and making good
use of health system resources.
Among other things, researchers indicate that poor communication between patient and provider leads
to increased feelings of vulnerability, fear and frustration for the patient and the need for more
laboratory and imaging tests for the provider to diagnose and treat. Thus, poor communication between
OLMC patients and health providers compromises patient safety, as the potential for errors in the
diagnostic process, interventions and treatments is increased.
In the context of a health emergency such as the COVID-19 pandemic, offering health services to
vulnerable populations in their official language of choice becomes even more important. The bill to
modernize the Official Languages Act (Bill 13) provides for reinforcements to better support the vitality
of OLMCs and recognizes the health sector as a key sector for their vitality.
Canada has been taking a variety of actions over the years to address these challenges. Since 2003, as
part of the various five-year Action Plans for Official Languages in Canada, Health Canada, through the
Official Languages Health Program (OLHP), has been supporting initiatives across Canada to improve
access to health services for OLMCs.
The program includes three components:
• Health Professional Training and Retention;
• Health Networking; and
• Innovative projects to improve access to health services in the minority official language.
Approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals able to serve Francophone minority communities
have been trained by the Association des Collèges et universités de la francophonie canadienne – Volet
consortium de formation en santé (ACUFC-CNFS) until now and more than 12,000 health professionals
have received language training from McGill University or one of its regional partners to serve English-
speaking communities in Quebec.
Furthermore, the 2023 Budget confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that
the OLHP will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to support
non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as to enhance the capacity to train
additional bilingual nurses and personal care workers, given the most pressing needs in these key sectors
following the pandemic of COVID-19.
In addition, on February 7, 2023, the federal government announced that it would increase health
funding to the provinces and territories by nearly $200 billion over 10 years. This amount includes $46.2
billion in new funding through new Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to
meet the needs of each province and territory, personal support worker wage support, and a 10-year
renewal and increase of the Territorial Health Investment Fund.
Tailored bilateral agreements will include an action plan describing planned activities, expenditures,
expected results and timelines. As these action plans are developed, provincial and territorial officials
will have to consider and identify how different population characteristics such as age, gender, and
OLMCs can be factored into the design of their planned initiatives.
RESEARCH ON BILINGUAL ACCESS TO HEALTHCARE
ISSUE
• The Minister of Health has been called before the Standing Senate Committee on Official
Languages to support their study on the minority-language health services, which includes a focus on the
“needs for research, evidence and solutions to foster access to health care in the language of one’s
choice”.
KEY FACTS
• In 2021-22, CIHR invested over $42 million in research on equitable health care delivery systems
focused on underrepresented groups, including within official language minority communities (OLMCs).
• In April 2021, CIHR launched the Official Language Minority Communities in Health Research
funding opportunity aimed at understanding the health issues of French- and English-speaking
Canadians who live in communities where they are a minority. This represented a total investment of
over $1 million, over 1 year beginning in February 2022, and supported a total of 10 research projects.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes the need for health data on official language minority communities
(OLMCs).
• That is why our Government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, invested over
$1 million in research to understand the health issues of French- and English-speaking Canadians who
live in communities where they are a linguistic minority.
• This includes research at the Institut du Savoir Montfort in Ottawa to analyze healthcare access
barriers, as well as health information needs of OLMCs across Canada.
BACKGROUND
As per CIHR’s Policy Statement on Official Languages, CIHR, as Canada’s federal funding agency for health
research:
• is committed to supporting the development of OLMCs through investigator-initiated and
priority-driven research funding programs. These programs may:
o support research that studies the health determinants and specific needs of OLMCs;
o support the generation and mobilization of knowledge on issues related to OLMCs; and
o support health research projects led by OLMC researchers.
• is committed to supporting the development of OLMCs by encouraging researchers to consider
issues related to official languages and OLMCs in developing their research projects, whatever their
research field.
• encourages researchers to submit their funding applications in the official language of their
choice.
In 2016, CIHR consulted with key OLMC stakeholders, including but not limited to the Consortium
national de formation en santé, the Association Francophone pour le savoir, the Association des collèges
et universités de la francophonie Canadienne, and the Fédération des communautés francophones et
acadienne du Canada, to better understand the needs of the OLMC research community and determine
how CIHR can help to meet those needs. Among the key findings of these consultations, was an
identified lack of health data on OLMCs.
In response to the recommendations by OLMC stakeholders, in 2021, CIHR launched the Catalyst Grant:
Official Language Minority Communities in Health Research to support research initiatives aimed at
generating knowledge on health issues faced by OLMCs. Through this funding opportunity, CIHR invested
over $1 million over 1 year and supported 10 research projects, including one led by Dr. Sharon Johnston
and her team at the Institut du Savoir Montfort titled, Understanding healthcare access barriers and
health and community resource information needs of Official Language Minority Communities across
Canada, exploring the interaction of minority language status, and cultural and community contexts. This
study conducted an analysis of patient reported data to examine self-reported healthcare access
barriers, as well as health and community resource information needs of OLMCs across Canada,
considering the intersectionality of minority language status, as well as cultural and community contexts.
FACILITATING RESEARCH IN FRENCH
ISSUE
• The order of reference for the Standing Senate Committee on Official Languages (OLLO) study on
minority-language health services include examining the needs of post-secondary institutions in official
language minority communities (OLMCs) respecting recruitment, training and support for future
graduates in health-related disciplines.
KEY FACTS
• A report published by Acfas in June 2021 notes that French-language research in Canada is in
decline with only 5% to 10% of applications to research funding organizations submitted in French.
• One of Acfas recommendations is that the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
maintains measures aiming to rebalance the success rate of applications submitted in French, that these
measures be extended to all CIHR programs to ensure that the success rate of applications submitted in
French be at least equivalent to that of applications submitted in English.
• The average proportion of French applications submitted from 2000-2010 was approximately 8%
of applications (7.8% to be precise), while the average proportion from 2011-2021 was just over 6%
(6.1%). Between 2000-2021, the average success rate for applications submitted to CIHR in French was
26.5% compared to 29.7% for English-language applications.
• After the introduction of equalization measures in the Project Grant competition, the percentage
of funded projects submitted in French became in line with the overall success rates of the competition.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government recognizes the challenges faced by Francophone researchers in accessing
services in the official language of their choice.
• That is why the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or CIHR, has taken specific actions to
promote health research in French, including accommodation measures for French-language
applications.
• Additionally, CIHR has put in place equalization measures for its Project Grant program – its
largest research funding competition – to ensure that the proportion of French grants funded is at least
equal to the proportion of applications submitted in French.
IF PRESSED ON THE VALUE OF GRANTS AWARDED TO FRENCH-LANGUAGE APPPLICATIONS COMPARED
TO THE VALUES AWARDED TO ENGLISH-LANGUAGE APPLICATIONS…
• From 2000-2022, CIHR’s largest competition for research funding (Project Grants) provided
successful French applications and English applications on average, 72% of the budgets requested.
• French applications have typically requested smaller amounts than English applications, and thus
the values awarded to French applications are lower. Since 2000, French applications have requested an
average of $ 531,345 versus an average of $ 775,709 requested by English applications.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF ACFAS REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS…
• In line with recommendations from Acfas, CIHR maintains equalization measures for French-
language applications.
• The success rate of applications submitted in French is in line with the overall success rates for
the competition.
BACKGROUND
The government recognizes that Francophone researchers face barriers in conducting research in the
language of their choice. These include a dearth of French-language journals in the health sciences in
Canada; lack of research grant support in French for Francophone researchers within English-speaking
institutions; collaborative research teams that may operate in English; and overall lack of trust from
researchers that their applications will be considered equally, if submitted in French.
Since 2012, the government, through CIHR, has led a series of action plans to better fulfill its obligations
under the Official Languages Act and support the development of French language research programs in
health. The action plans included measures to support health researchers’ equitable access to CIHR
programs and services. These measures include:
• Publication of all CIHR guidance materials in both official languages.
• Inviting researchers to submit applications and communicate with CIHR in the official language
of their choice.
• Increased page limit for French-language applications, based on evidence that documents
written in French require approximately 20% more space than those written in English.
• Increased availability of translation services for peer reviewers and researchers so that
information is available in both official languages at all stages of the research funding process, from
application to peer review.
• Implementation of a targeted recruitment strategy in April 2018 to expand CIHR pool of experts
capable of reviewing applications written in French.
o Systematized reviewer recruitment to identify and mobilize the appropriate expertise for the
review of all funding applications.
o Ongoing analyses to ensure that approximately 25% of College of Reviewer members can review
applications written in French.
• Equalization measures put in place in 2021 for the Project Grant program, CIHR’s largest
competition for research grant funding, to ensure that the proportion of French grants funded is at least
equal to the proportion of applications submitted in French.
Project funding data for Spring 2022 shows that equalization had a positive impact on success rates for
applications submitted in French, bringing the percentage of funded projects in this category to 20%, in
line with the overall success rates of the competition.
As part of the Tri-Agency Equity, Diversity and Inclusion Action Plan (2018 – 2025), CIHR has updated the
Tri-Agency self-identification questionnaire to ask applicants to identify which language they first
learned, and which language is used most often at home. With this data, CIHR will be able to better
monitor the impact of its actions on the proportion of researchers applying in the language of their
choice.
CIHR will continue to take action to address systemic barriers within the health research ecosystem.
Specifically, CIHR will continue to monitor research funding data to ensure equity in health research
funding for French-speaking researchers; work with key stakeholders, such as universities and
community organizations, to identify areas for improvement; and implement actions to further support
health research in both official languages in Canada.
CONSIDERATIONS
CIHR submitted a brief to the House of Commons’ Standing Committee on Science and Research’s study
on Research and Scientific Publication in French that was published on November 25, 2022. The three
granting agencies, including CIHR, appeared alongside Minister Champagne before the Standing
Committee on Science and Research regarding this topic on February 2, 2023.
HEALTH PRODUCT SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Health product shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic and
recent shortages, such as the pediatric analgesic shortage, further exposed vulnerabilities in the health
product supply chain that impacted supplies of products required to treat patients with COVID-19 and
other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national health product supply continues. With the
creation of an internal Drug Shortages Task Force, Health Canada has bolstered its capacity for
surveillance, data collection and analysis, and engagement with provinces and territories, key supply
chain players, and patient groups to mitigate impacts of shortages and move towards prevention where
possible. Health Canada is also exploring medium- and longer-term policy options to improve resilience
of health product supply for Canada.
KEY FACTS
• Canada is a small market that relies heavily on imported products, making it vulnerable to
shortages. During the pandemic, global supply challenges and unprecedented demand further
contributed to shortages in Canada.
• Lessons learned from the pandemic informed the development of new regulations that provide
new tools to address health product shortages.
• As of April 3, 2023, 76 drug shortages were de-escalated from critical status, out of a total of 101
that were deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
• As of April 3, 2023, 344 of the 470 medical device shortages reported through the mandatory
framework are now resolved.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed health products is a top priority for our
Government.
• Significant efforts were made throughout the pandemic to respond to health product supply
disruptions; the recent shortage of pediatric analgesics demonstrates the need for continued vigilance.
• In 2021 and 2022, additional regulations came into force that provide new tools to help prevent
and alleviate health product shortages and to safeguard the supply.
• Health Canada has also bolstered its capacity to mitigate and prevent the impacts of health
product shortages through the creation of an internal Drug Shortages Task Force.
• We continue to work with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient groups and
international partners to monitor supply, to minimize the impact of shortages, and to prevent them
where possible.
IS DOING TO PREVENT FUTURE SHORTAGES …
• Health Canada has bolstered capacity to address the issue of immediate shortages by
establishing an internal Drug Shortages Task Force. We are also exploring medium-to-longer-term policy
options to improve Canada’s health product supply resilience.
• The Department remains focused on doing everything possible to ensure Canadians have access
to the health products they need, when they need them.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO ENSURE IMPORTED HEALTH PRODUCTS HAVE
SAFETY INFORMATION AVAILABLE IN BOTH OFFICIAL LANGUAGES…
• Ensuring that Francophones in Canada have access to important safety information in French is
something Health Canada takes very seriously.
• Health Canada regulations require that bilingual safety information be made available for all
imported drugs and medical products, including those imported to address a shortage.
BACKGROUND
Shortages in Canada
Health product shortages are a growing global issue. Canada is particularly vulnerable to shortages due
to its small market share and reliance on imported products. 68% of Canadian drugs are imported from
outside of Canada and 83% of activities related to drug production (e.g., manufacturing, packaging,
labeling) are performed outside of Canada. Similarly, the majority of medical devices on the Canadian
market are imported. Further, Canada holds only 2% of the global market share for drug sales and 1.8%
of the global market share for medical devices.
Health Canada’s Role
Health product shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of health product shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
federal leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, importers,
distributors, and practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and
territories and stakeholders across the supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include
regulatory measures, and to explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Several factors are taken into account to determine both the potential impact of a shortage of health
products and the actions required by Health Canada. Factors such as whether the shortage is national in
scope, whether alternative supplies are available and whether the product is considered medically
necessary are all considered in determining the potential impact.
Health Canada established the Drug Shortages Task Force in November 2022. The Task Force has
bolstered the Department’s capacity for surveillance, data collection and analysis, and to support the
development and implementation of medium- to longer-term policy options to improve Canada’s drug
and other health product resilience.
New tools to address shortages
The pandemic has had major impacts on drugs and medical devices in Canada and globally. The number
of national/critical shortages increased significantly throughout the pandemic. As well, secondary effects
from the pandemic are expected to persist in the medium to long term, such as fluctuating demand,
supply chain challenges and healthcare system recovery.
Additional authorities were added in the Food and Drug Regulations and the Medical Devices
Regulations, which allow the Minister to:
• Permit the exceptional importation of drugs and medical devices to address a shortage or an
anticipated shortage. Imported products in this case do not need to fully meet Canadian regulatory
requirements but must be manufactured to comparable quality standards. Information to support the
safe use of the imported product must also be available in both official languages.
• Require manufacturers and importers of specified medical devices to report shortages and
discontinuances that could lead to a shortage.
• If required, request that drug establishment licence holders and medical device manufacturers,
importers, and distributors provide information needed to assess, prevent, or alleviate a shortage.
The regulations also respond to risks posed by bulk importation frameworks, such as the one established
by the United States. A prohibition was put in place on drug establishment licence holders from
distributing certain drugs intended for the Canadian market for use outside of Canada if that distribution
could cause or exacerbate a shortage. This serves to ensure that bulk importation frameworks do not
cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Health Product Shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage health product shortages and has
leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify
shortage signals earlier. For example, through FPT collaboration, a process for the allocation of imported
critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The process allows
companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial governments in
allocating supply where it is needed most. This has been effective in managing limited supplies of
therapies being used to treat COVID-19 (e.g., Tocilizumab, Remdesivir) as well as drugs authorised by
Health Canada facing a high global demand (e.g., Paxlovid), and to ensure fair distribution of imported
foreign-labelled products in Canada (e.g., pediatric analgesics).
Working with provinces and territories, Health Canada established a COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve in
2020 that complemented other drug shortage mitigation efforts. It included 12 drugs used to support
patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives, pain relievers,
antibiotics, muscle relaxants, and inhalers. The Critical Drug Reserve served as a backstop for Canada’s
existing supply, complemented the existing drug shortage management systems, and mitigated critical
drug shortages, which relieved pressures on provincial and territorial health care systems through
several pandemic waves. This pandemic initiative ended on June 30, 2022.
During the pandemic and beyond, Health Canada has worked with FPT partners to address medical
device shortages and strengthen relationships in the medical devices sector. In November, 2022, this FPT
collaboration was formalized through the launch of the Medical Device Shortages Multistakeholder
Committee where early signals of shortages are discussed.
With the above-noted new tools in place, and a strong basis of FPT and stakeholder collaboration, Health
Canada has improved its ability to help address shortages of health products.
In light of more recent shortages of children’s analgesics, antibiotics and adult cough and cold medicines,
the Department is now focused on exploring options to improve signal detection, data collection and
analysis to inform response measures, and medium- to longer-term policy options, practices and
approaches to further improve Canada’s supply resilience. This work will continue to be based on federal
leadership in mobilizing key players to take action in their domains, while continuing to use the
regulatory framework to support federal action, such as authorizing exceptional importation of health
products to fill supply gaps.
HEALTH WORKFORCE CRISIS AND THE LANGUAGE SKILLS OF THE HEALTH CARE PERSONNEL
ISSUE
• Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. High patient
workloads, lack of resources, mandatory overtime and fear for personal safety have led to high levels of
burnout, absences, and turnover. For official language minority communities (OLMCs), this adds to the
ongoing challenge of a lack of access to health care personnel able to provide quality and safe care in the
official language of their choice.
KEY FACTS
• The fact that OLMCs do not always have access to health professionals who can offer them
health services in the official language of their choice can have a significant impact on the safety and
quality of care received by OLMC members. Among the categories of services presenting challenges for
OLMCs, there are mental health services, palliative care, chronic disease care, long-term care and
reception services.
• According to Statistics Canada, the number of bilingual health workers has increased in Canada
since 2001, but the proportion of health professionals who know French outside Quebec has decreased,
while in Quebec the proportion of health professionals who know English has increased slightly.
KEY MESSAGES
• By supporting and developing our health care workforce, we can ensure that the many
Canadians who are waiting for needed care can get it as quickly as possible. Investing in the training and
retention of bilingual staff helps ensure that services are offered in the official language of choice and
has a positive impact on the quality and safety of care offered to OLMCs, as well as on their health
outcomes.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced an investment of $200 billion over 10
years, including $46.2 million in new funding for provinces and territories through a top-up to the
Canada Health Transfer and tailored bilateral agreements to improve health care services for Canadians.
This was confirmed in Budget 2023. One of the priorities of this funding is to continue to support the
health workforce and reduce delays caused by COVID-19.
• To access this funding, provinces and territories are also encouraged to commit to streamlining
foreign credential recognition for internationally educated health professionals and promoting labour
mobility, starting with cross-jurisdictional credential recognition for key health professionals.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada’s Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) will receive between 2023 to 2028, the Program will
also receive $14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve these communities as well as
enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
• Under the OLHP, Health Canada also provides support to post-secondary training institutions to
improve the availability of bilingual health service providers across the country, particularly in regions
where OLMC needs are the greatest.
o The Consortium national de formation en santé (CNFS), which includes a national secretariat and
16 post-secondary institution members outside Quebec, offers more than 100 French-language health
programs in eight provinces and works with health institutions to offer internships and placements to its
students.
o McGill University offers language training to health care providers based in Quebec, as well as
scholarships and internships to integrate bilingual health professionals in regions where there is a
significant need for English-language health services.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY…
• New health care funding announced in February prioritizes a resilient and sustained health
workforce that delivers high-quality, effective and safe health services to Canadians who need them.
• This investment will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the recruitment and retention of health care workers in the public health care system.
• As part of the training component of the Official Languages Health Program, the CNFS reported
that approximately 10,000 new health professionals have been trained in French since 2003 by member
institutions and that 96% of their graduates offer health services in French. McGill University has
provided language training to more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec to better meet the needs
of English-speaking communities in that province.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS RELATING TO KNOWLEDGE AND USE OF THE MINORITY OFFICIAL LANGUAGE
AMONG HEALTH PROFESSIONALS …
• In Canada outside Quebec, the number of health care workers aged 55 and over who know
French has more than doubled since 2001. At the same time, the proportion of people who know French
is decreasing among both younger health care workers (15 to 29 years old) and older health care workers
(55 years and older). Despite the decline in the level of knowledge of French outside Quebec, younger
health care workers still know and use the minority language at a higher rate than older health care
workers.
• In Quebec, health care workers who know English age just as quickly. However, contrary to what
happens for knowledge of French outside Quebec, young health care workers in Quebec who know the
minority language are increasing, both in number and proportion.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic has amplified many of the challenges facing the health workforce and it is understood that the
way forward must address the root causes of this crisis.There are not enough health care workers to
meet the current demand for services.
Labour mobility, hampered by the lack of licensure or other pan-Canadian solutions, impacts the ability
to recruit health care workers across the country, particularly in rural and remote areas. This issue also
affects OLMCs, especially on the outskirts of large urban centres, making access to care in the minority
official language even more precarious in rural and remote areas.
Aging, recruitment and retention of bilingual graduates in health professions also have an impact on the
growth of the population of health care workers who know or use the minority official language.
The lack of detailed, recent and comparable pan-Canadian data on the health workers, including their
knowledge and use of the minority official language in the workplace, prevents policy makers from
supporting long-term staff planning and the ability to identify potential gaps before they become a crisis.
A collective approach is needed to address and improve systemic challenges, such as retention and
recruitment of health care workers, as well as planning and new models of care. Additionally, it will
require transformative and innovative solutions to problems that have existed for years, as well as new
and different levels of collaboration between governments and stakeholders.
Nearly 90% of Canadians indicated that addressing the shortage of doctors and nurses should be a top or
high priority in a survey conducted by the Privy Council Office in February 2022.
In 2020, Health Canada collaborated with Statistics Canada to develop a portrait of the evolution of the
capacity of Canada's health systems to provide services in the minority official language. The number of
bilingual health care workers has increased across the country since 2001, but the proportion of health
care workers who know French outside Quebec has decreased, while the proportion of health
professionals who know English has increased slightly in Quebec.
In a public opinion survey conducted by Leger Marketing in 2020 on behalf of Health Canada among
1,125 respondents from OLMCs across the country, about three out of four Francophone respondents
outside Quebec (74%) think it is very or somewhat important to receive their health services in their first
official language spoken, and among Anglophones in Quebec, six in ten (62%) think it is very important
to receive health services in their first official language spoken.
For Francophone respondents outside Quebec:
- Almost all respondents consulted a health service provider in the past year (98%). Pharmacists,
family physicians, dental professionals, nurse practitioners were the most consulted professionals.
Francophone respondents outside Quebec most often received health services in clinics. One-third of
respondents received health services entirely in French, while one-third received some health services in
French, and another third of respondents received no health services in their first official language.
Residents of Western Canada are less likely than those in other regions of Canada to have received
health services entirely in French.
- Although only one-third (34%) of Francophone respondents outside Quebec received health
services in their first official language from all their health service providers in the past year, they are
more likely than Anglophones in Quebec to have observed an increase over the past decade in health
services provided in their first official language. Respondents in Ontario (23%) are more likely to have
seen an increase in the offer of French-language health services than respondents in other regions of
Canada.
For English-speaking respondents in Quebec:
- Family physicians (70%), dental professionals (68%), psychologists and psychiatrists (57%) and
pharmacists (53%) are the health service providers who were able to provide services entirely in English
to more than half of English-speaking respondents who consulted them in the past year.
- More than half of English-speaking respondents (57%) have found at least one English-speaking
health service provider, while four in ten (43%) have found none.
During a consultation with OLMCs in 2022 on the renewal of Health Canada's Official Languages Health
Program (OLHP), the vast majority of respondents mentioned that they were facing challenges in
accessing health services in their language. Identified service categories that present challenges include
mental health, palliative care, chronic disease care, long-term care and reception services.
FPT collaboration
Although the federal government provides financial support to provinces and territories for health
services, responsibility for health human resource management rests with provincial and territorial
jurisdictions and their regulatory bodies. The federal government has continuously engaged with its
provincial and territorial counterparts in the health human resources crisis.
Health Canada will continue to work closely with PT partners to take the concrete steps needed to
improve the state of the health workforce.
Recent federal investments
The Canada Health Transfer continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories for the
delivery of health care. On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced new federal
investments in healthcare, which include several initiatives that can support the healthcare workforce:
• An immediate and unconditional top-up of $2 billion to the Canada Health Transfer to address
immediate pressures on the health care system, including in pediatric hospitals and emergency rooms,
and long wait times for surgical operations.
• $25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral
agreements that will meet the needs of people in every province and territory in four shared priority
areas: family health services; health workers and backlog reduction; mental health and substance use;
and modernization of the health system. These additional federal investments will depend on continued
provincial and territorial investments in health care. This funding is in addition to $7.8 billion over five
years still to be provided to provinces and territories for mental health and substance use, home and
community care, and long-term care for which the guiding principles mention the need to consider
barriers to access for equity-seeking individuals and groups, including OLMCs.
• $1.7 billion over five years to support personal support workers and related professions as
federal, provincial and territorial governments work together to find the best way to support recruitment
and retention.
• $505 million over 5 years to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, Canada Health
Infoway and federal data partners to work with provinces and territories to develop new indicators of
health data, support the creation of a center of excellence on health worker data, advance digital health
tools and an interoperability roadmap and support efforts to use the data to improve the safety and
quality of care.
In addition to this funding, over the past two years the federal government has provided provinces and
territories with $6 billion in top-up funding through the Canada Health Transfer, distributed on an equal
per capita basis, to help provinces and territories deal with immediate pressures on the health care
system, including reducing medical backlogs caused by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to provide surge support, including nurses and doctors, where
needed across the country to meet critical pandemic needs.
Other Federal Government Measures
The federal response to the HHR crisis is focused on sustainably increasing the supply of health care
workers and creating healthier workplaces to support the retention and mental health of health care
workers. Other recent federal actions and investments include:
• On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada created an Action Coalition for Healthcare
Workers. The Coalition will focus its efforts on developing approaches to stimulate pan-Canadian action
and advance policy implementation, based on real insights.
• The Coalition, made up of representatives from key groups including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients and equity-minded communities, will report to the
sub -health Minister.
• On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced the appointment of Dr. Leigh Chapman as Chief
Nursing Officer for Canada. Ms. Chapman will address nursing issues at the federal level, while working
closely with provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulators.
Health Canada will continue to work closely with other federal departments, provinces and territories,
and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce challenges. This includes
complementary investments by Employment and Social Development Canada through the Sector
Workforce Solutions Program to help Canadians get the training they need to access jobs in high
demand sectors. demand, such as health care, as well as expanding the Foreign Credential Recognition
Program and improving student loan relief for health care providers who practice in rural and remote
communities and expanding the program beyond doctors and nurses.
According to Statistics Canada, outside Quebec, interprovincial migration is a much more important
source of minority language health care workers than international migration. Provinces and territories
outside Quebec tend to retain less than two-thirds of health care workers who know French and who
were trained in the same province or territory. In contrast, Quebec retains more than four out of five
healthcare workers who know English and who were trained in the province.
Foreign-trained healthcare professionals have to travel a long and costly path to practice in Canada,
which prevents them from integrating into the Canadian healthcare system. In a report sponsored by
Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada on the professional integration of French-speaking
immigrants in the health sector, it is noted that the issue of language barrier arises at all stages of the
journey of a French-speaking immigrant seeking to work in the health sector in a French-speaking
minority community (CFSM).
Mental Health
In September 2022, a report by the Commission on Mental Health noted that it remains essential to
break down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in healthcare organizations and to prioritize
health and psychological safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and territorial
health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes $25 billion over 10 years
to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements that will meet the needs of
people in every province and territory in four areas of shared priority: family health services; health
workers and backlog reduction; mental health and substance use; and modernization of the health
system. This is in addition to investments under Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion over 10 years ($3
billion remaining until 2027) to improve Canadians' access to mental health services. The establishment
of a Canada Mental Health Transfer will build on these agreements to provide a permanent and ongoing
source of funding for mental health services.
On June 28, 2022, the Government of Canada announced an investment of $28.2 million in nine projects
to address PTSD and injuries among frontline and essential workers, as well as others whose mental
health has been significantly affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• These projects will implement and test interventions, develop resources for affected or at-risk
populations, and create resources and guidance for service providers and organizations.
The investment will also facilitate the establishment of a Knowledge Development and Exchange Hub,
which will use data from these projects to inform mental health interventions and improve public health
policy and practice in Canada.
Investments in the training and retention of bilingual health professionals
It should be noted that Health Canada's OLHP contributes to increasing the capacity of health systems to
meet the health service needs of OLMCs by promoting collaboration and innovation in the areas of
training and retention of bilingual health professionals.
In 2023-2028, Health Canada will invest $206.7 million under the OLHP to improve access to health
services for official language minority communities. Of this amount, more than $124 million over five
years will be used to train more bilingual health professionals.
This funding envelope includes additional investments of $6.5 million announced in Budget 2023 to
support the training of more bilingual nurses and personal care workers, able to serve Francophone
minority communities, given the most pressing needs in these key sectors following the COVID-19
pandemic.
TRAINING OF BILINGUAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS
ISSUE
The number of bilingual health professionals is not sufficient to provide many key health services in the
minority official language for official language minority communities, which has negative consequences
on safety and quality care offered to these communities.
KEY FACTS
• A 2021 Statistics Canada study reports that:
- knowledge of French among health care workers aged 15-29 (who represent the next generation
of health care workers) has dropped from 17.7% in 2001 to 13.6% in 2016,
- the proportion of health care workers outside Quebec who know French declined between 2001
and 2016, and
- the proportion of health professionals who know English has increased slightly in Quebec.
• Health Canada's Official Languages in Health Program (OLHP) has supported training and
retention activities for bilingual health professionals since its inception in 2003.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that the OLHP
will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to support non-profit
organizations that serve these communities as well as to enhance the capacity to train additional
bilingual nurses and personal care workers.
• Since 2003, approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals, 96% of whom report serving
Francophone minority communities, have been trained and over 12,000 health professionals have
received language training from McGill University or one of its regional partners to serve English-
speaking communities in Quebec.
KEY MESSAGES
• It is essential that official language minority communities be able to communicate with health
professionals in the official language of their choice in order to ensure the safety and quality of the care
they receive.
• Since 2003, Health Canada has funded the training of approximately 10,000 new bilingual health
professionals capable of serving French-speaking minority communities, as well as the language training
of more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec to serve the English-speaking communities of this
province.
• Health Canada will continue to support initiatives to train and retain bilingual health
professionals to address the persistent health services access issues faced by official language minority
communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPORTANCE OF TRAINING BILINGUAL HEALTH PROFESSIONALS …
• In 2023-2028, Health Canada will invest $206.7 million under the Official Languages Health
Program to improve access to health services for official language minority communities.
• Of this amount, more than $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual
health professionals.
• This funding envelope includes additional investments of $1.6 million to train more bilingual
nurses and orderlies, able to serve Francophone minority communities, given the most pressing needs in
these key sectors, following the COVID-19 pandemic.
BACKGROUND
Training bilingual health professionals is a long-standing priority for official language minority
communities (OLMCs). Indeed, at the request of the Minister of Health at the time, the Consultative
Committee for Francophone Minority Communities and the Committee for Anglophone Minority
Communities each published a report in 2001 and 2002, respectively, which recommended investments
to improve access to health services in the minority official language, including the training of bilingual
health professionals.
These reports paved the way, as part of the first Action Plan for Official Languages in 2003, for the
creation of Health Canada's Official Languages Health Program (OLHP). The OLHP still exists today and
received funding under the Government of Canada's Action Plan for Official Languages 2018-2023 -
Investing in our Future.
The Program includes a component for the training and retention of bilingual health professionals in
OLMCs ($117.6 million over five years in 2018-2023) which favors different approaches for Francophone
and Anglophone communities in difficult situations. minority.
For Francophone minority communities, the OLHP provided $97.6 million over five years in 2018-2023 to
the Association des collèges et universités de la francophonie canadienne, volet Consortium national de
formation en santé (ACUFC-CNFS), which includes a national secretariat and 16 post-secondary member
institutions outside Quebec.
The ACUFC-CNFS offers more than 100 health programs in French in eight provinces and collaborates
with health establishments to offer internships and placements to its students in their communities of
origin. Programs by the ACUFC-CNFS institutions include, among others: medicine, nursing, care
attendant programs, paramedical care, etc.
Since the creation of OLHP, approximately 10,000 bilingual health professionals have been added to
provincial and territorial health systems across the country through investments in the ACUFC-CNFS.
According to a 2020 survey of graduates of ACUFC-CNFS programs, 96% of them reported offering
services in French in their workplace and 91% of them were employed in OLMCs.
As for the English-speaking communities of Quebec, the OLHP provided $20 million over five years in
2018-2023 to McGill University. Rather than training new bilingual health professionals like the ACUFC-
CNFS institutions, McGill University offers language training to health care providers already working in
Quebec, as well as scholarships and internships to integrate bilingual health professionals in regions of
Quebec where the need for health services in English is significant.
Since 2003, more than 12,000 health professionals in Quebec have completed language training with
McGill University or one of its associated regional institutions. According to a 2021 Statistics Canada
study, the proportion of health professionals able to provide services in English in Quebec rose from
52.3% in 2001 to 55.7% in 2016.
Health Canada launched an online consultation in 2022 on the renewal of the OLHP. In total, 2,000
respondents from OLMCs answered the questionnaire, which confirmed that there were still significant
challenges for OLMCs in accessing health services in the official language of their choice. They also
expressed that they perceived the training of bilingual health professionals as one of the most important
ways to help remedy this situation. In addition, a study, published in 2021 by Statistics Canada, reports
that the proportion of health care workers who know French outside Quebec fell from 12.3% in 2001 to
11.5% in 2016 and that this decrease is more pronounced among younger health care workers, who
represent the next generation, with rates of 17.7% in 2001 and 13.6% in 2016
(https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/ n1/pub/89-657-x/89-657-x2021005-eng.htm).
Budget 2023 confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that the OLHP will
receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive $14.5 million to:
• Support non-profit organizations that serve these communities ($8 million over five years); and,
• Improve capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal care workers ($6.5 million over
four years).
Issue
Foreign Credential Recognition Program
Context
Budget 2022 announced additional funding for the Foreign Credential Recognition Progam with a
particular emphasis on supporting internationally educated health professionals.
Suggested Response
• Through the Foreign Credential Recognition Program, the Government helps address
employment barriers specific to skilled newcomers.
• The Program provides funding to support employment services, loans, and improvements to
foreign credential reconigion processes to help skilled newcomers get jobs and have their foreign
credentials recognized.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $115 million over five years, with $30 million ongoing, to
expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally trained health
care professionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in their field.
• This new funding will help alleviate Canada’s health human resource crisis by supporting the
integration of internationally educated health care professionals into the Canadian labour market.
Background
The Foreign Credential Recognition Program (FCRP) supports the labour market integration of skilled
newcomers by funding P/Ts, regulatory authorities and organizations to:
• Enhance foreign credential recognition (FCR) processes by funding projects to standardize
national exams, centralize information portals, and provide alternative assessment processes.
• Provide loans and support services to help skilled newcomers navigate FCR processes.
• Provide employment supports such as training, work placements, wage subsidies, mentoring and
coaching to help skilled newcomers gain Canadian work experience in their field of study and fully use
their talent.
FCR and licensing for regulated occupations (e.g.nurses) is a P/T responsibility, and in most cases they
further delegate that authority in legislation to regulatory authorities. Within Canada, there are more
than 600 regulators overseeing more than 150 regulated occupations. The FCRP will continue to
collaborate with P/Ts, regulatory authorites and other organizations to support the labour market
integration of skilled newcomers.
Since 2009, the annual FCRP budget has remained at $27.1 million. The 2020 Fall Economic Statement
announced additional funding of $15 million for 2021-2022. The new investment announced in Budget
2022 will help the Program to scale up and expand supports to newcomers, with a particular emphasis
on the integration of internationally educated health care professionals to support efforts to alleviate
Canada’s health human resource crisis.
Since 2015, the FCRP has invested nearly $125M in 90 projects to support skilled newcomers. The
program is currently investing over $22M in 20 projects focusing on the labour market integration of
internationally educated health professionals. Additionally, as of March 2022, nearly $15M in FCR loans
have been issued—two thirds of the borrowers were in the health sector.
LONG-TERM CARE AND OFFICIAL LANGUAGE MINORITY COMMUNITIES
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians living in long-term care
homes. This problem is exacerbated in official language minority communities, which often have little or
no access to long-term care in their language, which has a negative effect on the safety and quality of the
care provided to them.
KEY FACTS
• On January 31, 2023, the Standards Council of Canada, Health Standards Organization and CSA
Group announced the creation and implementation of new national long-term care standards. The
standards highlight the importance of employing equity, diversity, and inclusion practices in a LTC home
and states that facilities should recognize the diversity in residents’ language requirements.
• Budget 2021 announced a $3 billion investment over five years to support provinces and
territories in their efforts to ensure standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are
made.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by close to $200 billion over 10 years. The bilateral agreements will mutually
respect each government's jurisdiction, and be underpinned by key principles, including providing equal
access for equity-seeking groups and individuals, including those in official language minority
communities to access to health services, including long-term care.
• This includes $7.8 billion over five years still to be provided for mental health and substance use
services, home care and community care, and long-term care.The new funding announced includes $1.7
billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related
professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments work together on how best to support
recruitment and retention.
• In addition, Budget 2023 confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that
Health Canada's Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program
will also receive $14.5 million to supporting not-for-profit organizations that serve these communities as
well as improving the capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support workers.
KEY MESSAGES
• Every senior in Canada deserves to live in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they
live, and this includes having access to health services in their official language of choice.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in long-term care
homes across Canada; these challenges are exacerbated for those living in OLMCs.
• To help address this, we announced a $3 billion investment over five years to support provinces
and territories in their efforts to ensure standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes
are made.
• The federal government also announced the creation of a new Safe Long-Term Care Fund. This
fund transferred $1 billion to the provinces and territories to protect people living and working in long-
term care.
• The Government of Canada is now looking at developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help
ensure seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction. In the
coming months, the Government of Canada will move forward with consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on the Safe Long-Term Care Act.
• To support OLMCs, Health Canada will invest 206.7 million under the Official Languages Health
Program to improve access to health services for official language minority communities, including long-
term care services.
• Of this amount, at least $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual health
professionals.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNEMENT WILL IMPROVE ACCESS TO LTC FOR OLMCs …
• Health Canada’s Official Languages in Health Program (OLHP) is designed to help reduce
linguistic and cultural barriers to health services for Francophone and Anglophone minority communities
in Canada.
• The program promotes collaboration and innovation in the areas of training and retention of
bilingual health professionals and supports community health networking activities and innovative
projects to promote access to health services in the official minority language.
• Between 2023-2028, Health Canada will invest 206,7 million under the OLHP to improve access
to health services for official language minority communities.
• Of this amount, at least $124 million over five years will be used to train more bilingual health
professionals. This funding envelope includes additional investments of $6.5 million to train more
bilingual nurses and personal support workers, able to serve Francophone minority communities, given
the most pressing needs in these key-sectors following the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CARE SYSTEM FUNDING…
• We announced that we will increase health funding to provinces and territories by close to $200
billion over 10 years to strengthen our public health care system.
• This includes $7.8 billion over five years for long-term care, home and community care, and
mental health and substance use.
• New funding includes $1.7 billion over five years to support wage increases for personal support
workers and related professions.
• These investments will provide access to safe long-term care and home care so Canadians can
age safely.
• Bilateral agreements will allow provinces and territories to respond to the specific needs of their
populations, including equity-seeking individuals and groups such as OLMCs.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The federal government is working with provinces and territories to help make improvements in
long-term care, while respecting their jurisdiction.
• The Government is appreciative of the work of CSA Group and the Health Standards
Organization (HSO) and welcomes these new long-term care standards as it reflects the importance of
long-term care to all Canadians.
• Together, the standards focus on the delivery of safe, reliable, and high-quality long-term care
services, safe operating practices and infection prevention, and control measures in long-term care
homes.
• These standards followed consultations, including several virtual general meetings, including one
specific to Francophones and people from Quebec with long-term care experience and incorporate
considerations related to the diversity of the population served, including considerations related to
language and culture.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT…
• The Government of Canada is also committed to doing more to support seniors across the
country. We know Canadians want to age closer to home and family, but also expect long-term care to
be safe, when needed.
• As such, our government is looking at developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure
seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• In the coming months, we will move forward with consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act, which will include representatives of
organizations that work with OLMCs.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care (LTC) in Canada
• While there is growing understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on people living and working in
long-term care facilities, more research is needed to better understand and address inequities in
experience of care faced by equity-seeking groups, including official language minority communities
(OLMCs).
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of LTC falls
within provincial and territorial (PT) jurisdiction.
• LTC is referenced in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as “extended health care services.” Extended
services are not covered by the five criteria of the Act or its extra billing and user charges provisions, and
therefore are not subject to the Act’s penalty provisions.
• While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
• While there is growing understanding of the impact of COVID-19 on people living and working in
long-term care facilities, more research is needed to better understand and address inequities in the care
received by equity-seeking groups, including official language minority communities (OLMCs).
• Through Health Canada's Official Languages Health Program, the department supports initiatives
across the country that seek to improve access to long-term care for members of OLMCs. For example,
between 2018 and 2023, the Program supported an initiative by Jeffery Hale-Saint Brigid Hospital,
located in Québec City, that developed a real-time database model to assess home care/home support
needs and accommodation in a residential facility for seniors who are members of OLMCs to better
assess the needs and effectiveness of the health and social services system. The data and tools
developed will thus make it possible to locate customers who need services and identify their needs to
match them with existing services.
Mandate Letters
Minister of Health Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports. Specific commitments
include:
• Support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This
includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures,
identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure
seniors get the care they deserve.
• Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
Third-Party Standards Development Process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
On January 31, 2023, the Government of Canada welcomed the release of complementary, independent
LTC standards from the Health Standards Organization (HSO) and CSA Group and thanked them for their
dedicated work to complete the development of LTC standards. The national standards development
process was complementary to, but independent from, the Government of Canada’s collaborative work
with PTs to help support improvements in LTC. While Health Canada did not fund the recently released
LTC standards, it did provide funding to CSA Group and HSO to support enhanced engagement and
consultations with Canadians and stakeholders to ensure the diverse perspectives were considered
during the development of both standards, including members of OLMCs and the organizations that
represent them, to ensure that various points of view have been taken into account.
Health Canada also collaborated with the Bruyère Research Institute in a study on the importance of
linguistic concordance in access to health care obtained in long-term care facilities. The report was
shared with HSO and CSA Group during the development of the national standards.
Health Care System Funding
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, and his PT counterparts met to work together
on improving Canada’s health care system. First Ministers discussed shared health priorities to deliver
real results for Canadians as well as the importance to uphold the Canada Health Act to protect Canada’s
publicly funded health care system.
At the Primers' meeting, the federal government announced that it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by close to $200 billion over 10 years, including $46.2 billion in new funding.
This amount includes $25 billion to advance shared health priorities through bilateral agreements, in
addition to $7.8 billion over five years still to be provided to provinces and territories for mental health
and substance use services, home care, community care, and long-term care. Provinces and territories
will have to pay particular attention to equity-seeking groups, including OLMCs.
Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new Canada
Health Transfer measures, building on the $10 billion to provinces and territories to strengthen home
care, community care, and long-term care for seniors. PTs will be encouraged to pay particular attention
to groups and individuals seeking equity, including OLMCs.
The new funding announced includes $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for
personal support workers and related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments
work together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
In addition, Budget 2023 confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada's Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also
receive $14.5 million dollars to support not-for-profit organizations that serve these communities as well
as improving capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support workers.
Situation in LTC Homes Throughout the COVID-19 Pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in LTC have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
including: infection prevention and control; health human resources, including bilingual health human
resources able to provide services to OLMCs; compliance with standards and regulations; infrastructure;
and personal protective equipment. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered major COVID-19 outbreaks
and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in LTC and seniors’ homes
accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many PTs and stakeholders have released reports and
recommendations on addressing issues faced in LTC facilities.
Government of Canada Initiatives to Support PT Actions in LTC
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with PTs throughout the COVID-19 pandemic to
protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has responded to COVID-19
through a number of initiatives, including those announced in Budget 2021:
• $3 billion over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement saving
for personal support workers.
Federal Government Ownership of Long-Term Care Facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
OBTAINING HOME CARE AND PALLIATIVE CARE IN THE OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF CHOICE
ISSUE
• Canadians want to age and receive end-of-life care at home or in their community, close to
family and loved ones. There is therefore a need to improve access to quality home care and palliative
care services. This includes people from official language minority communities (OLMCs) with a loss of
autonomy and at the end of life, who face additional challenges in obtaining services in the official
language of their choice.
KEY FACTS
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by close to $200 billion over 10 years. Funding includes $1.7 billion over five
years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related professions, as federal,
provincial, and territorial governments work together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
• This funding is separate from the $6 billion over 10 years committed to provinces and territories
for home and community care,
• The National Seniors Council has been invited by the federal government to act as an expert
group to examine measures, including a possible “Aging at Home”allowance, to support Canadians who
wish to age in their home.
• Federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027 will
also advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on
palliative care needs. supportive care, including services needed to respond to equity-seeking groups
such as OLMCs.
• In addition, through grants and contributions programs, Health Canada has supported activities
to develop concrete solutions to improve access to health care for OLMCs, including home care and end-
of-life care.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recently announced an investment of nearly $200 billion over 10
years in the health sector, including $1.7 billion to support hourly wage increases for personnal support
care workers and related occupations.
• To complement the investments the federal government has made to improve the working
conditions and wages of personal support workers, Budget 2023 proposes to provide up to $50 million
over five years, starting in 2023-24 to Employment and Social Development Canada to develop and test
innovative solutions to strengthen the retirement savings of personal support workers without
workplace retirement security coverage.
• At the same time, the federal government is providing (since 2017) $6 billion over 10 years to
the provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care services for all Canadians,
including in OLMCs.
• Budget 2023 confirmed that in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health
Canada's Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program
will also receive $14.5 million to support not-for-profit organizations that serve these communities as
well as improving the capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support workers.
• One of the challenges for OLMC members is to receive home services and palliative care in the
official language of choice, which has an impact on the quality and safety of care, on health outcomes
and their experience of end of life. Between 2023 and 2028, the OLHP will provide at least $124 million
over five years to train more bilingual health professionals, including personal support workers and
nurses who provide care in community settings, including home care and end-of-life care.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Our government is committed to strengthening our health care system, especially for vulnerable
members of our communities – this includes home care and OLMC members.
• Budget 2021 announced an investment of $90 million over three years to launch the “Aging Well
at Home” initiative to help community organizations provide practical support to help low-income and
vulnerable seniors to age in place.
• Federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027 will
also advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on
supportive care needs, including services needed to respond to equity-seeking groups such as OLMCs.
• Health Canada, through the OLHP, has been supporting initiatives across Canada since 2003 to
increase the availability of bilingual health professionals who can meet the health needs of OLMC
patients, particularly in priority health areas such as home care and palliative care.
IF PRESSED ON HOME CARE OR END OF LIFE CARE FOR OLMCs IN THEIR OFFICIAL LANGUAGE OF
CHOICE…
• There are significant knowledge gaps regarding access to home care and palliative care by
OLMCs in the official language of choice.
• Access to telehealth services can contribute to home and palliative care by, for example,
providing some support to caregivers who turn to these services. These services should be bilingual.
• Community health centers offering services in the minority language are also a very helpful
resource when they are known and used by patients from OLMCs. The use of telehealth lines and
community resources can help reduce the number of emergency room visits by patients, for example,
since many of their needs can often be met in the community. The promotion of services in the minority
language is therefore essential to support patients in the community.
BACKGROUND
Home care in Canada
Health care is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and territorial
(PT) governments.
Although the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these services, including
home care, falls under provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
Home care is considered in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as “complementary health services”.
Complementary services are not subject to the five conditions for granting the Act or to the provisions
on extra-billing and user fees, and are therefore not subject to the penalties provided for in the Act.
A public opinion survey conducted in 2020 on behalf of Health Canada on access to health services for
OLMCs shows that one of the main obstacles to obtaining health services in the official language of
choice is the lack of bilingual health service providers. It is then often the responsibility of relatives to
serve as translators. Natural caregivers of elderly parents, for example, are regularly called upon when
services are not offered in the first official language spoken by the parent. They take responsibility for
accompanying their relative to navigate the health care system and must translate important information
given by health service providers.
Palliative care in Canada
End-of-life care aims to alleviate an individual's suffering by providing comfort, dignity and compassion
until death. This care is particularly focused on the needs of patients and their families with regard to
health, social well-being and spirituality. Palliative care can be provided in several places: acute care
units, complex care centers, long-term homes, rehabilitation centers and at home. When certain
situations preceding death or on the periphery of death become too difficult for patients or their loved
ones to manage, patients often end up in the emergency room, against their will and despite the best
intentions of the healthcare team. A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI)
states that:
• Although 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to
palliative care services at home.
• Recipients of palliative home care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in the emergency room, or in an intensive care unit.
A literature review conducted in 2019-2020 for Health Canada shows that, for OLMCs, language remains
an issue for the quality of palliative and end-of-life care, because for some, death can be accompanied by
seizures, pain, fears and other considerations that can increase in complexity when care is only offered in
the language of the majority. Too often, patients and their loved ones notice that interactions and
information are only offered in the majority language, causing a lack of information and difficulties in
understanding the care trajectory.
Mandate letters
Minister of Health and Minister of Seniors Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada is committed to working in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports.
Here are some specific commitments:
• Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and increase salaries.
• As part of the Decade for Healthy Aging (2021-2030), promote the physical and mental health of
seniors to enable them to live longer at home, in particular by supporting the Minister of Seniors in
setting up a group of experts tasked with formulating recommendations for the establishment of an
Aging at Home allowance.
• Create a group of experts responsible for formulating recommendations for the establishment of
an aging-at-home allowance, with the support of the Minister of Health.
Financing of the health system
On February 7, 2023, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau and his provincial and territorial counterparts met to
work together to improve Canada's health care system. Prime Minister Trudeau and the premiers of the
provinces and territories discussed their shared health priorities to achieve concrete results for
Canadians. They also discussed the importance of ensuring compliance with the Canada Health Act to
protect Canada's public health system.
Budget 2023 lays out the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over ten years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new Canada
Health Transfer measures, building on the $10 billion to provinces and territories to strengthen home
care, community care, and long-term care for seniors. PTs will be required to pay particular attention to
groups and individuals seeking equity, including OLMCs.
In addition, federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027
will also advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on
supportive care needs, including the services needed to respond to equity-seeking groups such as
OLMCs.
Federal funding for home and community care will help provinces and territories to:
• Disseminate and deploy models of home care and community care, based on evidence, which
are more integrated and connected to primary care;
• Increase access to palliative and end-of-life care at home or in palliative care centres;
• Increase support for caregivers; and
• Improve infrastructure for home services, such as access to digital technologies, remote
monitoring technologies and equipment for service delivery in the community.
Under Health Canada's Official Languages Health Program (OLHP), a variety of initiatives are funded
across the country to improve access to health care for members of OLMCs in the official language of
their choice, including home care and palliative care. As part of a Colloquium on the health of OLMCs
organized by Health Canada to be held in June 2023, researchers and stakeholders will present certain
projects that have benefited from the OLHP support in these areas.
Between 2018 and 2023, the OLHP provided contribution and micro-grant support worth over $192
million with various partners (communities, decision-makers, health managers, health professionals).
Some of the projects supported include:
• In Quebec, the Centre intégré de santé et de services sociaux de la Montérégie-Centre (CISSS -
Montérégie) has produced tools (videos, leaflets, microsite) to inform people with autonomy loss and
their caregivers and to ensure that English-speaking seniors and their loved ones are able to identify
aging-related health issues and risks in their environment.
• In Prince Edward Island (PEI), the Réseau Santé en français ÎPÉ worked with the PEI Department
of Health to prepare a request for open funding from Health Canada to help meet the specific home care
service needs of the Francophone and Acadian minority community (CFASM). This provincial project
integrates and uses the linguistic standard established with the support of the Société Santé en français
(SSF) in order to establish home services in French which include the active offer of services in French,
training and retention of bilingual human resources. These standards are required for their accreditation
and will also be used to assess their programs and the quality of services.
Finally, Health Canada's Health Care Policy and Strategies Program has also supported projects that
specifically target OLMCs. A good example is the development and implementation of a virtual palliative
care mentoring model for Francophones in New Brunswick. This web-based application allows palliative
care patients and their caregivers to self-report their symptoms and obtain relevant care information.
This initiative is currently testing how the application can also be implemented with Francophones in
Ontario and Anglophones in Quebec.
FPT Bilateral Agreements on Home and Community Care
The 2017 federal budget committed $11 billion over 10 years to improve home and community care ($6
billion) and mental health and addictions ($5 billion). Bilateral agreements providing details about how
federal investments between 2017-2018 and 2021-2022 would help improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addictions services have been negotiated with all provinces and
territories and posted on the Health Canada website. New agreements with provinces and territories will
be required to transfer funding for the remaining five years (2022-23 to 2026-27).
SUPPORT FOR 2SLGBTQI+ COMMUNITY: HEALTH PORTFOLIO
ISSUE
• Health of 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities in Canada
KEY FACTS
• There is limited evidence on the health of 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities in Canada.
However, these populations have reported experiencing:
- Two-fold discrimination (i.e., exclusion from French-speaking communities based on their sexual
orientation and/or gender identity, and from 2SLGBTQI+ communities based on their official language
minority status).
- Isolation, difficulty forming relationships, and lack of 2SLGBTQI+ French-speaking support
networks.
- Limited availability of psychological services, health care, and resources on sexual and physical
health that are both 2SLGBTQI+ affirming and available in French – particularly in predominantly English-
speaking provinces and territories.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to addressing stigma and discrimination against
2SLGBTQI+ populations, including 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities, and reducing the social and
health inequities that they face.
• This work is important because we know that intersecting systems of discrimination create
barriers to employment, housing, social support, health, and social services, and threaten the personal
safety and overall well-being of 2SLGBTQI+ individuals.
• We also know that 2SLGBTQI+ official language minorities in Canada have reported experiencing
two-fold discrimination, isolation, and limited availability of health and social services that are both
2SLGBTQI+ affirming and available in French.
• To address the unique needs of these populations, we are investing in research, health
promotion and disease prevention programs, as well as initiatives to improve health care. This includes
programs to address mental health, gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health.
BACKGROUND
2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations experience worse health outcomes across a range of
issues. These health inequities are the result of persistent, inequitable social and economic conditions
for these groups. These impacts are amplified for Indigenous and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations
affected by the intersecting impacts of colonialism and racism. They are also amplified for 2SLGBTQI+
official language minorities.
Overall Health of 2SLGBTQI+ Populations in Canada
Mental health: Worse outcomes for 2SLGBTQI+ people have been reported across a range of indicators,
including (but not limited to) mental health. For example, the prevalence of low self-rated mental health
among bisexual adults is 3 times that of heterosexual adults; among gay/lesbian adults it is 1.7 times that
of heterosexual adults.
Suicide: 2SLGBTQI+ people in Canada are more likely to contemplate suicide in their lifetime
(approximately 40% of LGB Canadians vs 15% of heterosexual Canadians). Suicidal thoughts, plans and
attempts are disproportionately prevalent among 2SLGBTQI+ youth compared to non-2SLGBTQI+ peers.
Substance use: 24% of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and other non-heterosexual respondents to the 2018
Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces reported having used drugs or alcohol to cope with
experiences of emotional abuse and physical violence, versus 10% of heterosexual respondents.
Chronic disease: Higher prevalence of cardiovascular diseases, some types of cancer and respiratory
diseases among 2SLGBTQI+ communities, with the onset of chronic diseases also happening earlier in
life.
Barriers accessing healthcare: Experiences of discrimination within the healthcare system sometimes
cause 2SLGBTQI+ people to avoid seeking healthcare in the first place. For example, 12% of respondents
to the Trans PULSE survey had avoided the emergency room in the previous year, despite needing care,
and 45% reported having unmet healthcare needs within the same period.
Marginalization: Historical and ongoing injustices endured by 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, racialized,
immigrant, and disabled populations, and women, have created persistent, inequitable social and
economic conditions for these groups. Consequently, 2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations
experience stigma, discrimination and worse health outcomes across a range of issues. These health
inequities are amplified for Indigenous and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations affected by the intersecting
impacts of colonialism and racism.
Other inequities: Gay, lesbian and bisexual Canadians experience substantial inequities in self-rated
health and mental health, household food insecurity, smoking, heavy drinking, asthma, arthritis, and HIV
infection. Canadian studies have also revealed significant socioeconomic inequities facing 2SLGBTQI+
populations, including in income, employment and workplace stress, as well as experiences of violence,
hate crimes, and discrimination.
Mis/disinformation: Anti-2SLGBTQI+ mis- and dis-information, particularly related to trans and non-
binary youth, is rising in Canada and the United States. Notable incidents of anti-2SLGBTQI+ threats,
intimidation, and harassment toward healthcare providers and organizations funded by Health Canada
and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research are directly impacting staff safety, research activities, and
service provision for/with 2SLGBTQI+ populations.
Recent Developments to Support 2SLGBTQI+
Blood Donor Deferral Period for Men who have sex with Men
There are two blood system operators in Canada – Canadian Blood Services (serving all provinces and
territories except Québec) and Héma-Québec (serving the province of Québec). Both are regulated by
Health Canada.
On September 11, 2022, Canadian Blood Services eliminated the three month blanket donor deferral
period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and instead began screening all donors,
regardless of gender or sexuality, for high risk sexual behaviour. Health Canada authorized this change
towards more inclusive screening on April 28, 2022. The Government of Canada provided $5.4M,
starting in 2016, to support the necessary research to effect this change.
In March 2022, Health Canada approved a submission from Héma-Québec to move to sexual-behaviour
based screening for all source plasma donors. On October 2, 2022, Héma-Québec replaced their plasma
donation questionnaire with a gender-neutral questionnaire, using the same questions as those
authorized for Canadian Blood Services for use in the rest of Canada.
On September 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized Héma-Québec’s submission to eliminate the three
month blanket donor deferral period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and others
impacted by this process, and to begin screening all blood, platelet, and plasma donors, regardless of
gender or sexuality for high risk sexual behaviour.
As of December 4, 2022, anyone wishing to donate blood products through Héma-Québec will answer
the same questions regardless of sex or gender identity, and an evaluation by a Héma-Québec medical
staff member will no longer be required.
Mpox
Community-based organizations have been an important source of expertise regarding health
promotion, disease prevention, and culturally responsive communications for the Government’s
response to mpox. As of August 12, 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada has invested $900,000 in
new investments through the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to the Community Based
Research Centre (CBRC), H.I.M. Health Initiative for Men Society in Vancouver, the Queer and Trans
Health Collective in Edmonton, the AIDS Committee of Toronto, RÉZO Montreal, and the Ottawa Gay
Men’s Wellness Initiative (MAX Ottawa) to increase the capacity of communities in the regions most
impacted by the mpox outbreak.
AIDS 2022
On August 1, 2022, at the AIDS 2022 conference hosted by Canada, the Government of Canada
announced a time-limited (September 2022 – March 2023) investment of $8 million to acquire HIV self-
test kits and support community-based organizations.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
The Health Portfolio currently supports the health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations through a range of both
targeted and inclusive initiatives, and will seek opportunities to strengthen these efforts as the
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan evolves over its 5-year timeline. Some of these initiatives include:
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC):
1) Data and surveillance initiatives, such as the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting
Initiative and enhanced surveillance through funding support for the Sex Now Survey;
2) Education and training initiatives, such as the Agency’s involvement in updating the “Pride
Guide” resource for 2SLGBTQI+ youth in Canada;
3) Funding programs that have supported 2SLGBTQI+ projects, including the Mental Health
Promotion Innovation Fund (2 targeted projects), the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (23
targeted projects), the Preventing Gender-Based Violence initiative (5 targeted projects), the Mental
Health of Black Canadians Fund (3 targeted projects), the Dementia Community Investment (1 targeted
project), and the Harm Reduction Fund (3 targeted projects);
4) Research and knowledge translation initiatives, such as the Canadian Research and Knowledge
Translation Agenda on Suicide and its Prevention, which includes a focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; and
5) Emergency preparedness and response, such as the $900,000 investment from the HIV and
Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to increase capacity of 2SLGBTQI+ community organizations in the
regions most impacted by the mpox outbreak.
Health Canada:
1) Funding programs that have supported, or are anticipated to support, projects focused on
2SLGBTQI+ populations. The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund ($45 million over 3 years, starting in
2021/22) has a strong emphasis on initiatives focusing on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; of the first 9 projects
that were funded, 5 focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, for a total dollar value of $8.8 million. Additional
funding programs supporting 2SLGBTQI+ populations include the Substance Use and Addictions Program
($100 million over 3 years, starting in 2022/23); and the Addressing Racism and Discrimination in
Canada’s Health Systems Program ($14.9 million over three years, beginning in 2021/22); and
2) Broader initiatives to improve access to care, which do not focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, but
include the populations through an SGBA Plus lens, such as the Action Plan on Palliative Care, National
Standards for Mental Health Services, National Standards for Long Term Care, the Task Team on
Equitable Access to Virtual Care, and Wellness Together Canada.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR):
1) CIHR supports research and knowledge mobilization related to 2SLGBTQI+ health, including
through the following time-limited priority-driven research initiatives:
• Catalyst and support grants for Community-Led Research on LGBTQIA/2S Wellness;
• The Health Research Training Platform on Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness for
LGBTQ/2S Populations (co-funded with PHAC and Egale);
• The CIHR Sex and Gender Science Chair - LGBTQI2S Wellness and Resilience;
• The Transitions in Care initiative, which includes research that will inform how healthcare teams
can collaboratively work with intersex individuals across Canada in an effort to improve lifelong
wellbeing within this population across several transitions in care;
• The Indigenous Gender and Wellness Initiative, which includes research to improve wellness of
Indigenous Two-Spirit and LGBTQI+ individuals and communities;
• Catalyst Grants for Healthy Youth, which includes dedicated funding for 2SLGBTQI+ youth (Note:
The results were announced in March 2023);
• Transforming Health with Integrated Care Implementation Science Team Grants, including
projects related to gender-affirming health (Note: this competition is currently underway with results
expected in April 2023);
• CIHR recently launched the National Women’s Health Research Initiative in partnership with the
Department of Women and Gender Equality (WAGE). This will invest $20 million over five years to
advance a coordinated research program that addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of
women’s health. The initiative promotes an intersectional lens to research and care to tackle persistent
gaps for all women, including members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities.
2) CIHR also continues to advance measures to promote equity, diversity and inclusion within the
research ecosystem, including for/with 2SLGBTQI+ researchers and trainees, for example through
commitments to further gender equity in CIHR’s strategic plan and the Tri-Agency Equity, Diversity and
Inclusion Action Plan.
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan
On August 28, 2022, the Government of Canada launched the first-ever federal 2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan,
which seeks to improve the social, economic and health outcomes of 2SLGBTQI+ populations in Canada
through a whole-of-government approach. WAGE is the federal lead on the Action Plan.
The historic $100 million Budget 2022 investment in the Action Plan, allocated entirely to WAGE, will
support activities such as community capacity, anti-stigma, awareness and research – all of which will
advance meaningful action on the social determinants of health and have a positive impact on the
health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations.
The Health Portfolio’s current initiatives to support 2SLGBTQI+ populations also contribute to the Action
Plan’s objectives, but more work remains to be done. The Health Portfolio will continue to work with
federal partners such as WAGE to advance the priorities of the Action Plan and related Government of
Canada equity initiatives, such as Canada’s Anti-Racism Strategy 2.0, Canada’s Action Plan on Combatting
Hate, and the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women, Girls and 2SLGBTQIA+ People National Action
Plan.
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH SYSTEMS
ISSUE
• Systemic racism has no place in Canada. Unfortunately, Indigenous Peoples continue to
experience racism, discrimination, stigma and bias in many facets, including when interacting with the
health systems, which has been well documented in a number of reports. There are ongoing domestic
and international calls for Canada to implement measures that address racism and discrimination in the
health systems and to demonstrate timely and meaningful progress.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Health
Canada and Indigenous Services Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe.
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous communities
and organizations and other health system partners in the development of measures to address anti-
Indigenous racism in health systems. This includes support for activities such as anti-racism and
discrimination training, tools and resources for health professionals, and standards and guidelines for
cultural safety.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health-related needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
Peoples are engaged in actions to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination where
Indigenous Peoples are respected and safe and support Indigenous partners to undertake meaningful
engagement on the development of policy and programs for health priorities.
IF PRESSED …
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous and health system partners to identify and
support Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism and discrimination across Canada’s
health systems.
BACKGROUND
In September 2020, the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman from Manawan, Quebec,
sparked widespread indignation, media attention, a public coroner’s inquest, and a lawsuit from
Echaquan's family against the hospital where she suffered racist insults from hospital staff before she
died in Joliette, QC. On November 16th, 2020, the Manawan Atikamekw Council and the Council of the
Atikamekw Nation submitted Joyce’s Principle to the Prime Minister, as well as federal, provincial, and
territorial ministers. Joyce’s Principle demands that all Indigenous Peoples have an equal right to the
highest standard of physical and mental health, with a right to traditional medicines, in line with the
United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples.
In response to Joyce Echaquan’s death, Ministers Miller, Bennett, Vandal and Hajdu held three National
Dialogues on October 16th, 2020, January 27-28th, 2021, and June 28-29th, 2021, to listen to Indigenous
patients and health service providers regarding their lived experiences with racism, to provide federal,
provincial, and territorial governments and health system partners a platform to present their past,
ongoing, and planned actions to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health systems, and to hear
recommendations from Indigenous representatives and health system partners.
At the January meeting, Minister Hajdu announced $4M in funding to a National Consortium of
Indigenous Medical Education to work on improving the experiences of Indigenous Peoples in medical
school/practices. Minister Miller also announced plans to begin co-developing distinctions-based
Indigenous health legislation and funding of $2M to the Atikamekw Nation and Manawan First Nation to
implement Joyce’s Principle.
Following the January National Dialogue, FPT leaders released a joint statement to express a collective
commitment to working with Indigenous communities, organizations, and leadership to address
Indigenous-specific racism in the health systems.
The June 2021 National Dialogue included breakout sessions where recommendations were heard from
Indigenous representatives and health system partners on the following thematic areas: increasing
Indigenous representation in postsecondary health education, cultural safety and humility, traditional
approaches to health, and safe patient navigation. During the meeting, the Government of Canada
publicly announced funding for specific initiatives to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health
systems, including Budget 2021 funding for Health Canada’s new Addressing Racism and Discrimination
in Canada’s Health Systems Program. Early findings from the January and June 2021 National Dialogues
demonstrate the importance of ensuring accountability and distinctions-based approaches.
While the federal government is working with Indigenous partners on a number of health policy
initiatives, dedicated work must be undertaken to directly address anti-Indigenous racism in the health
systems. The Government has committed to responding to a number of high profile reports and
recommendations to address anti-racism, cultural safety, and safe and equitable care, including the Truth
and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action and the Inquiry into Missing and Murdered Indigenous
Women and Girls’ Calls for Justice. In addition, there are proposed class action lawsuits on forced and
coerced sterilization of Indigenous women in multiple jurisdictions, and both the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health (HESA) and the Standing Senate Committee on Human Rights (RIDR) have
tabled their studies between 2019 and 2022. The latest Senate report provides various
recommendations to the Government to further advance reconciliation. The Government’s response is
underway and is expected to be tabled in the Senate in Winter 2023.
Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program
Through Budget 2021, Health Canada received $14.9 million over three years to establish the new
Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program, which provides contribution
funding for projects that address systemic racism and discrimination in Canada’s health systems in a way
that is informed by the lived experiences of Indigenous, racialized, and marginalized communities. The
Program’s inaugural open Call for Proposals, for $13M in project funding, closed on May 25, 2022. The
Call for Proposals targeted proposals addressing anti-Indigenous racism, with priority given to projects
that develop and implement cultural safety training and/or accreditation requirements and/or that
integrate culturally-safe care, including traditional approaches to health, into acute care settings. As of
March 2023, 15 projects across the country have been selected for funding. Proposals were selected
based on their alignment to the criteria and priority funding areas as outlined in the Call for Proposals,
strong assessment scores, geographical representation, and distinction-based approaches. To ensure
adherence to the Official Languages Act, the Program required that all funded projects were accessible in
one or both official languages depending on the reach and audience, with some exceptions. 9 of the 15
projects are being implemented in both official languages, along with some being implemented in local
Indigenous languages as well.
The Government’s commitment to engage with Indigenous Peoples has placed a heavy burden on
Indigenous organizations who may not have the capacity to participate in the multiple engagement
requests from the federal government, including Health Canada. A targeted Call for Proposals was
launched in summer 2022 to provide National Indigenous Organizations with funding to enhance their
capacity to engage on identified health priorities, including: Primary and Virtual Care; Mental Health and
Substance Use; Data and Digital Health; Long-Term Care and Supportive Care; Health Human Resources;
and Dental Care.
Prior to these investments, there was no federal funding available to specifically address anti-Indigenous
racism in the health systems. Further to these short-term investments, the Government of Canada is
committed to developing a long-term approach to addressing racism and discrimination against
Indigenous, racialized, and marginalized populations in health systems.
Budget 2023 Investments
On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced close to $200 billion over ten years in
health transfers to provinces and territories, which includes $25 billion over 10 years to advance shared
health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements with provinces and territories. A key principle of
these bilateral agreements is advancing reconciliation with Indigenous Peoples, recognizing their right to
fair and equal access to quality and culturally safe health services free from racism and discrimination
anywhere in Canada, including through seamless service delivery across jurisdictions and meaningful
engagement and work with Indigenous organizations and governments.
The federal government will also work with Indigenous partners to provide additional support for
Indigenous health priorities by providing $2 billion over ten years, which will be distributed on a
distinctions basis through an Indigenous Health Equity Fund.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
• Although access to abortion services in Canada has been improved by the approval and roll-out
of Mifegymiso for medical abortion, the availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces
and territories and nationally. Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for
surgical abortion services in a limited number of private clinics in both New Brunswick (1) and Ontario
(5). Patient charges for access to abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges
under the Canada Health Act.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years to establish the Sexual and Reproductive
Health Fund.
• An additional $36 million has been proposed in Budget 2023 to renew the fund for three years
(starting in 2024-25).
KEY MESSAGES
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• In addition, this Government has invested $8 million to date under the Sexual and Reproductive
Health Fund to support access to abortion, with renewed funds proposed under Budget 2023.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT …
• While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done
to improve access in many areas of the country.
• Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan to
eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
• New Brunswick will continue to be subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions as long as the
province refuses to cover insured surgical abortion services provided at private clinics, resulting in
patient charges.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND…
• This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health services more
accessible, with an emphasis on populations experiencing the highest risks and greatest barriers,
including Indigenous people, racialized populations, members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, women, and
youth.
• That is why Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years to establish the Sexual and
Reproductive Health Fund. An additional $36 million has been proposed in Budget 2023 to renew the
fund for three years (starting in 2024-25). This fund supports community-based organizations that help
make access to abortion, as well as other sexual and reproductive health care information and services,
more accessible for vulnerable populations.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including women
who choose to end their pregnancy. The Government of Canada unequivocally supports the right to
choose, and works to ensure that safe and legal abortion services are available to everyone. Abortion
services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories. Individuals
should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where the services are
provided.
The Canada Health Act establishes criteria and conditions related to insured health services and
extended health care services that the provinces and territories must fulfill to receive the full federal
cash contribution under the Canada Health Transfer (CHT). The aim of the Act is to ensure that all eligible
residents of Canadian provinces and territories have reasonable access to medically necessary hospital,
physician, and surgical-dental services that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis, without charges
related to the provision of insured health care services.
US Abortion Landscape
Ongoing developments in the United States, such as the overturning of Roe v. Wade and the March 2023
hearing of case in Texas seeking to suspend or revoke the USDA’s approval of Mifegymiso (medical
abortion), have galvanized the discussion about access to abortion in Canada.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who receive these services at the
private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a
private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient
charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada
Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since
March 2020, deductions totaling $334,766 have been levied against the NB’s Canada Health Transfer
(CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for
abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without
resolution. Currently, Clinic 554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical
abortion services for $700.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20 and was granted standing
on June 2, 2021. The group argues that the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada
Health Act. The province filed their Statement of Defence on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the
CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does not violate the Canada Health Act. The case
is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is awaiting information from the province, which was
requested in January 2022. To date, no trial date has been set.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical abortion
services in some private clinics. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for
physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in
the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered
confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for uninsured services, while not
consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to accessing insured surgical
abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations the patient charges discovered were
reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021, 2022, and 2023
deductions (totaling $53,265). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to
Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical
abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to
implement their action plan to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces and
territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them within a specified timeframe (two years from the date of the deduction).
Additional Federal Initiatives with Respect to Sexual and Reproductive Health
Of the $45 Million committed to sexual and reproductive health in Budget 2021, the Government has
invested $8 million to date specifically to support access to abortion in Canada. In the first six months of
funding, Action Canada served 208% more people, and provided 234% more financial support, as
compared to the same period in 2021. An additional $36 million has been proposed in Budget 2023 to
renew the Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund for three years (starting in 2024-25).
Budget 2023 confirmed that, in addition to the existing funding of $192.2 million that Health Canada’s
Official Languages Health Program will receive between 2023 and 2028, the Program will also receive
$14.5 million to support non-profit organizations that serve the official languages minority communities
as well as enhance capacity to train additional bilingual nurses and personal support care workers.
SENIORS AND DEMENTIA (OLMC)
ISSUE
• Official Language Minority Communities (OLMC) in Canada have been identified as being more
likely to be at risk of developing dementia as these communities tend to have older populations and the
risk of dementia increases with age, particularly after the age of 80.
• OLMC individuals have also been identified as being more likely to face barriers to accessing
services and/or information in their first language, including being able to communicate with health
professionals. Further, bilingual individuals living with dementia may revert to their first language as
symptoms progress, increasing the importance of services being available in their first language.
KEY FACTS
• As of 2016, just over 350,000 individuals aged 65 and older were living in OLMC. OLMCs tend to
have considerably higher proportions of older adults than the country as a whole.
• Public opinion focus groups and interviews were conducted for the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) in 2022 on the experiences of people living in OLMCs with respect to dementia. Results
suggest that while anglophones living with dementia and anglophone dementia caregivers generally feel
well supported in English regarding interaction with health care teams, francophones outside of Quebec
reported generally only being supported in English. Some of these francophones preferred using English
for this purpose, while others felt it was important to their care and wellbeing to have access to a
healthcare team that could communicate with them in French (their mother tongue).
• Dementia is a set of symptoms affecting brain function, often characterized by changes in
memory, mood, and judgement along with physical symptoms. In Canada, almost 474,000 people aged
65 and older have been diagnosed with dementia. As our population ages, the number of Canadians
affected by dementia is expected to increase.
In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. The strategy includes a
focus on OLMCs as a population that may face barriers to equitable care. Budget 2019 announced $50
million over five years to support the implementation of Canada’s first national dementia strategy
through the Dementia Strategic Fund. Several projects funded through the Dementia Strategic Fund
focus on supporting OLMCs.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to keeping all seniors in Canada healthy, safe and
socially connected, and to helping them maintain their independence and remain in their homes as long
as possible, including those living in Official Language Minority Communities.
• In 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy. The strategy places
an emphasis on considering the specific needs of individuals living in Official Language Minority
Communities in designing and delivering dementia-related initiatives.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s Dementia Strategic Fund supports the Dementia Strategy.
Proposals for funding are encouraged to consider a focus on Official Language Minority Communities.
• For example, under the Dementia Strategic Fund, the Agency is funding dementia-related
projects on risk and stigma reduction for Francophone minorities living in British Columbia, Alberta,
Saskatchewan, New Brunswick and Yukon, and for Anglophones in Quebec.
BACKGROUND
Many studies conducted on behalf of Health Canada show that language is a key determinant of
appropriate, quality and safe healthcare. Good communication between the patient and their healthcare
provider is therefore essential to achieving optimal health outcomes and making good use of healthcare
resources. This is especially true for seniors and people with dementia. In addition, the findings of these
studies show that patients from OLMCs continue to be disadvantaged in terms of equitable access to
healthcare in their official language of choice. Furthermore, the profile of these patients is varied, in that
the experiences of OLMCs vary from one province and territory to another, or even from one region to
another.
On June 22, 2017, the National Strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias Act came into
force and provided for the development and implementation of a national dementia strategy. A
Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released in June 2019. The strategy recognizes
that individuals living in OLMCs are more likely to face barriers to accessing services and/or information
in their first language, including being able to communicate with health professionals.
The lack of information on dementia and access to care in the official minority language can have an
impact on the quality of care received, diagnosis, treatment and patient safety. It is also known that
bilingual people living with dementia often revert to their first language, resulting in challenges in being
understood and heightening the importance of having health resources and care available in the official
minority language.
Health Portfolio Initiatives:
Supporting Older Adults
As part of the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting Initiative, in 2018–2019, PHAC engaged with
OLMC researchers and experts to identify and address challenges and opportunities to measure health
inequalities in OLMCs, including the OLMC in New Brunswick. Following that research, in 2019-2020,
PHAC added a number of new indicators to its publicly available Health Inequalities Data Tool relating to
inequalities in socioeconomic status and seniors’ health, disaggregated by first official language spoken.
The 2018-2025 New Brunswick Healthy Seniors Pilot Project (HSPP), a $75 million grant from PHAC to
the Government of New Brunswick, requires that federal and provincial Official Languages legislation be
respected. New Brunswick, a bilingual province, is responsible for tracking investments and learnings in
official language minority communities as part of its annual report. All public facing communications are
in both official languages, project applicants may submit proposals in their language of choice, and
results from project evaluations will be made available in both official languages. PHAC reviews the
annual project report to ensure that the investments and learnings in OLMCs are included. The language
profile of the HSPP portfolio includes:
- 22 projects in both French and English (34%);
- 36 projects in primarily English (55%);
- 5 projects in French (7%) specifically targeting rural Francophone communities; and
- 2 projects (3%) in both English and Maliseet or Mi’kmaq.
Supporting People Living with Dementia and Caregivers
Both the Dementia Strategic Fund and the Dementia Community Investment require that resources
created by funded projects be available in one or both official languages depending on the intended
reach and audience. Projects under these funding initiatives focused on OLMCs include:
• A project by RésoSanté Colombie Britannique to inform, equip and support Francophone
minorities living in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan and Yukon by providing a better
understanding of the challenges of accessing resources in French, as well as the needs of people with
dementia and their caregivers. It includes awareness campaigns and peer coaching aimed at improving
cognitive health literacy.
• A project by Lucilab to expand the reach of a national coaching app including to individuals in
OLMCs across Canada to educate higher risk individuals aged 45-70 about dementia risk factors and
motivate them to adopt healthier lifestyle habits.
• A project by the Centre for Family Medicine Family Health Team to improve access to and use of
high-quality person-centred dementia guidance in primary care to a Francophone (minority language)
community in New Brunswick.
• A project by the Société Alzheimer Granby et region to counter stigma and reduce social
isolation for people with mild cognitive impairment and provide supports for caregivers, including in
Anglophone and Francophone minority communities in Quebec and Nova Scotia.
Public opinion focus groups and interviews were conducted for PHAC in 2022 on the experiences of
people living in OLMCs with respect to dementia. Results suggest that while Anglophones living with
dementia and Anglophone dementia caregivers generally feel well supported in English regarding
dementia care and supports, Francophones outside of Quebec felt they were only supported in English.
Some preferred using English for this purpose, while others felt it was important to their care and
wellbeing that they have access to a healthcare team who could communicate with them in French (their
mother tongue).
Health Canada
Between 2018-2023, the Official Languages Health Program (OLHP) has provided over $192 million
through contribution and micro-grant agreements with various partners (communities, decision makers,
health managers, health professionals). These partners include, among others, the Community Health
and Social Services Network (CHSSN) and its 23 networks in Quebec for English-language minority
communities, the Société Santé en français (SSF) and its 16 networks in all provinces and territories
(except Quebec) for French-language minority communities. The following are concrete examples of
initiatives to improve access to home care, palliative care and end-of-life care in the official language of
choice for seniors:
• In Quebec, the Centre intégré de santé et de services sociaux de la Montérégie-Centre (CISSS -
Montérégie) has produced tools (videos, pamphlets, microsite) to inform people with decreased
independence and their caregivers and to ensure that English-speaking seniors and their loved ones are
able to identify health problems related to aging and the risks in their environment.
• In Quebec, the CHSSN led the community health education program that saw a record number
of Anglophones (over 180) attend each health education session in 2021–2022. Eight sessions were held,
with approximately 1,300 participants. The sessions covered: expanding the role of your community
pharmacist, an update on ticks and Lyme disease, eye and vision care, medical emergencies in the
elderly, education on dementia, fall prevention, “Decluttering” for your health, and belonging.
• In PEI, the Société Santé en français entered into an agreement with the Association
francophones de l’âge d’or de l’ÎPÉ and the Foyer Beach Grove to increase access to French-language
services for seniors in the province. This agreement has resulted in the recruitment of 35 volunteers
from long-term care facilities, who are now listed in the directory and identified as being able to provide
services in French in the West Prince regional database. Also, these collaborations have resulted in the
creation of three new designated bilingual positions at Foyer Beach Grove, which are currently filled.
This enables French-speaking seniors in the province to receive services in their official language.
• Moreover, in PEI, the program, “Caring for older adults in the community and at home
(COACH)/Prendre soin des personnes âgées en communauté et à domicile” now identifies its French-
speaking clients and service providers to facilitate matching and to better understand and meet their
specific needs in their official language of choice.
