Created: 2023-06-06T16:48:20.888190
Name: PACP_Appearance-OAG_Report_9_–_COVID-19_
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/0c5032ec-e598-4f5c-ad9a-587662e824a5/resource/218d2a5e-9d6b-4e55-a2ab-62b42eb480a6/download/disclosure-binder-pacp-feb-6-en.pdf
Package ID: 0c5032ec-e598-4f5c-ad9a-587662e824a5
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee Appearance', 'Public Accounts 2023']
Notes: Briefing Binder for the Deputy Minister of Health's appearances at the Satnding Committee on Public Accounts (PACP)- OAG Report 9 (Covid 19 Vaccines).
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
PACP Appearance
OAG Report 9–COVID-19 Vaccines
Deputy Minister
Monday, February 6, 2023
STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PACP)
STUDY OF THE OAG 2022 REPORT 9: COVID-19 VACCINES
February 6th, 2023
Committee Appearance
1. Scenario Note andContext / Official Notice
2. Opening Remarks (5 minutes)
3. Q&A Document
4. PACP Committee Member Information
OAG Audit and HC Recommendations
5. 2022 Report 9 of the OAG on COVID-19 Vaccines
6. Health Canada Management Response
7. Health Canada Management Response and Action Plan
8. PHAC Management Response
9. PHAC Management Response and Action Plan
10. Health Canada Summary of Activities Undertaken
Health Canada Key Messages
11. Departmental Statement on Health Canada’s Website
12. Media Lines
13. QPNote–OAG Audit Reports during the Pandemic
Background–Vaccine Authorization and Surveillance
14. QP Note–Vaccination–General
15. QP Note–Access to Vaccines for COVID-19
16. QP Note–Treatments and Vaccines for Children
17. Overview of COVID-19 Vaccines and Treatments
18. Table–COVID-19 Vaccine Approval Chronology
19. Table–COVID-19 Safety and Communications Chronology
20. Table–NACI Guidance Chronology (PHAC) (Note to Follow)
21. Roles and Responsibilities on Vaccine Surveillance
22. Redacted–Confidential information
23. Vaccine Clinical Trials
Background–Health Data Sharing / Digital Strategy
24. QP Note–Digital Sharing
25. Draft Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PACP)–OAG
REPORT 9 (COVID 19 VACCINES)
February 6, 2023
MEETING SCENARIO
• At this meeting you will be on a panel with the following officials:
o Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister of Health.
-Dr. Supriya Sharma, ChiefMedical Advisor, Health Canada & Senior Medical Advisor, Health
Products and Food Branch.
-Dr. Celia Lourenco, Acting Associate Assistant Deputy Minister / Health Products and Food
Branch.
o Dr. Harpreet S. Kochhar, President of the Public Health Agencyof Canada.
-Stephen Bent, Vice-President, COVID-19 Vaccine Rollout Task Force.
-Luc Gagnon, Assistant Deputy Minister and Chief Digital Transformation Officer, Digital
Transformation Branch
o Arianne Reza, Associate Deputy Minister of Public Services and Procurement Canada.
-Michael Mills, Assistant Deputy Minister, Procurement Branch
o Karen Hogan, Auditor General, Office of the Auditor General.
-Susan Gomez, Principal
-Nadine Cormier, Director
• The Committee meeting will open with lead officials delivering 5 minutes of opening
remarks for a total of 20 minutes. You and other officials will then take questions from
Committee members for the remainder of the time.
o The first round of questions are generally 6 minutes in length and proceed in the
following order: Conservative Party, Liberal Party, Bloc Québécois, NDP.
o For the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP
(2.5 minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes)
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will be the 48th time that PACP has met since the beginning of the 1st session of
the 44th Parliament. The most recent meetings have focused on Reports 9 and 10 of the Auditor
General of Canada (COVID-19 benefits and vaccines).
• At PACP, the Opposition role is led by the Conservatives, who have placed a key critic, or
“shadow minister,” on the Committee. The Conservative presence is led by Garnett Genuis,
currently the Shadow Minister for International Development. Other Conservative members
have held positions in past Shadow Cabinets. Other Conservative members of the Committee
include Kelly McCauley and Michael Kram.
• The Conservatives remain critical of COVID-19 mitigation measures, including
verification of COVID-19 benefits, masking mandates, border restrictions, and mandatory
vaccination policies. Mr. Genuis has been critical of the Government’s management of the
COVID-19 pandemic both at Committee and in the House. On December 13, 2022, he
characterized the Government’s response as one leading to “mismanagement, waste and a lack
of focus leading to tens of billions of dollars in Government waste.” Mr. Genuis has particularly
focused on issues with the Canada Emergency Response Benefit, and the ArriveCan application.
• The Bloc Quebecois presence on the Committee is led by Nathalie Sinclair-Desgagné.
Ms. Sinclair-Desgagné is the Bloc Quebecois Critic for public Accounts, Pandemic Programs, and
Economic Development Agencies. Bloc Quebecois members consistently call for greater
unconditional transfers to the provinces and generally oppose anything that they may interpret
as federal intrusion into Quebec’s jurisdiction. In an intervention at the December 6, 2022,
meeting of the Committee, Ms. Sinclair-Desgagné said “I especially want to make sure that
people who are watching today understand that we’re not asking for a universal health care
system in Canada managed by the federal government, for example.” Her remarks were in the
context of data sharing, an issue that was flagged in the Auditor General’s report.
• The New Democratic Party presence is led by Blake Desjarlais the party’s critic for the
Treasury Board Secretariat, Diversity and Inclusion, Youth, Sport, and Post Secondary Education.
NDP members have been supportive of the Governments investments during the pandemic,
nevertheless, they have raised concerns about funds that have gone to large corporations. At
the December 6 meeting of the Committee, Mr. Desjarlais spoke positively of the actions
Parliament took to “end poverty or at least reduce poverty with strong measures” but ended
critically, noting that “we’ve seen the use of the Canadian emergency wage subsidy to break
unions and lock out workers.”
• The Portfolio has prepared a range of briefing products, addressing a variety of hot
issues, including, the Health Canada Management Response and Action Plan, notes on
vaccination, access to vaccines for COVID-19, treatments and vaccines for children, and the pan-
Canadian health data strategy.
Opening Remarks
Deputy Minister Health Canada
Dr. Stephen Lucas
House of Commons Standing Committee on Public Accounts (PACP)
Report 9—COVID-19 Vaccines—Health Canada
February 6, 2023
11:00 am to 1:00 pm
Introduction
I would like to thank the Committee members for the opportunity to appear before them today.
Joining me is Health Canada’s Chief Medical Advisor Dr. Supriya Sharma and the Acting Associate
Assistant Deputy Minister of the Health Products and Food Branch Dr. Celia Lourenco.
Health Canada is responsible for regulating health products in Canada, including vaccines. This
involves evaluating data in support of the safety, quality, and efficacy of health products before
authorizing them for sale in Canada. Health Canada also monitors the safety of health products
while they are on the market in Canada and takes prompt action should safety concerns
emerge.
Audit
Health Canada acknowledges the extensive effort of the Office of the Auditor General, in
collaboration with relevant partners across government, in developing the COVID-19 vaccines
report assessing the procurement, authorization, allocation, distribution and surveillance of
COVID-19 vaccines from January 1st, 2020, to May 31st, 2022.
Health Canada is responsible for evaluating vaccine safety, efficacy and quality, and shares the
important role of vaccine surveillance with our colleagues at the Public Health Agency in
collaboration with the Provinces and Territories. We rely on close information sharing between
our two organizations on vaccine safety reports and surveillance data.
I will focus on the areas of the audit relating to Health Canada’s responsibilities. Specifically, the
authorization of COVID-19 vaccines, surveillance, and data-sharing.
Agile Regulatory Review of COVID-19 Vaccines
The COVID-19 pandemic presented a global threat and public health emergency that required
the federal government to act quickly regarding vaccine approval, procurement, distribution,
and surveillance.
One of Health Canada’s top priorities in light of the pandemic was to exercise regulatory agility
to support vaccine clinical trials, expedite vaccine authorization, and continually monitor their
quality, safety and efficacy while maintaining rigorous standards that were aligned with those of
international regulatory partners.
Health Canada welcomes the results of the audit, which found that Health Canada expedited the
regulatory review and authorization of the vaccines used to combat COVID-19, while upholding
the rigorous standards required for our approval. The expedited authorization process that was
developed and implemented for COVID-19 vaccines through an Interim Order maintained the
Department’s scientific standards while considerably shortening the timelinesfor reviews. These
regulatory flexibilities modified the Department’s usual process in a few key ways.
First, the Department created dedicated teams that focused on the review of COVID-19
vaccines. This process was made possible by backfilling our staff’s previous positions to ensure
there were not any compromises on the reviews of other non-COVID-19 health products.
Second, Health Canada authorized vaccine manufacturers to submit data on a rolling basis,
which allowed us to review data from early in the development of the vaccine while later-stage
clinical trials were taking place. This allowed vaccine manufacturers to submit data to us as it
became available and for us to start the review process as early as possible. The vaccines were
only authorizedonce all the necessary data were submitted, reviewed, and considered
acceptable.
Third, we applied terms and conditions on each vaccine authorization to manage uncertainties
that remained, and ensure closer monitoring of vaccine safety as they are administered in
Canada and globally.
Finally, Health Canada cooperated extensively withour international partners to share
information during the review process and reduce duplication, all while maintaining the same
thorough standards of evidence we use in the authorization of any vaccine.
Health Canada authorizes a vaccine and maintains a vaccine on the market only when the
vaccine’s benefits outweigh the risks of its use. The audit concluded that the Public Health
Agency and Health Canada efficiently provided access to COVID-19 vaccines, with Health
Canada’s expedited authorization process playing a critical role in ensuring that vaccine doses
were available to Canadians in a timely manner.
Surveillance & Data-Sharing
The audit also found that the Public Health Agency and Health Canada shared relevant
surveillance data, such as cases ofadverse events following immunization and other vaccine
safety signals, to effectively monitor the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines. This
allowed both organizations to take immediate action in response to vaccine safety signals
resulting fromreported adverse events, and subsequently communicate these adverse events
to the Canadian public and to the vaccine manufacturers.
However, the audit also highlighted long-standing issues related to data-sharing which affected
the Public HealthAgency’s ability to share detailed case-level safety surveillance data with
Health Canada.
For example, the audit recommended that more should be done to facilitate the sharing of
surveillance data with Health Canada by expanding access to the Canadian Adverse Events
Following Immunization Surveillance System to Health Canada, and by expediting the
implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy.
Health Canada agrees with the audit’s findings, and its recommendations validate the efforts
Health Canada has taken to advance a more robust and consistent method of sharing health
data. Information sharing is an important component of Canada’s vaccine safety surveillance
system, and Health Canada fully supports the audit’s findings on the importance ofallowing the
sharing of detailed data between the Provinces and Territories, the Public Health Agency and
Health Canada.
Nevertheless, the audit still found that Health Canada was able to act appropriately and respond
to confirmed vaccine safety signals based on reported adverse events. The Department
leveraged existing surveillance systems already in place prior to the pandemic and was able to
fulfill its mandate in a timely manner.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate with the Public Health Agency in implementing the
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, and we support ongoing conversations with the provinces
and territories to provide greater access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following
Immunization Surveillance System.
Conclusion
In closing,Health Canada’s priority is the health and safety of Canadians. Timely access and a
sufficient supply of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines have been vital in achieving this goal.
Health Canada welcomes the Auditor General’s recommendations and is committed to the
continuous improvement of our work, particularly as it relates to sharing health data.
We recognize that timely and accurate health data can guide investments in health care, help
governments to respond to public health events, and achieve equitable, better health outcomes
for Canadians.
Again, I would like to thank the Committee for inviting me. I will be pleased to answer any
questions you may have.
Q&A | INDEX OF QUESTIONS
Q&A | INDEX OF QUESTIONS
1.1 OVERVIEW OF AUDITOBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
Q1. What was the objective of the audit?
Q2. What was the scope of the audit?
Q3. What were the overall findings of the audit?
Q4. What were the audit recommendations directed towards Health Canada?
1.2 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND THE AUTHORIZATION OF COVID-19 VACCINES
Q5. What were the audit findings around the Department’s authorization of COVID-19
vaccines?
Q6. What regulatory pathways did the Department implement to expedite the authorization
of vaccines?
Q7. Did the Department take additional steps to facilitate timely authorization of vaccines?
Q8. Why did the Department terminate the Interim Order which was deemed to be so
effective?
Q9. How did the Department make use of dedicated COVID-19 funding to expedite the
authorization of vaccines?
Q10. Did the Department take any measures to mitigate the fees for COVID-19 vaccines
sponsors?
1.3 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND THE SURVEILLANCE OF VACCINES
Q11. What did Health Canada do to monitor the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19
vaccines?
Q12. What are the sources of information for regulatory post-market surveillance of COVID-
19 vaccines?
Q13. What is the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System
(CAEFISS) and what is Health Canada’s involvement in it
Q14. How did the data-sharing issues identified in the audit impact Health Canada’s ability to
act on COVID-19 vaccine safety issues? How did Health Canada mitigate the impact of limited
data-sharing?
Q15. Given the gaps noted in the audit, how can we have confidence that the system for
monitoring the safety of COVID-19 vaccines is working?
Q16. Why didn’t Health Canada use Vanessa’s Law provisions on the mandatory reporting of
serious adverse events by hospitals to obtain AEFI reports?
Q17. What are theenhanced transparency approaches used by Health Canada for publishing
information about drugs and vaccines?
1.4 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND DATA-SHARING AND PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Q18. What were the key challenges identified in the audit for the Department?
Q19. Why is there a lack of regulation for the collection, use, and disclosure of public health
information between the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and P&Ts?
Q20. The Department agreed to expedite the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health
Data Strategy. What does this initiative entail?
Q21. What has been done thus far to implement the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy?
Q22. Will the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy address the issues raised in the audit?
Q23. In whatother ways is Health Canada addressing the issue of information sharing?
1.5 PHAC–KEY MESSAGES (RESPONSE TO OAG RERPORT 9)
Q24. PHAC Key Messages –Overview of OAG Report 9 (Vaccines)
Q25. PHAC Key Messages -VaccineConnect
Q26. PHAC KeyMessages–Vaccine Surveillance
Q27. PHAC Key Messages –NACI Recommendations on Vaccine Use and Intervals
Q28. PHAC Key Messages –Science-based Decision Making
1.1 OVERVIEW OF AUDIT OBJECTIVE AND SCOPE
Q1. What was the objective of the audit?
• The focus of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada and the Public Health
Agency of Canada efficiently provided access to COVID-19 vaccines, and whether the
surveillance of COVID-19 vaccines was effective and timely. Further, the audit focused on
whether Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support to
secure COVID-19 Vaccines.
Q2. What was the scope of the audit?
• The audit covered the period from January 1, 2020 to May 31, 2022, and its scope
included the three main federal organizations involved in implementing Canada’s COVID-19
Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods—the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health
Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada.
Q3. What were the overall findings of the audit?
Overall findings:
• Overall, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada, supported by Public
Services and Procurement Canada, responded to the urgent nature of a rapidly evolving
coronavirus pandemic by working together to obtain a sufficient number of COVID-19 vaccine
doses for provinces and territories to vaccinate everyone living in Canada.
• Although the government was successful in sending a sufficient number of doses to
provinces and territories, the Public Health Agency of Canada ended up with a large surplus of
doses, which led to vaccine wastage because some of the doses expired before they could be
used or donated.
• The sharing of case-level details of COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data was not as
effective as it should have been. By the end of the audit period, the agency had not received
permission from all provinces and territories to share detailed case-level information on vaccine
safety with Health Canada, vaccine companies, and the World Health Organization.
Authorization of COVID-19 vaccines
• The audit found that Health Canada adapted its normal authorization process to
expedite the regulatory approval to authorize COVID-19 vaccines in a timely manner.
• The expedited process included the same key steps as the normal process to authorize
vaccines, but it was adjusted to allow for a rolling submission across the review period. It also
allowed the Department to manage risks and uncertainties through the use of Risk Management
Plans, and Terms and Conditions.
Allocation and distribution of vaccines
• The audit found that the Public Health Agency of Canada equitably allocated vaccine
doses to provinces and territories and distributed requested doses in a timely matter.
• It also found that the Public Health Agency ofCanada was unsuccessful in its efforts to
minimize vaccine wastage.
Surveillance of vaccines
• The audit found that despite data-sharing issues, the Public Health Agency of Canada
and Health Canada were timely in responding to the three confirmed vaccine safety signals
based on adverse events reported in Canada.
• However, while the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada collected and
analyzed COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data, data-sharing problems affected the agency’s
ability to collect disaggregated vaccine coverage data on population characteristics from
provinces and territories. Data-sharing issues also affected the effectiveness of the agency’s
sharing of detailed case-level safety surveillance data with Health Canada, as well as withthe
World Health Organization and vaccine companies.
Q4. What were the audit recommendations directed towards Health Canada?
• The audit made one recommendation (9.79) to the Department: Given the urgency and
importance of improving timely access to quality data among health partners, the Public Health
Agency of Canada and Health Canada should expedite their work with provinces and territories
to implement the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy.
• In response, the Department provided the following response: Agreed. Health Canada
will continue to collaborate with the Public Health Agency of Canada to advance the
development and implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, working with
provinces and territories.
• Although not aimed directly at Health Canada, the audit also recommended (9.80) that
the Agency, in collaboration with the Department and the PTs,
o resolve barriers to better share vaccine surveillance information among themselves,
o provide access to the CAEFISS to Health Canada, and
o provide surveillance data, including case-level details as needed, to the World Health
Organization and vaccine companies in a timely manner.
• While this recommendation is not being led by the Department, Health Canada will be
working with the Agencyto address these issues.
1.2 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND THE AUTHORIZATION OF COVID-19 VACCINES
Q5. What were the audit findings around the Department’s authorization of COVID-19
vaccines?
• The audit found that Health Canada adapted its normalauthorization process to
expedite the regulatory approval to authorize COVID-19 vaccines before they were made
available in Canada. The expedited process included the same key steps as the normal process
to authorize vaccines, but it was adjusted to allowfor a rolling submission across the review
period. It also allowed the Department to manage risks and uncertainties through the use of
Risk Management Plans and Terms and Conditions.
Q6. What regulatory pathways did the Department implement to expedite the authorization
of vaccines?
• Due the urgent need for COVID-19 vaccines, the Department prioritized COVID-19
vaccine submissions and adapted its usual review process to expedite the vaccine authorization
process.
• On September 16, 2020, the Minister ofHealth signed an interim order (ISAD IO) that
introduced a temporary regulatory pathway. An interim order is one of the fastest mechanisms
available to the federal government for putting in place temporary regulations to help make
health products available to address large-scale public health emergencies. The IO helped
expedite the authorization for COVID-19-related drugs and vaccines without compromising
quality, efficacy, and patient safety, by:
o providing manufacturers with regulatory flexibilities inthe market authorization of
COVID-19 drugs without compromising patient safety, for example, allowing adapted data
requirements for COVID-19 products, allowing rolling submissions and using Terms and
Conditions (T&Cs) to help continue to monitor the safetyand efficacy of vaccines and
treatments;
o authorizing a new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on the approval of a trusted foreign regulatory authority;
o allowingexpanded use of an already approved drug to include COVID-19-related
indications based on known evidence with or without an application from the market
authorization holder;
o permitting the PHAC to import promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-
positioning) in Canadian facilities before they are authorized in Canada;
o modifying requirements for drug establishment license (DEL) applications for COVID-19
drugs; and
o providing fee mitigation on cost recovery fees as well as fees for establishment of
licence applications.
• As noted in the audit, the expedited process allowed vaccine companies to submit
review data from early development while later-stage clinical trials were taking place at the time
of the initial filing with Health Canada, a process referred to as a rolling submission.
Furthermore, any uncertainties or risk mitigation measures related to vaccines in the context of
the public health need due to COVID-19 were managed through terms and conditions.
• In all cases, Health Canada only authorizes products where it is determined that the
benefits outweigh the risks. As well, Health Canada assesses and monitors the safety and
effectiveness of all COVID-19 drugs following authorization.
• These efforts were further supported by extensivestakeholder engagement and the
rapid creation of easily accessible guidance documents to aid sponsors with their COVID-19
submissions, improve processing times, and reduce inquiries and errors.
• The eventual termination of the interim order which was ineffect for one-year meant
that drugs authorized through the interim order would no longer be legally permitted to be sold
in Canada beyond that time. To ensure that COVID-19-related drugs, including vaccines,
authorized under the interim order could continue to be imported and sold in Canada, the
Department introduced transition regulations which were published in March 2021. The
regulations maintain some of the mechanisms introduced through the interim order, thus
continuing to provide Canadians with quick access to safe and effective COVID-19 drugs.
Q7. Did the Department take additional steps to facilitate timely authorization of vaccines?
• Health Canada used a number of innovative and agile regulatory approaches to expedite
the regulatory review of COVID-19 health products and clinical trials, including for vaccines,
without compromising safety, efficacy and quality standards. This was done through:
o temporary legislative, regulatory and policy measures;
o partnerships and networks with companies, provinces and territories, other government
departments, international regulatory bodies and health care professionals; and
o easily accessed and available guidance and other priority information
• These measures were put in place well before we authorizedthe first vaccine in Canada
for the prevention of COVID-19 on December 9, 2020.
• Notably, our actions were complemented and guided by enhanced engagement and
communications with health system partners, industry stakeholders (including those new to the
regulatory landscape, and international regulators) and colleagues in other federal departments
or other levels of government.
• For example, we engaged the health products sector in mobilizing to find COVID-19
solutions by:
o meeting with industry leaders toidentify and track potential health products;
o ensuring that the regulatory review of promising health products is done in a timely
manner;
o hosting information sessions on our regulatory response; and
o maintaining a centralized COVID-19 websitewith relevant information for industry and
health professionals.
• We also worked closely with domestic health partners, such as with health technology
assessment agencies, to support efficiencies and alignment.
• Finally, at the international level, we collaborated with our strongest partners to ensure
that our policies and regulatory approaches were aligned so that safe and effective products
could be made available to Canadians as soon as possible.
Q8. Why did the Department terminate the Interim Order which was deemed to be so
effective?
• The eventual termination of the interim order which was in effect for one-year meant
that drugs authorized through the interim order would no longer be legally permitted to be sold
in Canada beyond that time. To ensure that COVID-19-related drugs, including vaccines,
authorized under the IO could continue to be imported and sold in Canada, the Department
introduced transition regulations.
• Furthermore, the interim order provided a temporary emergency authorization for
COVID-19 drugs to address the pandemic. The authorization was not a notice of compliance. In
order for drugs to receive an NOC, a submission needs to be made under Division 8 of the Food
and Drug Regulations.
• As such, the Food and Drug Regulations havebeen amended to allow for modified
requirements that facilitate the regulatory process for new COVID-19 drugs to receive an NOC
through a new drug submission (NDS). The amendments maintain some of the mechanisms
introduced through the interim order, thus continuing to provide Canadians with quick access to
safe and effective COVID-19 drugs.
Q9. How did the Department make use of dedicated COVID-19 funding to expedite the
authorization of vaccines?
• The Department immediately reallocated resources to prioritize its early response to the
pandemic, which included putting in place temporary legislative, regulatory, and policy
measures, and participating in extensive international discussions to anticipate and be prepared
to meet Canadians’ health product needs.
• When dedicated funding to support the federal COVID-19 response was received, Health
Canada made effective use of it to hire and train additional staff, purchase necessary
equipment, and cover other expenses related to increasing the capacity of the vaccine review
process.
• A key step that was taken to ensure timely and thorough approvals was the hiring
additional scientists and establishing dedicated review teams for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to
ensure consistency in reviews.
• This allowed scientists and physicians with many years of experience reviewing vaccines,
and with expertise in different domains including, but not limited to, clinical medicine,
toxicology and pharmacology, biochemistry, virology, immunology, microbiology, and other
scientific disciplines relevant to the development, testing and manufacture, and quality control
of vaccines, to provide focused attention on the review of COVID-19 products, in many cases,
around the clock.
Q10. Did the Department take any measures to mitigate the fees for COVID-19 vaccines
sponsors?
• The review of applications submitted under the interim order was not subject to cost
recovery fees. In addition, the annual fee to sell a product on the Canadian market did not apply
to COVID-19 drugs, whichincluded vaccines.
1.3 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND THE SURVEILLANCE OF VACCINES
Q11. What did Health Canada do to monitor the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19
vaccines?
• Ensuring robust mechanisms were available for the Department to monitor the safety
and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines was front and centre, well before the first vaccine
candidate was even authorized.
• For example, the Department adapted its existing robust pharmacovigilance system to
introduce strategies to bring forward enhancedpost-market surveillance measures for COVID-19
vaccines through the institution of innovative regulatory measures included within our first
interim order.
• This included the ability to impose terms and conditions on manufacturers to quickly
request andgather critical safety and effectiveness information in order to mitigate risks
promptly. Specific examples of terms and conditions that were used to support the monitoring
of post-market safety of vaccines included:
o Requiring manufacturers toprioritize reporting adverse events following immunization
(AEFIs) to rapidly identify emerging or evolving safety concerns; and
o requiring regular (initially, monthly) submission of safety summary reports from
manufacturers.
• Subsequently, as vaccines were approved, the Department collected and analyzed
COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data to monitor the safety and effectiveness of the vaccines. The
Department used several sources of surveillance data, including post-market studies, safety
reports, and adverse events following immunization (AEFI) reported internationally and
domestically by vaccine sponsors.
• The Department also worked closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada to
monitor, identify and share aggregate data relating to COVID-19 vaccine safety. In addition, both
organizations worked closely on communicating new safety information to Canadians, including
regular web-posting of Canadian adverse events data.
• As the audit noted, Health Canada monitors and reviews reports of adverse events
following immunization reported to our Canada Vigilance Program (CVP), which is the name of
the post-market surveillance program that collects and assesses reports of suspected adverse
reactions to health products marketed in Canada. It is important to note that in the case of
vaccines, these reports do not necessarily imply that a relationship between the adverse event
and the vaccine has been established. However, they are an important information source
supporting ongoing safety monitoring.
• The Department also increased its monitoring and assessment activities of emerging
safety issues, and its collaboration and information-sharing efforts with its partners here in
Canada and around the world, such as the World Health Organization (WHO). The department
also published specific information about reported side effects of COVID-19 vaccines for
Canadians and health partners.
Q12. What are the sources of information for regulatory post-market surveillance of COVID-
19 vaccines?
• Health Canada has a robust and well-established vaccine safety surveillance system.
Information routinely monitored by HC is multipronged and includes a wide range of sources:
o spontaneous AEFI reports submitted to the Canada Vigilance database (CVD; from
manufacturers, consumers and healthcare professionals);
o CAEFISS (from provinces and territories), through PHAC collaboration;
o data submitted by manufacturers (Monthly Safety Reports (MSRs), Periodic Safety
Update Report (PSUR) or ad hoc data);
o ongoing clinical studies, post-authorization studies;
o information exchanged from international regulatory agencies, such as the International
Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities (ICRMA) COVID-19 Vaccine Pharmacovigilance
Network, the ACCESS Consortium for COVID-19 Therapies and Vaccines Working Group, the
International Post-Market Surveillance (IPMS) Group and the Pharmacovigilance Cluster EMA-
FDA-HC and PMDA; and
o environmental scanning of the scientific literature.
• Health Canada augmented and expedited its regular safety monitoring activities to
monitor the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines.
Q13. What is theCanadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System
(CAEFISS) and what is Health Canada’s involvement in it
• The CAEFISS is a federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) public health post-market
vaccine safety surveillance system. CAEFISS is managed by PHAC and is unique in that it includes
both passive (spontaneous reports from FPTs) and active surveillance (conducted through the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive). The CAEFISS is responsible for:
o Continuously monitoring the safety ofmarketed vaccines in Canada;
o Identifying increases in the frequency or severity of previously identified vaccine-related
reactions;
o Identifying previously unknown adverse events following immunization (AEFI) that could
possible be related to a vaccine;
o Identifying areas that require further investigation and/or research; and
o Providing timely information on AEFI reporting profiles for vaccines marketed in Canada
that can help inform immunization-related decisions.
• Health Canada does not currentlyhave access to the CAEFISS database, but it works
closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada to ensure that this information is considered in
regulatory decision-making. HC already has an agreement with PHAC which allows the agency to
share aggregatedsafety surveillance data collected from P/Ts with the department to inform
regulatory activities. In the Management Response to the OAG Audit, the Public Health Agency
of Canada has indicated that it will continue its consultations with PT partners on a proposal to
provide Health Canada with access to the CAEFISS.
• Market authorization holders such as vaccine manufacturers are required to report
serious adverse events following immunization to the Canada Vigilance Program in Health
Canada’s Marketed Health Products Directorate (within HPFB). Health professionals and
consumers may also report adverse events following immunization to the Canada Vigilance
Program.
Q14. How did the data-sharing issues identified in the audit impact Health Canada’s ability to
act on COVID-19 vaccine safety issues? How did Health Canada mitigate the impact of limited
data-sharing?
• While data-sharing issues affected the Public Health Agency’s ability to share case-level
safety information with Health Canada, the audit found that Health Canada was able to act and
respond quickly to confirmed vaccine safety signals, including issuing public information and
requiring vaccine label changes.
• Health Canada utilized existing surveillance systems already in place prior to the
pandemic to monitor the safety of vaccines approved for use in Canada.
• For example, Health Canada monitored thesafety and effectiveness of COVID-19
vaccines by obtaining and analyzing surveillance data, including post-market studies, safety
reports, and adverse events reported internationally and domestically.
• This included the use of terms and conditions to require the expedited submission of
periodic safety summary reports by vaccine manufacturers and regular collaboration and
information sharing with foreign regulators.
• As part of a shared responsibility for vaccine surveillance and safety, Health Canada and
the Public Health Agency of Canada have an agreement which allows the agency to share
aggregated safety surveillance data collected from P/Ts with the department to inform
regulatory activities. Health Canada supplements this level of information in Canada by
exchanging emerging information on COVID-19 surveillance data with international partners.
Q15. Given the gaps noted in the audit, how can we have confidence that the system for
monitoring the safety of COVID-19 vaccines is working?
• Health Canadaand PHAC have a well-established and effective vaccine safety
monitoring system that engages health care professionals, vaccine manufacturers, provincial
and territorial health authorities, and Indigenous partners. Long-standing collaborative
relationships with provincial and territorial immunization programs enabled PHAC to leverage
pre-existing vaccine surveillance governance bodies to pull together unprecedented surveillance
data on COVID-19 vaccine safety.
• PHAC collates, codes, reviews, analyzes, and communicates national level safety data
submitted to CAEFISS from multiple sources. HC reviews safety reports submitted to the Canada
Vigilance database from manufacturers, consumers and healthcare professionals, data
submitted by manufacturers (MonthlySafety Reports, Periodic Safety Update Reports or ad hoc
data), ongoing clinical studies, post-authorization studies, and information exchanged from
international regulatory agencies.
• PHAC also performs causality assessment of each adverse event and provides summary
information to Health Canada. Causality assessments help determine the likelihood that the
adverse event reported was caused by the vaccine. The Department then uses this information,
along with data from other sources, to monitor and assess the safety of authorized vaccines.
• Canadians can have confidence that the current system for monitoring vaccine safety
works. Canadians will recall that the government responded quickly to safety issues like
thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS), and myocarditis/pericarditis when reports
started to emerge in 2021. The Department worked with companies to promptly update the
product information (product monograph) based on emerging evidence. PHAC and Health
Canada continue to closely monitor Canadian and international reports of TTS and myocarditis
and/or pericarditis following vaccination.
• CAEFISS is just one of many sources used by Health Canada to monitor adverse events
related to immunization. Health Canada also has a well-established historyof cooperation with
its international partners and furthered that engagement for the timely surveillance of COVID-
19 vaccines The use of multiple sources ensures that the Department is able to make evidence-
based decisions in a timely manner, protection the health and well-being of Canadians.
• The safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines continues to be monitored in Canada.
We remain committed to ensuring that Canadians and health care professionals have access to
the latest information to make informed decisions and are aware of symptoms, including by
publishing regular summaries of AEFIs, and online information.
Q16. Why didn’t Health Canada use Vanessa’s Law provisions on the mandatory reporting of
serious adverse events by hospitals to obtain AEFI reports?
• In determining whether to require hospitals to report AEFIs to vaccines under Vanessa’s
Law, Health Canada took into consideration that, as part of provincial immunization programs,
there is a well-established network for reporting AEFIs andmonitoring vaccine safety. AEFI
reporting to local health units is mandatory for healthcare professionals in most provincial and
territorial jurisdictions. These reports are also forwarded to provincial health authorities, as well
as to the Public Health Agency of Canada, for national collation and analysis. The Public Health
Agency of Canada shares information from these reports with Health Canada, enabling
regulatory action where appropriate. Requiring the mandatory reporting by hospitals of adverse
events related to these vaccines under Vanessa’s Law would have resulted in a duplication of
reporting for this class of therapeutic products.
• As things stand, there are no barriers preventing the reporting of AEFIs to Health Canada
by hospitals, healthcare practitioners or individuals. Requiring the mandatory reporting by
hospitals of adverse events related to these vaccines under Vanessa’s Law would have resulted
in a duplication of reporting for this class of therapeutic products. Having a well-established
network in place for vaccines, especially during a public health event, has been key to ensure
successful vaccine surveillance and the reporting of serious adverse events during the COVID-19
pandemic and in the past.
Q17. What are the enhanced transparency approaches used by Health Canada for publishing
information about drugs and vaccines?
• Health Canada strives to be transparent with all regulatory review of health products. In
addition to all the ongoing communications about Health products, Health Canada recognised
the need for tailored COVID communications. This includes regular updates to the website
about our regulatory process and published information relating to both the review and
authorization of COVID-19 drugs on our website:https://bit.ly/3FQhZB3. These comprise the
most viewed webpages in the history of the department.
• Health Canada has also committed to additional transparency approaches in relation to
COVID-19 drug and vaccine information sharing by creating the ‘COVID-19 vaccines and
treatments portal’. This portal proactively publishes key information related to every product,
including terms and conditions, health product incident report (HPRC), and information for
consumers, health care professionals, and researchers. The portal is designed to meet the
growing demand for increased transparency and access to information regarding the safety,
efficacy and quality of drugs and vaccines.
• Health Canada also introduced same day publishing of key documents such as the
authorised clinicaltrials list, submissions under review list and authorised submissions.
• These online communications were complemented by regular briefings to the media,
working groups and key stakeholders. The frequency and level of detail was unpreceded and
enabled effective collaboration.
1.4 AUDIT FINDINGS AROUND DATA-SHARING AND PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Q18. What were the key challenges identified in the audit for the Department?
• The report indicated problems regarding the sharing of surveillance data between the
Public Health Agency of Canada and the Department. The audit identified the agency’s inability
to collect disaggregated vaccine coverage data on population characteristics from provinces and
territories and noted that the agency was unable to share case-level vaccine safety data with
Health Canada, the vaccine companies, and the World Health Organization.
[JUMP TO Q&A INDEX]
Q19. Why is there a lack of regulation for thecollection, use, and disclosure of public health
information between the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and P&Ts?
• The lack of a finalized agreement with provincial and territorial partners regarding which
elements of health information should be shared and with whom, as well as the lack of
supporting information and technology structure, have affected the Public Health Agency of
Canada’s ability to share detailed case-level surveillance data with Health Canada. As it stands,
PHAC can shareinformation received from provinces and territories through CAEFISS with
others only when provinces and territories provided specific consent to do so. This is the subject
of a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, which the Department is working with the Public Health
Agency of Canada to expedite.
Q20. The Department agreed to expedite the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health
Data Strategy. What does this initiative entail?
• The Government of Canada together with provinces and territories are supporting
critical actions to finalize a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. The ‘Strategy’ sets a long-term
vision for the collection, access, sharing, use, and protection of health data and articulates initial
steps towards that vision. It is based on the recognition by federal, provincial and territorial
(FPT) governments that the health sector requires reliable, person-centric, timely, quality, and
trusted health data systems that enable optimized health data management that achieves
mutually beneficial outcomes.
• Activities under the Strategy could initially focus on health system and public health
priorities such as primary care, mental health, vaccination data, and the health workforce, while
recognizing that jurisdictions have different capacity andcapability to advance this work.
• FPT governments will work together under the Strategy, in coordination with pan-
Canadian health organizations, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis (FNIM) partners and other
stakeholders, to achieve the vision of better healthoutcomes and public health responses for
individuals and communities.
Q21. What has been done thus far to implement the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy?
• The strategy is currently being finalised with FPT governments.
• Implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy is in the early stages of
development. The approach may vary across the country since jurisdictions are at different
places in their health data journey. Initial actions could include confirming the elements of the
proposed HealthData Charter to guide implementation, finalizing the governance structure for
the Strategy, and developing a collaborative work plan that would prioritize activities like
interoperability standards adoption, discussions on policy harmonization and public
engagement planning to build health data literacy and trust.
• As jurisdictions move toward the Strategy’s long-term vision, further discussions will be
necessary to achieve jurisdictional consensus on priorities to be advanced in the short-term.
• The federal government has also supported provinces and territories with efforts to
improve health data and digital health:
o As part of the Safe Restart Agreement between provinces/territories and the federal
government, the Government of Canada provided funding to improve and modernize data
management across Canada;
o The COVID-19 Health Data and Evidence Virtual Library is an example of a secure and
trusted health data-focussed project that is helping Canada respond to COVID-19; and
o In March 2020, an FPT Virtual Care and Digital Health Table was struck to discuss digital
health and virtual care in response to the Covid-19 pandemic. This table produced an FPT Action
Plan on Virtual Care and Digital Health, endorsed by Conference of Deputy Ministers in January
2022.
- The Action Plan mandates pan-Canadian Health Organizations (Infoway and CIHI) and
Statistics Canada to advance interoperability and data standards, with progress to date on
interoperability roadmap that will advance a framework for the secure technical exchange of
Canadians health information.
o On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $200M to help
provinces and territories accelerate their efforts to meet health care needs through virtual tools
and approaches, including $50Mfor Canada Health Infoway to support provinces and territories
in the implementation of new initiatives.
• The Department will continue to collaborate with the Public Health Agency of Canada to
advance the development and implementation of the Pan-CanadianHealth Data Strategy,
working with provinces and territories.
Q22. Will the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy address the issues raised in the audit?
• Implementing the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy could help address some of the
data-sharing issues that have been identified, as it aims to improve interoperability and
integration of health data across Canada, including by establishing standards and protocols for
data sharing by building capacity in health data governance, management, and analysis.
• The ‘Strategy’ sets a long-term vision for the collection, access, sharing, use, and
protection of health data and articulates initial steps towards that vision. The ultimate goal of
these improvements is to empower individuals with their own health data, enable clinicians to
provide better care and to support the use of health data to improve health care, public health
and population health systems. Numbers of COVID-19 cases or vaccination statistics are
examples of the type of critical data sharing which is essential to address public health
emergencies.
• The Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy is important because ultimately it will support
improvements in the way we use, share and manage health data. With easier access to health
data that can flowbetween different health systems, Canadians will benefit by:
o being empowered to use it to be active in their own health management, to access the
health care they need, and to improve their health outcomes;
o health providers able to share and exchange data with one another and deliver better
quality care;
o having better information on how their health system is working and being improved;
and
o governments analysing health data to make the entire health system more efficient,
strengthen our workforce planning, and make better decisions about public health and support
advances in health research.
Q23. In what other ways is Health Canada addressing the issue of information sharing?
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is leading consultations with provincial and
territorial partners on a proposal to provide Health Canada with access to the Canadian Adverse
Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS). CAEFISS receives reports from all
provincial and territorial public health authorities andfrom some federal departments on
instances of adverse events following the administration of a vaccine. Health Canada will
continue to support PHAC in these discussions with the PTs.
• For Health Canada, having access to the CAEFISS is an important step inensuring better
information sharing with PHAC. It would improve the Department’s data collection, allow for
greater real-time surveillance and enhanced decision-making. Health Canada will also support
PHAC, as needed, in efforts to improve information-sharing with vaccine companies, to increase
their ability to identify and mitigate risks in Canada.
• Recognizing the importance of reliable, timely and relevant health and public health
data in informing decision-making during public health events and for improving health
outcomes for Canadians in the long-term, all levels of government are actively working together
on initial steps needed to improve our ability to collect, use and disclose critical health and
public health data. This includes efforts being led by Canada Health Infoway, the Canadian
Institute for Health Information, and Statistics Canada, in collaboration with FPT governments to
advance common pan-Canadian standards to support the exchange of health data between
connected digital solutions.
• Health Canada is also working with PTs on a set of common aims for legislative and
policy frameworks to support consistent approaches for accessing and exchanging data across
PTs
• Further, as part of federal efforts to modernize privacy legislation in Canada, Health
Canada has also been working with Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada
(ISED) to explore opportunities to leverage the Digital Charter Implementation Act (DCIA) to
support digital health and health data, including mobility and portability of personal
information. Under the legislation, ISED intends to develop the “data mobility framework”
which would include general regulations that would apply to all sectors of the economy,
including the health sector (where contractual exchange of data occurs between physicians
(operating like businesses) and private sector vendors).
o These general provisions could confirm individuals’ right to access their data and require
that data be interoperable. However, they cannot be leveraged to advance sector-specific
requirements or regulations because this would encroach on PT jurisdiction over health care
delivery and extend beyond the general trade and commerce powers of ISED’s legislation
1.5 PHAC–KEY MESSAGES (RESPONSE TO OAG RERPORT 9)
Q 24. PHAC Key Messages –Overview of OAG Report 9 (Vaccines)
• PHAC acknowledges the comprehensive report by the Officer of the Auditor General of
the COVID-19 vaccine response.
• The Agency has agreed to all recommendations put forward in the report.
• Canada’s vaccine supply management is complex and is continually impacted by an
uncertain disease trajectory, evolving public health advice based on the latest science, changes
in global demand, and fluctuating vaccine uptake and population intentions.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with provincial, territorial, and
Indigenous partners, as well as vaccine manufacturers to ensure vaccine supply aligns with
Canada’s program requirements, the most recent scientific data, and evidence-basedexpert
advice.
Key Successes
• Overall: The successful procurement and equitable distribution of vaccines have
contributed to the health and well-being of people in Canada, allowing for widespread
protection against severe COVID-19 outcomes and the safere-opening of our economy and
society.
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada’s primary objective has
been to protect the health and safety of Canadians. This included early procurement steps to
ensure early and timely access to the most effective vaccines as soon as they became authorized
by Health Canada and available on the international market.
• To ensure the best chance for success in a highly competitive and uncertain global
market, informed by an expert-based Vaccine Task Force, Canada built its vaccine portfolio
through Advance Purchase Agreements (APAs) with seven vaccine suppliers to mitigate
uncertainty risks surrounding successful product authorization, development and timely
delivery.
• Canada’s response to COVID-19 hasinvolved significant and positive collaboration
between the federal government, provinces, territories, Indigenous partners, health
professional associations, the private sector, diverse community partners such as faith leaders
and many more.
• Through the support of this broad set of partners led by PHAC, Canada’s COVID-19
immunization plan successfully supported the largest vaccination campaign in our country’s
history.
• To date (as of Jan. 26, 2023), over 97 million doses of COVID-19 vaccineshave been
administered to people in Canada.
• Canada has achieved one of the highest levels of individuals with their primary vaccine
series completed in the world at 80.6% as of January 1, 2023.
• Japan and Canada have the highest proportion of fourth doses received at 44.2% and
23.4%, respectively.
• For children and youth (ages 5 to 11 and 12 to 17), Canada had the highest coverage for
both the at least one dose and primary series completed categories.
• Based on a published study by PHAC, Canada’s collective efforts up to April 2022, to
achieve high vaccine coverage and adhering to public health measures may have saved or
prevented up to an estimated:
○ 800,000 lives
○ 1.9 million hospitalizations
○ 34 million COVID-19 cases
Looking Forward
• Of course, with any large scale and complex endeavour, further improvements can be
made drawing on lessons to date to ensure continued support for the health and well-being of
Canadians.
• Today, people in Canada are well protected against severe outcomes from COVID-19
through vaccination, and we continue to make this health product available to people in Canada
and international partners and countries around the world through international donations and
investments.
• There is still uncertainty with the COVID-19 trajectory globally and potential future
variants. Our priority remains ensuring the protection of the health and safety of Canadians and
we will continue to dedicate the resources necessary to respond to and manage COVID-19,
including through our collectivevaccination response.
• As you may have heard, on January 27, 2023, the WHO Director General determined
that the global COVID-19 pandemic continues to constitute a public health emergency of
international concern.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges the WHO Director General’s determination
that COVID-19 remains a PHEIC, as the SARS-CoV-2 virus continues to evolve and is still
circulating widely across Canada and in many other countries worldwide.
• PHAC will continue to work with Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners, health
professional organizations and communities to support vaccine confidence and uptake efforts in
the context of significant mis-and dis-information about COVID-19 vaccines.
• In doing this we have placed a particular focus on reaching underserved and
marginalized communities through our investments in national, regional and community-based
projects via the Immunization Partnership Fund and the Vaccine Community Innovation
Challenge.
Q 25. PHAC Key Messages –VaccineConnect
• Launched in June 2021, VaccineConnect is an agile, modular digital platform developed
to address the urgent need to manage distribution and administration of COVID-19 vaccines and
laid the foundation for an integrated pan-Canadian vaccine supply management system.
• It is made up of three main modules, namely, the Intelligent Supply Chain (ISC), the
Immunization Information System (IIS) and the Immunization Program Management (IPM).
• The ISC module was developed in partnership with the Canadian ArmedForces (CAF),
PHAC and HC, in collaboration with federal, provincial and territorial jurisdictions responsible for
immunization delivery, vaccine manufacturers and logistical partners.
• ISC 2.0 successfully launched in November 2022 including an enhancedWebPortal with
data quality procedures in place for submission and tracking of orders and inventory at the
central level to support supply chain management.
• It focuses on standardizing processes, providing users with additional reporting
capabilities and ensuring a stronger foundation for sustainable management of the medical
countermeasures supply chain and inventory management, including and beyond COVID-19
vaccines
• PHAC is actively working to advance the implementation and data quality procedures of
the three modules of VaccineConnect. The Agency will continue to actively engage jurisdictional
partners on identification of service and data quality gaps and needs to support future
integration of the systems.
• Provinces and territories report on vaccine wastage and inventory; however, not all
have an inventory tracking system that electronically monitors and rolls up supply at the local
level across diverse vaccination administration sites.
• The limited functionality of VaccineConnect in tracking vaccine wastage was largely due
to the inability of provinces and territories to track and share usage and wastage data at the
local level once COVID-19 vaccines had been distributed to pharmacies, diverse community sites
and primary care providers.
Q 26. PHAC Key Messages –Vaccine Surveillance
• Health Canada and PHAC have a robust, well-established, and effective vaccine safety
monitoring system that engages health care professionals, vaccine manufacturers, provincial
and territorial health authorities, and Indigenous partners.
• If a safety issue is confirmed, PHAC and Health Canada take appropriate action. This
includes issuing public information and updating vaccine label changes on expedited timelines.
As indicated in the audit, safety signals about very rare cases of adverse events following
immunization were effectively detected and managed in Canada.
• Long-standing collaborative relationships with provinces and territories enabled PHAC to
leverage pre-existing vaccine surveillance governance bodies to pull together unprecedented
surveillance data on vaccine safety.
• In combination with increased safety reporting by vaccine companies to Health Canada
and other international data, Canadian vaccine safety surveillance data continues to be useful in
informing public health guidance and regulatory action.
• The safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines continue to be monitored in Canada.
Canada is committed to ongoing transparency and providing Canadians with the information
they need tomake informed decisions.
• The Government of Canada will continue working with provincial, territorial, and
Indigenous partners to implement best practices and audit recommendations, including
opportunities to further enhance data-sharing across governments.
Q 27. PHAC Key Messages –NACI Recommendations on Vaccine Use and Intervals
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) updates its
recommendations on COVID-19 vaccines based on the latest scientific evidence and its expert
opinion. NACI recommendations may differ from Health Canada’s authorization (i.e., NACI can
make off-label recommendations).
• It is important for individuals to receive a booster dose when recommended to stay up
to date and continue to protect themselves against severe outcomes from COVID-19.
• NACI strongly recommends that all individuals 65 years of age and older, and individuals
5 to 64 years of age who are at increased risk of severe illness from COVID-19 should be offered
a COVID-19 vaccine booster dose since the start of fall of 2022.
• NACI recommends that all other individuals 5 to 64 years of age may be offered a
COVID-19 booster dose since the start of fall 2022, noting that NACI recommends at least one
booster dose should be offered for those 18 years of age or over since the completion of the
primary series.
• NACI recommends that bivalent Omicron-containing mRNA COVID-19 vaccines are the
preferred products for those receiving a booster dose.
• If a person who has been recommended to receive a booster dosesince the start of fall
2022 and has not yet received that dose, it can still be given at this time with an interval of 6
months since the previous COVID-19 vaccine dose or infection (whichever is later). A shorter
interval of at least 3 months may be considered in the context of heightened epidemiological
risk, evolving epidemiology and operational considerations for efficient deployment.
• If a booster dose has been received since the start of fall 2022, no additional boosters
are recommended by NACI as this time.
• There may be variability in how each province, territory or community assesses risk and
the recommendations they make to respond to the needs of their respective jurisdictions.
6 months to 4 years of age (less than 5 years of age)
• Nobooster products are authorized for this age group and NACI is not making any
booster recommendations for this age group at this time.
Booster dose intervals
• Between the completion of the primary series and the first booster dose, the suggested
intervalis 6 months
• Between subsequent booster doses, the suggested interval is 6 months.
• Between infection and a booster doses, the suggested interval is 6 months (also
respecting the intervals noted in the bullets above)
• Based on the variability of fall 2022 booster program start dates across jurisdictions,
some individuals will have exceeded 6 months since receiving their fall booster dose in the
winter of 2023.
• Currently, NACI is not issuing guidance on an additional booster dose for these
individuals. NACI plans to continue to monitor the evidence and evolving epidemiology and
provide updated guidance in the coming months
Q 28. PHAC Key Messages –Science-based Decision Making
• The government’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved over the past three
years, as we have learned more about the virus, and its variants, since the initial outbreak in
early 2020.
• Due to the collective actions made by everyone in Canada, and often difficult decisions
taken by all levels of Government, we are now transitioning towards a longer term, more
sustainable approach to the ongoing management of COVID-19.
• However, the virus will continue to circulate at different levels across communities, and
new variants of concern may emerge. Our priority remains ensuring the protection of the health
and safety of Canadians and we will continue to dedicate the resources necessary to respond to
the pandemic.
• Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC has developed public health measures
(PHM) guidance forpublic health authorities and other audiences, as well as advice for the
public in Canada based on the latest scientific evidence, epidemiology and expert opinion.
• Canada will continue to update its public health guidance and advice based on the
evolving scientific evidence and circulating respiratory context.
• Any recommendations to adjust COVID-19 public health measures (PHMs) for the public
will continue to be informed by a number of considerations including:
• vaccination rates and vaccine protection against severe disease as variants evolve;
hospitalization rates; access to safe and effective COVID-19 therapeutics; the evolving
epidemiological situation in Canada and abroad; the emergence of new variants of concern; and
available evidence on the effectiveness of infection prevention and control and public health
preventive measures.
• As the pandemic has evolved, so have Canada’s public health measures,
recommendations, and requirements for COVID prevention and control. P/T governments and
regional/local public health authorities will continue to make decisions about when it is
necessary to adjust public health measures by considering indicators of readiness (such as
healthcare capacity), the most recent evidence, the current epidemiological situation, and other
factors.
Master Overview of the Committee
Standing Committee on Public Accounts (PACP)
Mandate of the Committee
When the Speaker tables a report by the Auditor General in the House of Commons, it is
automatically referred to the Public Accounts Committee. The Committee selects the chapters
of the report it wants to study and calls the Auditor General and senior public servants from the
audited organizations to appear before it to respond to the Office of the Auditor General’s
findings. The Committee also reviews the federal government’s consolidated financial
statements–the Public Accounts of Canada–and examines financial and/or accounting
shortcomings raised by the Auditor General. At the conclusion of a study, the Committee may
presenta report to the House of Commons that includes recommendations to the government
for improvements in administrative and financial practices and controls of federal departments
and agencies.
Government policy, and the extent to which policy objectives areachieved, are generally not
examined by the Public Accounts Committee. Instead, the Committee focuses on government
administration–the economy and efficiency of program delivery as well as the adherence to
government policies, directives and standards. The Committee seeks to hold the government to
account for effective public administration and due regard for public funds.
Pursuant to Standing Order 108(3) of the House of Commons, the mandate of the Standing
Committee on Public Accounts is to review andreport on:
• The Public Accounts of Canada;
• All reports of the Auditor General of Canada;
• The Office of the Auditor General’s Departmental Plan and Departmental Results
Report; and,
• Any other matter that the House of Commons shall, from time totime, refer to the
Committee.
The Committee also reviews:
• The federal government’s consolidated financial statements;
• The Public Accounts of Canada;
• Makes recommendations to the government for improvements in spending practices;
• Considers theEstimates of the Office of the Auditor General.
Other Responsibilities:
• The economy, efficiency and effectiveness of government administration;
• The quality of administrative practices in the delivery of federal programs; and,
• Government’s accountability to Parliament with regard to federal spending.
COVID-19 PANDEMIC
REPORT 9
COVID-19 Vaccines
Independent Auditor’s Report
2022
Reports of the Auditor General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada
Performance audit reports
This reportpresents the results of a performance audit conducted by the Office of the Auditor
General of Canada (OAG) under the authority of the Auditor General Act.
A performance audit is an independent, objective, and systematic assessment of how well
government is managing its activities, responsibilities, and resources. Audit topics are selected
on the basis of their significance. While the OAG may comment on policy implementation in a
performance audit, it does not comment on the merits of a policy.
Performance audits are planned, performed, and reported in accordance with professional
auditing standards and OAG policies. They are conducted by qualified auditors who
• establish audit objectives and criteria for the assessment of performance
• gather the evidence necessary to assess performance against the criteria
• report both positive and negative findings
• conclude against the established audit objectives
• make recommendations for improvement when there are significant differences
between criteriaand
assessed performance
Performance audits contribute to a public service that is ethical and effective and a government
that is accountable to Parliament and Canadians.
This publication is available on our website at www.oag-bvg.gc.ca.
Cette publication est également offerte en français.
His Majesty the King in Right of Canada, as represented by the Auditor General of Canada, 2022.
Icons for United Nations’ Sustainable Development Goals are used with permission.
The content of this publication has not been approved by the United Nations and does not
reflect the views of the United Nations or its officials.
https://www.un.org/sustainabledevelopment/Cat. No. FA1-27/2022-1-9E-PDF
ISBN 978-0-660-46279-0 ISSN 2561-343X
Cover photo: Momentum studio/Shutterstock.com
Table of Contents
Introduction
Background
Focus of the audit
Findings and Recommendations
Procurement and authorization of COVID-19 vaccines
Public Services and Procurement Canada secured a sufficient supply of vaccine doses
for Canada
Efficient procurement support
Sufficient vaccine doses obtained
Health Canada expedited the authorization of vaccines
Expedited process to authorize vaccines
Allocation and distribution of vaccines
The Public Health Agency of Canada equitably allocated vaccine doses to provinces and
territories and distributed requested doses in a timely way
Equitable allocation of vaccine doses
Timely distribution to provinces and territories
The Public Health Agency of Canada was unsuccessful in its efforts to minimize
vaccine wastage
Unsuccessful efforts to minimize vaccine wastage
Delays in implementing a vaccine management information technology system16
Surveillance of vaccines
Despite data-sharing issues, the PublicHealth Agency of Canada and Health Canada
responded to vaccine surveillance data
Response to information on vaccine safety
Data-sharing problems remain
Conclusion
About the Audit
Recommendations and Responses
Introduction
Background
COVID-19 vaccines
9.1 Vaccines are considered to be one of the most important public health tools available
for preventing serious illness and controlling infectious disease outbreaks. The rapidly evolving
nature of the coronavirus disease (COVID-19)1 pandemic, which was declared in March 2020,
and the high demand across the world for vaccines put pressure on the federal government to
act quickly on COVID-19 vaccine approval, procurement, distribution, and surveillance.
9.2 Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods, established by the
federal, provincial, and territorial governments in December 2020, has the goal of enabling as
many Canadians as possible to be immunized against COVID-19 as quickly as possible while
ensuring that high-risk populations are prioritized.
9.3 In Canada, COVID-19 vaccine approval and immunization rollout began in December
2020 for adults, in May 2021 for adolescents, in November 2021 for children aged 5 years to 11
years, and in
July 2022 for children aged 6 months to 5 years.
Roles and responsibilities
9.4 In Canada, public health is a shared responsibility between the federal government, the
provinces, and the territories. Vaccine
distribution logistics are usually provincial and territorial responsibilities. During the COVID-19
pandemic, the federal government paid for the vaccines and paid for and managed the
distribution logistics for
vaccine delivery to the provinces and territories. Canada’s immunization response to COVID-19
involved collaboration between the Government of Canada, the provincial and territorial
governments, Indigenous organizations, municipal governments, public health and logistical
experts, vaccine companies, and Canadians.
1 Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)—The disease caused by severe acute respiratory
syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2).
9.5 Provincial and territorial governments. These governments are responsible for
prioritizing vaccine distribution by population and managing initial and subsequent doses within
their jurisdictions, guided by advice provided by the federal government. The provinces and
territories are also responsible for requesting the quantity of doses and types of vaccines
needed to immunize their populations and providing
the federal government with coverage and safety information on vaccine use within these
populations.
9.6 Public Health Agency of Canada. The agency is the lead federal organization facilitating
national approaches to public health in cooperation with provincial and territorial health
departments or agencies. In relation to COVID-19 vaccines, the agency is responsible
for identifying vaccine needs, paying vaccine companies, allocating and distributing vaccines to
the provinces and territories, and conducting surveillance of vaccines.
9.7 Health Canada. The department is responsible for authorizing vaccines before they can
be made available in Canada. Before authorizing a particular vaccine, the department evaluates
whether the vaccine’s benefits outweigh the potential risks. The department also continues to
monitor the safety and effectiveness of vaccines after they are released for use.
9.8 Public Services and Procurement Canada. The department purchases goods and services
for federal departments and agencies. It was responsible for leading negotiations with COVID-19
vaccine companies and putting in place agreements with the companies on behalf of the Public
Health Agency of Canada.
Focus of the audit
9.9 This audit focused on whether
• Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate
procurement support to secure COVID-19 vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada efficiently
provided access to COVID-19 vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada’s
surveillance ofCOVID-19 vaccines was effective and timely
9.10 This audit is important because factors such as global travel, urbanization, and climate
change are making health emergencies like the COVID-19 pandemic more likely to occur.
Widespread immunization is one ofthe best tools for protecting people against infectious
diseases. To reduce deaths, hospitalizations, and negative effects on Canadians’ health and
social and economic well-being during future health emergencies, it is important to learn from
this pandemic and to be better prepared for future public health emergencies.
9.11 Although we had access to the advance purchase agreements2 established to purchase
the COVID-19 vaccines and to the related documentation, we are limited in what we can report
because of confidentiality clauses in the agreements. In addition, we did not audit any science-
based decisions.
9.12 More details about the audit objective, scope, approach, and criteria are in About the
Audit at the end of this report.
Findings and Recommendations
Overall message
9.13 Overall, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada, supported by Public
Services and Procurement Canada, responded to the urgent nature of a rapidly evolving
coronavirus pandemic by working together to obtain a sufficient number of COVID-19 vaccine
doses for provinces and territories to vaccinate everyone living in Canada. At the end of May
2022, the agency reported that about 82% of people who were eligible to be vaccinated at that
time had received at least 2 doses. This was the largest mass vaccination program in Canadian
history.
9.14 Although the government was successful in sending a sufficient number of doses to
provinces and territories, the Public Health Agency of Canada ended up with a large surplus of
doses. This led to vaccine wastage because some of the doses expired before they could be used
or donated. At the end of May 2022, there were 32.5 million doses
in inventory, and using unclassified and public documentation, we estimated those doses to be
worth about $1 billion. The majority of those doses will expire by the end of 2022, resulting in
more wastage if they are not used or donated soon. Canada, like other countries, is trying to
donate some of its surplus. In addition, there were delays in
implementingthe information technology system that the Public Health Agency of Canada
acquired to track the distribution and use of vaccine doses, necessitating workarounds for
inventory management. Not all of the system’s functionalities were being used by the end ofour
audit.
9.15 Because of known problems that were not addressed before the pandemic, sharing
case-level details of COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data was not as effective as it should have
been. When the pandemic began in early 2020, the Public Health Agency of Canada did not have
regulations or finalized agreements with the provinces and territories
to clearly outline what public health surveillance information to share and how to share it. By
the end of our audit period, the agency had not received permission from all provinces and
territories to share detailed case-level information on vaccine safety with Health Canada,
vaccine companies, and the World Health Organization. Data sharing will continue to be
important as new vaccines are developed and manufactured, including in Canada, to keep
Canadians safe.
2 Advance purchase agreements—Purchase agreements that have the obligations of a
contract, while being structured to allow flexibility given uncertainties around the development
of new vaccines. Essentially, they allow for the purchase of something that does not yet exist.
Source: Public Services and Procurement Canada
Procurement and authorization of COVID-19 vaccines
Public Services and Procurement Canada secured a sufficient supply ofvaccine doses
for Canada
What we found
9.16 We found that Public Services and Procurement Canada provided efficient procurement
support to the Public Health Agency of Canada. Soon after Canada’s COVID-19 Vaccine Task
Force made recommendations regarding potential vaccines, Public Services and Procurement
Canada secured a sufficient supply of COVID-19 vaccine doses to meet the country’s needs.
9.17 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the
following topics:
• Efficient procurement support
• Sufficient vaccine doses obtained
Why this finding matters
9.18 This finding matters because vaccines were needed quickly to reduce Canadians’ risk of
serious illness, hospitalization, and death from COVID-19. Despite the urgency to acquire vaccine
doses, vaccine procurement needed to be done with due diligence.
Context
9.19 At the start of the pandemic, there was uncertainty about which COVID-19 vaccines
would be developed and authorized and when the vaccines would be available for distribution.
This uncertainty created high global demand for safe and effective vaccines across the world
and put pressure on governments to secure agreements with vaccine companies. The
uncertainty around vaccine supply made the market very competitive. In such an environment,
advance payments and obligations for minimum purchase were required. Furthermore, Canada
had very limited domestic capacity to produce vaccines and therefore was reliant on
international imported products.
9.20 The federal government established the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force, which was made
up of science and industry experts who provided recommendations on identifying and selecting
vaccines. The task force had its first meeting on 16 June 2020 and provided its first letter of
advice on 29 June 2020.
Analysis to support this finding
Efficient procurement support
9.21 We found that Public Services and Procurement Canada provided efficient procurement
support to the Public Health Agency of Canada to obtain COVID-19 vaccines. Public Services and
Procurement Canada modified its procurement processes early in the pandemic
to allow use of its emergency contracting authority for vaccine procurement. The authority
allowed the department to procure vaccines with the vaccine companies recommended by the
COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force using a non-competitive approach.
9.22 Public Services and Procurement Canada started negotiating with vaccine companies
after the recommendations from the
COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force were received in late June 2020. On behalf of the Public Health
Agency of Canada and with its approval, Public Services and Procurement Canada established
advance purchase agreements with 7 vaccine companies that demonstrated the potential to
develop viable vaccines, with the goal of securing various types of COVID-19 vaccines and
enough doses to fully vaccinate every eligible person in Canada.
9.23 We found that, although a non-competitive approach was taken, Public Services and
Procurement Canada exercised due diligence on the 7 vaccine companies by conducting
assessments to examine
the companies’ financial capability to meet requirements and by conducting integrity checks to
mitigate the risk of unethical business practices. We found no issue with the delegation of
authority because the Minister of Public Services and Procurement signed the 7 advance
purchase agreements.
Sufficient vaccine doses obtained
9.24 By 19 January 2021, Public Services and Procurement Canada had put in place 7 advance
purchase agreements for up to 414 million potential doses.These agreements included advance
payments required to support vaccine development, testing, and at-risk manufacturing. The
strategy was to secure agreements with several vaccine companies
in case Health Canada authorized only 1 or a few vaccines. The agreements reached were with
the following companies (listed in chronological order):
• Moderna—24 July 2020
• Sanofi—11 September 2020
• Pfizer—26 October 2020
• Medicago—13 November 2020
• AstraZeneca—21 November 2020
• Johnson & Johnson—30 November 2020
• Novavax—19 January 2021
The department also worked with vaccine companies to secure deliveries as quickly as possible.
Procurement of the following additional vaccine doses took place to respond to many emerging
factors, including delayed deliveries and the need for boosters:
• In February 2021, a contract with Verity Pharmaceuticals Canada Inc. / Serum Institute
of India was signed to bring 2 million AstraZeneca vaccine doses rapidly to Canada.
• In March 2021, approximately 5 million additional AstraZeneca doses were procured
while there were delays in getting doses from other vaccine companies.
• In April and August 2021, 2 amendments were put in place with Moderna and Pfizer for
up to 280 million additional doses over 3 years (2022–24).
• The departmentsecured vaccines from Pfizer, Moderna, Novavax, and Medicago for
2022 and 2023, with options to extend into 2024. For Sanofi doses, the deliveries would be
confirmed if vaccine authorization is received.
9.25 On 27 July 2021, the Government of Canada announced that Canada had received more
than 66 million doses of COVID-19 vaccines. This meant that there were enough doses (2 doses
each) to fully vaccinate every person in Canada who was eligible at that time (people aged 12
years and older). The federal government’s target to provide vaccines to those who wanted
them by fall 2021 was met.
9.26 In order to protect the commercial confidential information contained in the advance
purchase agreements, we used publicly available information and unclassified information to
estimate that at 31 May 2022, the average cost of 1 dose was approximately $30, excluding
taxes. The estimated cost per dose will vary over time based on a number of factors, including,
but not limited to, the effects of changes in foreign currency exchange rates and in market
forces, such as supply and demand. As a result, at the end of our audit period, the Government
of Canada had spent approximately $5 billion on vaccines for the 169 million doses paid for
between December 2020 and
May 2022 (see Exhibit 9.3, after paragraph 9.54).
Health Canada expedited the authorization of vaccines
What we found
9.27 We found that Health Canada adapted its normal authorization process into one that
expedited the regulatory approval to authorize COVID-19 vaccines before they were made
available in Canada. We found that the expedited process included the same key steps as the
normal process to authorize vaccines, but it was adjusted to allow for a rolling submission across
the review period.
9.28 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the
following topic:
• Expedited process to authorize vaccines
Why this finding matters
9.29 This finding matters because, despite the urgent need for a COVID-19 vaccine, an
expedited vaccine authorization process required the same level of diligence as the normal
vaccine authorization process.
Analysis to support this finding
Expedited process to authorize vaccines
9.30 We found that Health Canada followed a systematic process to authorize the COVID-19
vaccines used in Canada. (We did not audit the science-based decisions on vaccine
authorization.) Because of the urgent need for COVID-19 vaccines, the department adapted its
normal review process to expedite the vaccine authorization process. The
expedited process,put in place through an interim order, allowed vaccine companies to submit
partially completed applications, called rolling submissions, at the time of the initial filing with
Health Canada. Health Canada began its assessment using the initial information and accepted
new evidence as it became available until the application was deemed complete. This is a
different approach than the normal Food and Drug Regulations process to authorize drugs,
which requires all information to be provided at the time of submission.
9.31 We compared the steps for authorizing COVID-19 vaccines in the expedited process with
the Food and Drug Regulations process. We found that Health Canada followed the
requirements in the regulations for reviewing scientific information even ifit was not all
received at the
same time. For example, we found that Health Canada completed clinical and quality
evaluations of data received from vaccine companies.
9.32 The department had a dedicated team of scientists who reviewed the vaccine
applications, and we also saw evidence of reviews completed by supervisors. In addition,
guidance, standard operating procedures, and information sessions were available to employees
who were conducting the regulatory review work. The interim order provided the authority to
impose terms and conditions on any authorization. We found that the vaccines were authorized
with terms and conditions that included requirements for the vaccine companies to provide
safety, effectiveness, and quality information to support Health Canada’s efforts to monitor the
safety of COVID-19 vaccines. (See Exhibit 9.1 for the timing of a selection of vaccine
authorizations.)
9.33 Health Canada stated that, although expedited, the process used for COVID-19 vaccines
respected the Food and Drug Regulations standards for vaccine review (safety, efficacy, and
quality). In
March 2021, the regulations were amended to include the expedited process for COVID-19
vaccines.
Exhibit 9.1—Health Canada expedited its processes for vaccine authorization during the COVID-
19 pandemic*
- 11 March 2020: The World Health Organization declares the global outbreak of COVID-
19 to be a pandemic.
- 16 September 2020: Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of
Drugs for Use in Relation to COVID-19.
- 1 October 2020 : Initial submission from AstraZeneca is received by Health Canada.
- 9 October 2020 : Initial submission from Pfizer is received by Health Canada.
- 12 October 2020 : Initial submission from Moderna is received by Health Canada.
- 30 November 2020 : Initial submission from Johnson & Johnson is received by Health
Canada.
- 9 December 2020 : The Pfizer vaccine for people aged 16 years and older is authorized
by Health Canada.
- 23 December 2020 : The Moderna vaccine for people aged 18 years andolder is
authorized by Health Canada.
- 29 January 2021 : Initial submission from Novavax is received by Health Canada.
- 26 February 2021 : The AstraZeneca vaccine for people aged 18 years and older is
authorized by Health Canada. The AstraZeneca vaccine for people aged 18 years and
older that is manufactured by the Serum Institute of India is authorized by Health
Canada. (This authorization expired on 16 September 2021.)
- 5 March 2021 : The Johnson & Johnson vaccine for people aged 18 years and older is
authorized by Health Canada.
- 18 March 2021 : The Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations is to include
the COVID-19 expedited process in the Food and Drug Regulations.
- 19 April 2021 : Initial submission from Medicago is received by Health Canada.
- 5 May 2021 : The Pfizer vaccine for people aged 12 years and older is authorized by
Health Canada.
- 27 August 2021 : The Moderna vaccine for people aged 12 years and older is authorized
by Health Canada.
- 19 November 2021 : The Pfizer vaccine for people aged 5 years and older is authorized
by Health Canada.
- 17 February 2022 : The Novavax vaccine for people aged 18 years and older is
authorized by Health Canada.
- 24 February 2022 : The Medicago vaccine for people aged 18 years to 64 years is
authorized by Health Canada.
- 17 March 2022: The Moderna vaccine for people aged 6 years to 11 years is authorized
by Health Canada.
Allocation and distribution of vaccines
Context
9.34 Implementing an immunization program across Canada that ensured equitable
allocation and distribution3 and that prioritized high-risk populations required collaboration and
planning. Canada’s
immunization response involved collaboration between the Government of Canada and other
parties, including provinces, territories, representatives from Indigenous groups, logistical
experts, and
vaccine companies.
9.35 Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization is made up of experts from
across Canada in the fields of immunization, infectious diseases, epidemiology, and other fields
and has
provided guidance on the use of vaccines since 1964. In relation to COVID-19 vaccines, the
committee provided guidance to the Public Health Agency of Canada on the prioritization of
populations for early immunization. The committee also made recommendations to support
decision making for COVID-19 immunization at the provincial and territorial levels. The
committee considers specific factors when providing advice, such as economics, ethics, equity,
feasibility, and acceptability. It identified the following high-risk populations:
• those at high risk of severe illness and death from COVID-19
• those most likely to transmit COVID-19 to those at high risk of severe illness and death
from COVID-19 and workers essential to maintaining the COVID-19 response
• those contributing to the maintenance of other essential services for the functioning of
society
• those whose living or working conditions put them at elevated risk of infection and
those for which infection could have disproportionate consequences, including Indigenous
communities
9.36 During the pandemic, for the first time, the Public Health Agency of Canada assumed the
lead role of managing the distribution of vaccines from companies to the provinces and
territories. This included managing logistical requirements for the different vaccines, including
availability, timing, warehousing, packaging, shipping, and cold chain maintenance (that is,
maintaining the vaccines at specific temperatures during storage and shipping).
3 Equitable allocation anddistribution—The principle that the overall basis for equitable
allocation and distribution of vaccines is on a per capita basis. This should be informed by
considering the number of individuals in high-risk populations identified by Canada’s National
Advisory Committee on Immunization.
Source: Adapted from Public Health Agency of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada equitably allocated vaccine doses to provinces and
territories and distributed requested doses in a timely way
What we found
9.37 Wefound that the Public Health Agency of Canada equitably allocated COVID-19 vaccine
doses to the provinces and territories while prioritizing high-risk populations. We also found that
the agency delivered requested doses to provinces and territories in a timely way.
9.38 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the
following topics:
• Equitable allocation of vaccine doses
• Timely distribution to provinces and territories
Why this finding matters
9.39 This finding matters because it was crucial that provinces and territories receive COVID-
19 vaccine doses in order to immunize their populations as quickly as possible. In addition,
prioritizing the allocation of vaccines to high-risk populations is essential to reduce severe
outcomes, such as hospitalizations and deaths.
Analysis to support this finding
Equitable allocation of vaccine doses
9.40 We found that the Public Health Agency of Canada equitably allocated vaccine doses to
the provinces and territories, as the federal, provincial, and territorial governments had agreed
in December 2020. The equitable allocation agreement required that vaccines be allocated on a
per capita basis, taking into consideration the size of high-risk populations identified by the
National Advisory Committee on Immunization. Provinces and territories requested shipments
of vaccine doses from the amounts that they were allocated. We found that the agency
delivered all vaccine doses requested by the provinces
and territories (Exhibit 9.2). In addition, we found that federal, provincial, territorial, and
Indigenous representatives participated in working groups, advisory committees, and steering
committees throughout the audit period, which allowed for the consideration of different views
before decisions were reached.
Exhibit 9.2—At the end of May 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada had delivered all the
vaccine doses requested by provinces and territories
Provincial or territorial recipient
- Ontario
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 15,008
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 36,836
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):36,688
- Quebec
o Provincial or territorialpopulation size (in thousands):8,653
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 23,148
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):22,703
- British Columbia
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands):5,287
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 13,404
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):12,619
- Alberta
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 4,501
o Totalcumulative doses allocated (in thousands):11,697
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):11,521
- Manitoba
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 1,393
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands):1,775
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):3,748
- Saskatchewan
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 1,186
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 3,160
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):3,089
- Nova Scotia
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 1,007
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 2,624
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):2,491
- New Brunswick
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 800
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands):2,181
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):2,175
- Newfoundland and Labrador
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 523
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 1,498
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):1,484
- Prince Edward Island
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 168
o Total cumulativedoses allocated (in thousands):440
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):425
- Northwest Territories
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 46
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands):119
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):116
- Yukon
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 43
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 107
o Total doses requestedby the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):103
- Nunavut
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 40
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 109
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):108
- Total
o Provincial or territorial population size (in thousands): 38,655
o Total cumulative doses allocated (in thousands): 99,098
o Total doses requested by the province or territory and delivered by the agency
(in thousands):97,270
* In addition, 25,802,000 doses were brought into Canada but were held in federal
inventory until needed. Source: Public Health Agency of Canada and Statistics Canada
9.41 We found that, although high-risk populations were considered in vaccine allocation, the
agency relied on the National Advisory Committee on Immunization’s prioritization of
populations. The agency did not conduct its own gender-based analysis plus4 as required in its
internal policy and to meet federal government commitments.
4 Gender-based analysis plus—An analytical process that provides a rigorous method for
the assessment of systemic inequalities, as well as a means to assess how diverse groups of
women, men,and gender-diverse people may experience policies, programs, and initiatives. The
“plus” acknowledges that gender-based analysis goes beyond biological (sex) and socio-cultural
(gender) differences and considers many other identity factors, such as race, ethnicity, religion,
age, and mental or physical ability.
Source: Adapted from Women and Gender Equality Canada
Timely distribution to provinces and territories
9.42 We found that the Public Health Agency of Canada distributed
the requested number of COVID-19 vaccine doses to provinces
and territories in a timely way. From the first vaccine delivery in December 2020 to the end of
May 2022, the vaccines were delivered on average 2 days after a province or territory requested
an order. In our view, deliveries were timely, given the range of logistical requirements faced by
the agency to successfully deliver the vaccines.
9.43 We also noted instances in which the agency responded quickly when provinces and
territories faced problems with vaccine deliveries. For example, when vaccines arrived damaged,
the agency arranged for another shipment. In addition, when provinces and territories
requested doses above their respective allocations to meet emerging needs, we noted instances
in which the agency liaised with the other provinces and territories when needed to help find
the required doses.
9.44 The agency contracted logistics providers FedEx Express Canada Corporation and
Innomar Strategies Inc. for vaccine delivery and storage. This contributed to the agency’s ability
to deliver vaccine doses in a timely way. These providers were primarily responsible for
providing centralized and safe warehousing and timely distribution of COVID-19 vaccines to
provinces and territories (including to remote and isolated communities).
The Public Health Agency of Canada was unsuccessful in its efforts to minimize vaccine wastage
What we found
9.45 We found that the Public Health Agency of Canada was unsuccessful in its efforts to
minimize vaccine wastage. The agency had a surplus of vaccine doses resulting from the
obligation to buy doses as specified in advance purchase agreements and the purchase of
optional doses. We also found that minimizing wastage was affected by the agency’s delay in
implementing important functionalities of VaccineConnect, the information technology system
intended to support planning and managing the COVID-19 vaccines and decision making around
vaccine wastage.
9.46 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the
following topics:
• Unsuccessfulefforts to minimize vaccine wastage
• Delays in implementing a vaccine management information technology system
Why this finding matters
9.47 This finding matters because vaccine wastage results in a financial cost to Canadians.
Context
9.48 When advance purchase agreements were signed with
the 7 vaccine companies starting in July 2020, it was unknown which vaccines would be
approved for use in Canada or when vaccines would be available for distribution. Based on the
market realities at the time, theseagreements contained binding requirements to purchase a
specific number of doses, and options were included to buy additional doses. The agreements
ranged from 20 to 76 million total doses. By signing several advance purchase agreements, there
were more chances to obtain the sufficient number of vaccines for Canada’s needs, but there
was also the possibility that, should all vaccines receive Health Canada’s authorization, Canada
would have a surplus of vaccine doses.
9.49 In June 2021, the federal government publicly committed to donating doses to other
countries that needed vaccines. Other countries with a surplus of vaccines had also committed
to making donations.
9.50 Vaccines have expiry dates that need to be considered when allocating, distributing, and
donating doses. For example, it is not possible to donate vaccine doses when their expiry dates
have been extended because the labels would not show these extensions.
Wastage can happen for many reasons. For example, wastage can occur when surplus doses
expire or when there is ineffective
temperature control. Addressing supply management problems requires collaboration between
different federal organizations and stakeholders, including the Public Health Agency of Canada,
Public Services and Procurement Canada, and in the case of international donations, Global
Affairs Canada.
Analysis to support this finding
Unsuccessful efforts to minimize vaccine wastage
9.51 The Public Health Agency of Canada knew that the potential existed for the advance
purchase agreements to result in excess doses and identified this as a risk in summer 2020. To
mitigate the risk, the agency expected to donate excess doses to other countries and to work
with vaccine companies to manage the vaccine supply.
9.52 As at 31 May 2022, 6of 7 potential vaccines had been authorized for use in Canada,
resulting in an oversupply of vaccine doses. With each authorized vaccine came an obligation to
purchase a specific quantity of doses and, for all but 1 agreement, options to purchase
additional doses.
9.53 We found that the agency purchased optional doses from Pfizer and Moderna, further
contributing to the oversupply. This led to vaccine wastage as some of the doses expired before
they could be used or donated. Officials explained that, because of the evolving nature of the
pandemic, there was a need to keep buying optional doses, to expand coverage, to accelerate
deliveries, and to address waning immunity and changes in vaccine administration guidelines,
such as shortened booster intervals andthe National Advisory Committee on Immunization
advice recommending the use of a certain vaccine type.
9.54 There were about 169 million vaccine doses paid for from December 2020 to the end of
May 2022. Of those, about 124.9 million vaccine doses were delivered to Canada. The agency
reported that the majority of these were administered to individuals in Canada. There were
close to 32.5 million doses in federal, provincial, and territorial inventories. By the end of our
audit period, the majority of these remaining doses still had a shelf life and could be used in
booster campaigns or donated; however, most will expire by the end of 2022 if unused (Exhibit
9.3). We estimated that the 32.5 million doses in inventory at the end of May 2022 were worth
about $1billion using the average cost per dose we estimated using publicly available and
unclassified information (see paragraph 9.26).
Exhibit 9.3—Most unused doses in Canada will expire by the end of 2022
About 169 million doses were paid for betweenDecember 2020 and May 2022*
- 32.5 million doses in inventory
o 27.9 doses in federal, provincial, and territorial inventories (majority of doses
will expire by end of 2022)
o 4.6 million doses with unknown status (including those expired)
- 1.5 million doses tracked federally as wasted for various reasons(expired, damaged, and
so on)
- 84.1 doses in arms
- 50.6 million doses deemed surplus
o 13.6 million doses expired waiting for donation
o 21.7 million doses offered by Canada and waiting for donation (will count
towardCanada’s wastage if not distributed)
o 15.3 million doses donated by Canada
Does not include those doses Canada has committed to purchase for delivery up to and
including the 2023–24 fiscal year
Source: Public Health Agency of Canada
9.55 Furthermore, we found that the agency was not able to properly track vaccine surplus
and wastage once vaccines were delivered to
the provinces and territories. A lack of data-sharing agreements with provinces and territories
(see paragraph 9.72) affected the agency’s capacity to gather information on the inventory,
wastage, and expiry of COVID-19 vaccine doses. This meant that the agency relied on voluntary
reporting by the provinces and territories. Although some provinces and territories consistently
reported to the agency, the agency was unable to obtain complete data from most. This meant
that the status of these doses was unknown and reduced the agency’s ability to predict supply
needs and plan for donations.
3. Good health and well-being
Ensure healthy lives and promote well-being for all at all ages
Source: United Nations
9.56 International vaccine donations support Goal 3 of the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goals, which includes “vaccines for all” as part of one of its targets. The
Government of Canada committed to donating the equivalent of 200 million COVID-19 vaccine
doses internationally by the end of 2022. This number includes 50.6 million doses that the
agency deemed surplus. We found that as at 31 May 2022, only 15.3 million of these 50.6
million doses had been donated. We also found that, despite a commitment to donate doses
with as much shelf life left as possible (ideally 14 to 16 weeks), other countries accepted
multiple donations that left them only from 4 to 8 weeks to administer the vaccines before they
expired. Officials told us that there are challenges with donations that are outside of Canada’s
control, including the willingness of other countries to accept donations offered. Furthermore,
many countries are now tryingto donate their surplus doses, resulting in a slowdown in demand
for donations.
9.57 Recommendation. To minimize further wastage, the Public Health Agency of Canada
should draw on the lessons learned from its management of the COVID-19 vaccine supply and
work with other implicated federal organizations and stakeholders to adjust its management of
COVID-19 vaccine surpluses.
The agency’s response. Agreed.
See Recommendations and Responses at the end of this report for detailed responses.
Delays in implementing a vaccine management information technology system
9.58 In our 2021 audit of pandemic preparedness, surveillance, and border control measures,
we identified long-standing shortcomings regarding the agency’s information technology
infrastructure used for the storage, processing, and analysis of health surveillance data from
provinces and territories. For more than 10 years before the COVID-19 pandemic, the agency
identified gaps in its existing infrastructure but had not implemented solutions to improve it.
9.59 Given the infrastructure gap, during the pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada
needed to rapidly put in place a system
to support vaccine management. In January 2021, Deloitte Inc. was contracted to develop a
national vaccine managementinformation technology system (now called VaccineConnect).
Using data from the agency, provinces, and territories, the system was expected to provide
timely information on vaccine distribution, coverage, and safety. Some capabilities were to be in
place by February 2021 to support order processing, supply chain visibility, inventory tracking,
and vaccine coverage tracking.
9.60 We found that, although VaccineConnect was partially functional in June 2021, the
agency delayed the development of key system capabilities that would have helped with
decision making on wastage (for example, tracking of expiry dates). The contract’s total
estimated cost was $59.1 million. We noted that $37.4 million had been spent on
VaccineConnect by the end of the audit period.
9.61 Key capabilities of the system were delayed by the agency and not ready in February
2021 as planned. We found that the agency developed workaround procedures and manually
tracked expiry dates, wastage, and all the data from the start of the vaccinationrollout to
June 2021 in spreadsheets. We found that, although some components of the system were
functional in June 2021, the agency and the provinces and territories were not using them all,
and the agency was continuing to track data using spreadsheets.
9.62 We also found that the agency had limited procedures in place to verify data quality for
both its manual tracking and for VaccineConnect.
This resulted in gaps in the inventory management data provided and a risk of error. For
example, during our review of inventory data, we found that 150,000 doses appeared to have
been delivered after they had expired, when in fact, they had not yet expired. Despite the
agency’s awareness of the inaccurate expiry date information since October 2021,
VaccineConnect was manually updated with the accurate information only close to the end of
our audit period. Without the proper verification procedures in place, the agency cannot be
assured that the inventory management data being used for future procurement and donation
decision making is accurate.
9.63 Recommendation. The Public Health Agency of Canada should complete implementing
VaccineConnect. This should include data quality procedures.
The agency’s response. Agreed.
See Recommendations and Responses at the end of this report for detailed responses.
Surveillance of vaccines
Despite data-sharing issues, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada responded
to vaccine surveillance data
What we found
9.64 We found that the Public Health Agency ofCanada and Health Canada collected and
analyzed COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data to monitor the safety, coverage, and effectiveness
of the vaccines. We found that the 2 organizations took actions to respond to the 3 confirmed
vaccine safety signals5 based on adverse events reported in Canada, including issuing public
information and requiring vaccine label changes.
However, we also found that some of the problems regarding sharing
of surveillance data that we had raised in 4 previous audits remained. The data-sharing
problems affected the agency’s ability to collect disaggregated vaccine coverage data on
population characteristics from provinces and territories. These problems also affected the
agency’s ability to share information with Health Canada, the vaccine companies, and the World
Health Organization.
9.65 The analysis supporting this finding discusses the
following topics:
• Response to information on vaccine safety
• Data-sharing problems remain
Why this finding matters
9.66 This finding matters because vaccine surveillance data provides information to the
Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada on public health and regulatory actions
necessary for ensuring the continued safe and effective use of COVID-19 vaccines. Responding
to this information in a timely way can raise the awareness of potential risks and help prevent
serious adverse events from affecting more people.
Context
9.67 Health surveillance is the continuing and systematic collection, analysis, and
dissemination of informationto enable decision making and action to protect the health of
populations. The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada obtain and use surveillance
information from several sources, including other countries. International health surveillance is
particularly important if vaccine use starts earlier in other countries or if rare adverse events
might be detected only in countries with a larger population than Canada’s.
5 Vaccine safety signal—Any information that arises from one or multiple sources and
suggests a new potentially causal association, or a new aspect of a known adverse reaction
(increased severity and/or increased frequency), between immunization and an event or set of
related events, and is judged to be of sufficient concern to justifyverification and remedial
action if appropriate.
Source: Canadian Immunization Guide, Public Health Agency of Canada
9.68 There are 3 areas of responsibility regarding COVID-19 vaccine surveillance: safety,
coverage, and effectiveness. The Public HealthAgency of Canada and Health Canada have
distinct and complementary roles for monitoring safety and effectiveness. The agency is
responsible for monitoring coverage.
9.69 Both the agency and the department had surveillance systems in place to monitor the
safety of all vaccines approved for use in Canada prior to the pandemic, and these systems were
used for COVID-19 vaccine surveillance. Provinces and territories voluntarily submit reports of
adverse events following immunization6 to the agency’s Canadian Adverse Events Following
Immunization Surveillance System. Reports are also submitted to the department’s Canada
Vigilance Program, primarily by vaccine companies, which are required to continue to carry out
safety monitoring once vaccines have been introduced for use in Canada. Health professionals
and consumers can also submit information voluntarily to the program. Adverse events are
monitored and analyzed by the agency and the department so that vaccines remain safe and
that appropriate actions are takenwhen a vaccine safety signal is identified.
Analysis to support this finding
Response to information on vaccine safety
9.70 We found that the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada monitored the
safety and effectiveness of COVID-19vaccines by obtaining and analyzing surveillance data,
including post-market studies, safety reports, and adverse events following immunization
reported internationally and domestically. Since the beginning of the COVID-19 mass vaccination
campaign in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada confirmed 3
vaccine safety signals based on adverse events reported in Canada: thrombosis
with thrombocytopenia syndrome, myocarditis and pericarditis, and Guillain-Barré Syndrome.
These safety signals were initially detected internationally.
6 Adverse event following immunization—Any untoward medical occurrence that follows
immunization and that does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the usage of the
vaccine. The adverse event may beany unfavourable or unintended sign, abnormal laboratory
finding, symptom, or disease.
Source: Canadian Immunization Guide, Public Health Agency of Canada
9.71 We found that following the international detection of these signals, Health Canada
completedinitial safety assessments for each of the 3 confirmed signals in an average of
approximately 14 days, which is faster than its non-pandemic performance target of 130 days.
We also found that
• as part of its response to these safety signals, the Public Health Agency of Canada and
Health Canada issued public information to inform health-care providers and the population at
large
• after advising the relevant vaccine companies to revise their vaccine labels, Health
Canada completed its review of the revisions submitted by the vaccine companies faster than
the non-pandemic service standard (from 165 days to an average of approximately 7 days for
each of the 3 confirmed signals)
• the National Advisory Committee on Immunization issued recommendations for
provinces and territories about the use of the implicated vaccines
Timely response by the agency and the department to these confirmed safety signals was
necessary to inform health-care professionals and Canadians of potential serious adverse events
and to support informed decision making around the safe use of COVID-19 vaccines.
Data-sharing problems remain
9.72 We found that some of the problems regarding the sharing of surveillance data that had
been raised in several previous audits
remained. We raised issues in 1999, 2002, and 2008 and, most recently, in the 2021 audit of
pandemic preparedness, surveillance, and border control measures. In the 2021 audit, we
reported that the agency did not have regulations for the collection, use, and disclosure of
public health information and that it had not finalized with its provincial and territorial partners
which elements of health information should be provided, to whom, and in what format. Also in
the 2021 audit, we found that supporting information technology infrastructure had not been
developed. In the current audit, we found that those long-standing issues affected the
effectiveness of the Public Health Agency of Canada’s sharing of detailed case-level safety
surveillance data with Health Canada, as well as withthe World Health Organization and vaccine
companies. These issues also affected the agency’s ability to collect disaggregated vaccine
coverage data on population characteristics (for example, ethnicity).
9.73 The Public Health Agency of Canada and HealthCanada had different surveillance
systems for monitoring vaccine safety already in place and used them to obtain and analyze
surveillance data on COVID-19 vaccines. However, we found that the agency could
share information received from provinces and territories through the Canadian Adverse Events
Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS) with others only when provinces and
territories provided specific consent to do so. In early April 2021, the agency requested
permission from provinces and territories to make specific CAEFISS data elements publicly
available to all partners, including Health Canada, the World Health Organization, and vaccine
companies, to enhance timely safety signal detection. Permission was not received from all
provinces andterritories, with some citing privacy concerns.
In addition, in July 2021, Health Canada sent a request to the agency to have access to CAEFISS
to “facilitate regulatory review and decision making based on comprehensive and up-to-date
safety information” for COVID-19 vaccines. By the end of our audit period, the agency had not
received permission from provinces and territories to provide Health Canada access to CAEFISS.
9.74 We also noted that, according to the agency, Canada is the only G7 country that does
not follow World Health Organization guidance that countries share with the organization
detailed case-level data on COVID-19 adverse events following immunization. The agency shared
summary-level data with the organization.
9.75 In addition, Health Canada requires vaccine companies to carry out safety monitoring
once vaccines have been authorized for use. Companies cannot entirely fulfill this requirement
when they do not have access to the necessary data on adverse events. We found that in 2
separate instances in 2021, 2 vaccine companies learned of Canadian reports of adverse events
following immunization through the media and subsequently requested the underlying data
from the agency on an urgent basis. The Public Health Agency of Canada had to seek provincial
and territorial consent to provide the data. We found that in both cases, it took approximately 3
months to obtain permission and to provide all of the information to the vaccine companies.
9.76 The authorization of a Canadian COVID-19 vaccine, and the government’s renewed
support to manufacture novel vaccines domestically, which increases the likelihood of other
vaccines being authorized in Canada first, may reduce the Public Health Agency of Canada’s and
Health Canada’s ability to leverage international sources for vaccine surveillance information.
This also increases the importance of Canada sharing pertinent surveillance information
domestically and with its international partners.
9.77 We found that, to monitor coverage, the agency establishedthe Canadian COVID-19
Vaccination Coverage Surveillance System at the start of the pandemic. The agency initially
manually compiled data submitted voluntarily by provinces and territories, but by June 2021,
it was processing this data electronically. However, our review of the data showed that some
population characteristics, such as ethnicity or Indigenous status, were not included, because
provinces and territories do not always collect or share that information. In our view, without
this type of disaggregated data, the agency could have less information to target programs or
communications to groups that may be at higher risk.
9.78 Since October 2020, the Public Health Agency of Canada
and Health Canada have led work with partners, including provinces, territories, and Indigenous
organizations, on the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. The strategy’s aim is to advance
efforts to improve health data collection, sharing, and usage. In a 2021 report, the Chief Public
Health Officer of Canada noted that the strategy was not expected to be implemented prior to
2030 and encouraged the acceleration of its implementation.
9.79 Recommendation. Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to
quality data among health partners, the Public HealthAgency of Canada and Health Canada
should expedite their work with provinces and territories to implement the Pan-Canadian Health
Data Strategy.
Response of each entity. Agreed.
See Recommendations and Responses at the end of this report for detailed responses.
9.80 Recommendation. The Public Health Agency of Canada, in collaboration with Health
Canada and the provinces and territories, should resolve barriers to
• better share vaccine surveillance information among themselves
• provide access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance
System to Health Canada
• provide surveillance data, including case-level details as needed, to the World Health
Organization and vaccine companies in a timely manner
The agency’s response. Agreed.
See Recommendations and Responses at the end of this report for detailed responses.
Conclusion
9.81 We concluded that Public Services and Procurement Canada provided efficient
procurement support and secured a sufficient number of COVID-19 vaccine dosesto vaccinate
Canada’s population.
9.82 We also concluded that the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
efficiently provided access to COVID-19 vaccines. Health Canada expedited its regulatory
process to authorize the vaccines, and the Public Health Agency of Canada distributed vaccine
doses to the provinces and territories in a timely manner. However, the agency was
unsuccessful in minimizing vaccine wastage.
9.83 Lastly, we concluded that the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada were
timely in responding to the 3 confirmed vaccine safety signals based on adverse events reported
in Canada. However, long-standing issues related to data sharing identified in past audits
affected the effectiveness of the agency’s sharing of detailed case-level safety surveillance data
with Health Canada, as well as with the World Health Organization and vaccine companies.
About the Audit
This independent assurance report was prepared by the Office of the Auditor General of Canada
on COVID-19 vaccines. Our responsibility was to provide objective information, advice, and
assurance to assist Parliament in its scrutiny of the government’s management of resources and
programs, and to conclude on whether the selected federal organizations involved in COVID-19
vaccines complied in all significant respects with the applicable criteria.
All work in this audit was performed to a reasonable level of assurance in accordance with the
Canadian Standard on Assurance Engagements (CSAE) 3001—Direct Engagements, set out by
the Chartered Professional Accountants of Canada (CPA Canada) in the CPA Canada Handbook—
Assurance.
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada applies the Canadian Standard on Quality Control 1
and, accordingly, maintains a comprehensive system of quality control, including documented
policies and procedures regarding compliance with ethical requirements, professional
standards, and applicable legal and regulatory requirements.
In conducting the audit work, we complied with the independence and other ethical
requirements of the relevant rules of professional conduct applicable to the practice of public
accounting in Canada, which are founded on fundamental principles of integrity, objectivity,
professional competence and due care, confidentiality, and professional behaviour.
In accordance with our regular audit process, we obtained the following from entity
management:
• confirmation of management’s responsibility for the subject under audit
• acknowledgement of the suitability of the criteria used in theaudit
• confirmation that all known information that has been requested, or that could affect
the findings or audit conclusion, has been provided
• confirmation that the audit report is factually accurate
Audit objective
The objective of this audit was to determine whether
• Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support to
secure vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada efficiently provided access to
COVID-19 vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada’s surveillance of the COVID-19
vaccine was effective and timely
Scope and approach
The audit scope included the 3 main federal organizations involved in implementing Canada’s
COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods—the Public Health Agency of Canada,
Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada.
We interviewed officials involved in the different areas under our scope. We also interviewed
officials at National Research Council Canada who were responsible for the COVID-19 Vaccine
Task Force secretariat to obtain documentation.
We did not audit the quality of science-based decisions or the scientific judgments in any of our
audit work.
With regard to our audit work on procurement, we examined the actions taken by Public
Services and Procurement Canada to procure a sufficient number of vaccines. We reviewed
documentation from the 7 advance purchase agreements. We are limited in what we can report
because of
the confidentiality clauses in the agreements. To estimate an average cost per dose, we used
unclassified information and information available in the Public Accounts of Canada. The Public
Accounts of Canada aggregated amounts disbursed for vaccines, including advance payments,
and therapeutics. The amount disbursed is an aggregate because there is no publicly available
information that discloses the exact amount paid to companies for COVID-19 vaccines. This is in
order to respect the confidentiality clauses in the agreements. The estimated average cost is a
reasonable approximation of the actual average cost per dose.
We reviewed key documentation prepared by Health Canada to authorize different COVID-19
vaccines to see if the steps in the expedited process had been followed. We also reviewed
documents related to the quality framework in place.
We examined documents and analyzed data related to
• the allocation and distribution of vaccines (from the Public Health Agency of Canada)
• vaccine surveillance (from the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada)
In this audit report, we noted that there were limited procedures in place at the Public Health
Agency of Canada to verify the quality of its inventory management data. Although we are
confident in our analyses and observations in this report, they were based on the agency’s data
that was available to us.
This audit contributed to Canada’s actions in relation to the United Nations’ Sustainable
Development Goal 3—Good health and well-being.
Criteria
We used the following criteria to determine whether
• Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support to
secure vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada efficiently provided access to
COVID-19 vaccines
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and HealthCanada’s surveillance of the COVID-19
vaccine was effective and timely
Criteria
- The Public Health Agency of Canada identifies, in an efficient manner and based on
scientific advice available at the time, the specifications required to procure COVID-19
vaccines.
o Sources
▪ Public Health Agency of Canada Act
▪ Department of Health Act
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Biological
Events,
▪ Pan-Canadian Public Health Network
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Ongoing
Management of COVID-19, second edition, Public Health Agency of
Canada
▪ Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods,
Public Health Agency of Canada
- Public Services and Procurement Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine procurement is conducted
in an efficient manner and with due diligence to meet the specifications identified by
the Public Health Agency of Canada
o Sources
▪ Department of Public Works and Government Services Act
▪ Supply Manual—Version 2020-3, Public Services
▪ andProcurement Canada
▪ Government Contracts Regulations
▪ Request for a National Security Exception for the procurement of goods
and services required by the Government of Canada to respond to
▪ the COVID-19 pandemic, Public Health Agency of Canada
▪ Contracting Policy Notice 2021-2: Continued Response to COVID-19
Limited Extension of Temporary Amendments to Contracting Limits,
Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
▪ Contracting Policy Notice 2020-1: Response to
▪ COVID-19, Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat
▪ Order-in-Council, PC Number 2020-0207
▪ Order-in-Council, PC Number 2020-0279
- Health Canada follows the authorization process established for the COVID-19 vaccines.
o Sources
▪ Food and Drugs Regulations
▪ Department of Health Act
▪ Interim Order Respecting theImportation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs
for Use in Relation to COVID-19, Minister of Health
▪ Interim Order Respecting Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs
Relating to COVID-19, Minister of Health
▪ Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (Interim Order
Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in
Relation to COVID-19)
▪ Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods,
Public Health Agency of Canada
- The Public Health Agency of Canada efficiently andequitably allocates COVID-19
vaccines.
o Sources
▪ Public Health Agency of Canada Act
▪ Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods,
Public Health Agency of Canada
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Biological
Events,
▪ Pan-Canadian Public Health Network
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Ongoing
Management of COVID-19, second edition, Public Health Agency of
Canada
▪ Guidance for Equitable Allocation of COVID-19 Vaccine, Public Health
Agency of Canada
▪ Transforming Our World: The 2030 Agenda for
▪ Sustainable Development, United Nations
- The Public Health Agency of Canada efficiently distributes COVID-19 vaccines.
o Sources
▪ Public Health Agency of Canada Act
▪ Canada’s COVID-19Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods,
Public Health Agency of Canada
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Biological
Events, Pan-Canadian Public Health Network
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Planfor Ongoing
Management of COVID-19, second edition, Public Health Agency of
Canada
▪ Financial Administration Act
- The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada collect and analyze accurate and
timely COVID-19 vaccine surveillance data in order to monitor the safety, coverage, and
effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines and to take public health actions and regulatory
actions if required.
o Sources
▪ Public Health Agency of Canada Act
▪ Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs
for Use in Relation to COVID-19, Minister of Health
▪ Regulations Amending the Food and Drug Regulations (Interim Order
Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in
Relation to COVID-19)
▪ Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan: Saving Lives and Livelihoods,
Public Health Agency of Canada
▪ Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Ongoing
Management of COVID-19, second edition, Public Health Agency of
Canada
▪ Canadian Pandemic Influenza Preparedness: Planning Guidance for the
Health Sector, Pan-Canadian Public Health Network
Period covered by the audit
The audit covered the period from 1 January 2020 to 31 May 2022. This is the period to which
the audit conclusion applies. However, to gain a more complete understanding of the subject
matter of the audit, we also examined certain matters that preceded the start date of this
period.
Date of the report
We obtained sufficient and appropriate audit evidence on which to base our conclusion
on 29 September 2022, in Ottawa, Canada.
Audit team
This audit was completed by a multidisciplinary team from across the Office of the Auditor
General of Canada led by Susan Gomez, Principal. The principal has overall responsibility for
audit quality, including conducting the audit in accordance with professional standards,
applicable legal and regulatory requirements, and the office’s policies and system of quality
management.
Recommendations and Responses
In the following table, the paragraph number preceding therecommendation indicates the
location of the recommendation in the report.
Recommendation
- 9.57 To minimize further wastage, the Public Health Agency of Canada should draw on
the lessons learned from its management of the COVID-19 vaccine supply and work with
other implicated federal organizations and stakeholders to adjust its management of
COVID-19 vaccine surpluses.
o Response
▪ Agreed. From the onset of the pandemic the Government of Canada’s
primary objective has been to ensure that Canada has timely access to
the most effective vaccines to protect the health and safety of
Canadians. Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine supply plans have evolved
throughout the pandemic, informed by emerging scientific evidence,
timing of regulatory approvals, product availability, National Advisory
Committee on Immunization guidance, and federal/provincial/
territorial needs.
▪ The Public Health Agency of Canada will review lessons learned and
collaborate with other implicated departments and stakeholders to
optimize COVID-19 vaccine supply management and reduce COVID-19
vaccine surpluses and wastage throughout the duration of the
contracts.
▪ These continued efforts will include:
▪ Working with provinces, territories and federal partners on demand
planning and forecasting, based on evolving scientific evidence and
National Advisory Committee on Immunization recommendations, to
determine supply requirements for ongoing campaigns
▪ Working closely with Public Services and Procurement Canada and
vaccine suppliers to adjust contractual commitments and delivery
schedules, where possible
▪ Continuing to collaborate with Global Affairs Canada and COVAX to
donate surplus doses to support global health and vaccine equity
objectives, recognizing there is a limited international demand for
donated COVID-19 vaccines in a global market of oversupply
▪ The agency will also draw on the lessons learned from COVID-19 to help
inform vaccine supply planning for future pandemics (December 2024).
- 9.63 The Public Health Agency of Canada should complete implementing
VaccineConnect. This should include data quality procedures.
o Response
▪ Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working to
advance the implementation and data quality procedures of the three
modules of VaccineConnect; namely, the Intelligent SupplyChain, the
Immunization Information System and the Immunization Program
Management. The agency will continue to actively engage jurisdictional
partners on identification of service gaps and needs to support future
integration of the systems.
▪ Building on investments to date in the Intelligent Supply Chain module
of VaccineConnect, the agency will work closely with other federal
departments, as well as provincial and territorial partners to support
supply chain management and distribution of vaccines.
▪ The Immunization Information System will replace the Canadian
Adverse Events
▪ Following Immunization Surveillance System.
▪ The agency will test and validate the cloud Canadian Adverse Events
Following Immunization Surveillance System in order to prepare for the
anticipated minimum viable product launch in fall 2022.
▪ The development of the Immunization Program Management module is
complete, and it was leveraged by a number of jurisdictions during the
deployment of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
- 9.79 Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality data
among health partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada should
expedite their work with provinces and territories to implement the Pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy.
o Response
▪ The Public Health Agency of Canada’s response. Agreed. The Public
Health Agency of Canada created the Corporate Data and Surveillance
Branch in October 2020 to support its commitment to continue
improving health data collection, sharing and use as their response to
recommendation 8.66 in the 2021 Reports of the Auditor General of
Canada to the Parliament of Canada, Report 8—Pandemic
Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures.
▪ The agency and Health Canada have been working with provinces and
territories to co-develop the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. This
strategy will address the long-standing issues affecting Canada’s ability
to collect, share, access and use health data.
▪ Implementation will be guided by aligned policies and frameworks with
an integrated workplan. A review is planned for every three years. The
pace of implementation will respect individual jurisdictions’ capacity,
readiness, and seek opportunities to accelerate implementation
through collaboration.
▪ Health Canada’s response. Agreed. Health Canada will continue to
collaborate with the Public Health Agency of Canada to advance the
development and implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy, working with provinces and territories.
- 9.80 The Public Health Agency of Canada, in collaboration with Health Canada and the
provinces and territories, should resolve barriers to better share vaccine surveillance
information among themselves provide access to the Canadian Adverse Events
Following Immunization Surveillance System to Health Canada provide surveillance data,
including case-level details as needed, to the World Health Organization and vaccine
companies in a timely manner
o Response
▪ Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada understands that
information sharing is an important component of Canada’s vaccine
safety surveillance system, which is a collaboration between provinces
and territories, the agency, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers,
and will continue to advance better information sharing with its
partners.
▪ The agency is leading consultations with provincial and territorial
partners on a proposal to provide Health Canada with access to the
Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System
(CAEFISS). CAEFISS receives reports from all provincial and territorial
public health authorities and from some federal departments. Some
provinces and territories have put conditions on the access to and use
of the health information they provide to the agency.
▪ The agency will continue to share CAEFISSdata in aggregate form with
the World Health Organization on a regular schedule, and on an as-
needed basis with vaccine companies. The agency will engage with
provinces and territories in an effort to allow it to release more granular
data to the World Health Organization and vaccine companies, as
needed, while recognizing the importance of protecting patient
confidentiality, respecting privacy laws, and supporting accurate
interpretation of the data.
HEALTH CANADA MANAGEMENT RESPONSE
In response to the recommendations of the Report–Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines of the Auditor
General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada
Report Ref No. Para 77
OAG recommendation: Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality
data among health partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada should
expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy.
Departmental response: Agreed. Health Canada will continue to collaborate with the Public
Health Agency of Canada to advance the development and implementation of the pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy, working with provinces and territories.
HEALTH CANADA’s MANAGEMENT RESPONSE AND ACTION PLAN (MRAP)
In response to therecommendations of the Report-Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines of the Auditor
General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada
Report Ref No. Para 77
OAG recommendation: Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality
data amonghealth partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada should
expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy.
Departmental Response: Agreed. Health Canada will continue to collaborate withthe Public
Health Agency of Canada to advance the development and implementation of the pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy, working with provinces and territories.
Description of Final Expected Outcome/Result: The Strategy seeks to define common
approaches–in data standards, governance and policies, technologies, trust and literacy–to
enable pan-Canadian coordination of health data management and access, while recognizing
the need for flexibility to address jurisdictions’ unique circumstances, and the funding,
resources, and capacity to support this.
Expected Final Completion Date: The implementation of the Strategy will move at a pace that is
dependent on available funding, resources, and capacity across FPT governments.
Key Interim Milestones (Description/Dates):
- End of 2022:
o Infoway to complete a draft pan-Canadian interoperability roadmap, detailing
steps for confirmation and adoption of standards (working with CIHI, StatCan
and PTs).
- End of 2023:
o Ministers endorse the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy as a long-term vision
for better health data management guided by the Health Data Charter.
o Ministers affirm support for interoperability standards to enable data access
and exchange.
o Ministers agree to Common Aims for supporting jurisdictional approaches to
health data access and exchange, including through policy or legislative
approaches.
o FPT officials confirm governance, priorities and implementation plans.
PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA MANAGEMENT RESPONSE
In response to the recommendations ofthe Report–Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines of the Auditor
General of Canada to the Parliament of Canada
Report Ref. No. 55
- OAG Recommendation
o To reduce further wastage, the Public Health Agency of Canada should draw on
vaccine supply managementlessons learned and work with other implicated
departments and stakeholders to adjust its management of COVID-19 vaccine
surpluses.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. From the onset of the pandemic the Government of Canada’s primary
objective has been to ensurethat Canada has timely access to the most
effective vaccines to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Canada’s
COVID-19 vaccine supply plans have evolved throughout the pandemic,
informed by emerging scientific evidence, timing of regulatory approvals,
product availability, NACI guidance, and federal/provincial/territorial needs.
o The Public Health Agency of Canada will review lessons learned and collaborate
with other implicated departments and stakeholders to optimize COVID-19
vaccine supply management and reduce COVID-19 vaccine surpluses and
wastage throughout the duration of the contracts.
o These continued efforts will include:
o Working with provinces, territories and federal partners on demand planning
and forecasting, based on evolving scientific evidence and NACI
recommendations, to determine supply requirements for ongoing campaigns
o Working closely with Public Services and Procurement Canada and vaccine
suppliers to adjust contractual commitments and delivery schedules, where
possible.
o Continuing to collaborate with Global Affairs Canada and COVAX to donate
surplus doses to support global health and vaccine equity objectives,
recognising there is a limited international demand for donated COVID-19
vaccines in a global market of oversupply.
o The Agency will also draw on the lessons learned from COVID-19 to help inform
vaccine supply planning for future pandemics (December 2024).
Report Ref. No. 61
- OAG recommendation
o Public Health Agency of Canada should complete implementing
VaccineConnect. This should include the data quality procedures.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working to advance the
implementation and data quality procedures of the three modules of
VaccineConnnect; namely, the Intelligent Supply Chain (ISC), the Immunization
Information System (IIS) and the Immunization Program Management (IPM).
The Agency will continue to actively engage jurisdictional partners on
identification of service gaps and needs to support future integration of the
systems.
o Building on investments to date in the ISC module of VaccineConnect, the
Agency will work closely with other federal departments, as well as provincial
and territorial partners to support supply chain management and distribution of
vaccines.
o The Immunization Information System (IIS) will replace the Canadian Adverse
Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS).
o PHAC will test and validate the cloud CAEFISS system in order to prepare for the
anticipated minimum viable product launch in fall 2022.
o The development of the Immunization Program Management (IPM) module is
complete, and it was leveraged by a number of jurisdictions during the
deployment of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
Report Ref. No. 77
- OAG Recommendation
o Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality data
among health partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
should expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-
Canadian Health Data Strategy.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada created the Corporate Data and
Surveillance Branch in October 2020 to support its commitment to continue
improving health data collection, sharing and use as their response to
recommendation 8.66 in the 2021 Report 8 of the Auditor General of Canada.
o The Agency and Health Canada have been working with provinces and
territories to co-develop the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. This Strategy
will address the long-standing issues affecting Canada’s ability to collect, share,
access and use health data.
o Implementation will be guided by aligned policies and frameworks with an
integrated workplan. A review is planned for every three years. The pace of
implementation will respect individual jurisdictions’ capacity, readiness, and
seek opportunities to accelerate implementation through collaboration.
Report Ref. No. 78
- OAG Recommendation
o The Public Health Agency of Canada in collaboration with Health Canada and the
provinces and territories should resolve barriers to:
o Better share vaccine surveillance information among themselves
o Provide access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System for Health Canada
o Provide surveillance data, including case-level details as needed, to the World
Health Organisation and vaccine companies in a timely manner.
- Departmental Response
o Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada understands that information
sharing is an important component of Canada’s vaccine safety surveillance
system, which is a collaboration between provinces and territories (P/Ts), the
Agency, Health Canada (HC), and vaccine manufacturers, and will continue to
advance better information sharing with its partners.
o The Agency is leading consultations with provincial and territorial partners on a
proposal to provide Health Canada with access to the Canadian Adverse Events
Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS). CAEFISS receives reports
from all provincial and territorial public health authorities and from some
federal departments. Some Provinces and territories have put conditions on the
access to and use of the health information they provide to the Agency.
o The Agency will continue to share CAEFISS data in aggregate form with the
World Health Organization (WHO) on a regular schedule, and on an as-needed
basis with vaccine companies. The Agency will engage with provinces and
territories in an effort to allow it to release more granular data to the WHO and
vaccine companies, as needed, while recognizing the importance of protecting
patient confidentiality, respecting privacy laws, and supporting accurate
interpretation of the data.
PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA’S MANAGEMENT RESPONSE AND ACTION PLAN (MRAP)
In response to the recommendations of the Report -Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines of the Auditor
General of Canada tothe Parliament of Canada
Report Ref. No. Para 55
- OAG Recommendation
o To reduce further wastage, the Public Health Agency of Canada should draw on
vaccine supply management lessons learned and work with other implicated
departments and stakeholders to adjust its management of COVID-19 vaccine
surpluses.
- Departmental response
o Agreed. From the onset of the pandemic the Government of Canada’s primary
objective has been to ensure that Canada has timely access to the most
effective vaccines to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Canada’s
COVID-19 vaccine supply plans haveevolved throughout the pandemic,
informed by emerging scientific evidence, timing of regulatory approvals,
product availability, NACI guidance, and federal/provincial/territorial needs.
o The Public Health Agency of Canada will review lessons learned andcollaborate
with other implicated departments and stakeholders to optimize COVID-19
vaccine supply management and reduce COVID-19 vaccine surpluses and
wastage throughout the duration of the contracts.
o These continued efforts will include:
o Working with provinces, territories and federal partners on demand planning
and forecasting, based on evolving scientific evidence and NACI
recommendations, to determine supply requirements for ongoing campaigns
o Working closely with Public Services and Procurement Canada and vaccine
suppliers to adjust contractual commitments and delivery schedules, where
possible.
o Continuing to collaborate with Global Affairs Canada and COVAX to donate
surplus doses to support global health and vaccine equity objectives,
recognising there is a limited international demand for donated COVID-19
vaccines in a global market of oversupply.
o The Agency will also draw on the lessons learned from COVID-19 to help inform
vaccine supply planning for future pandemics (December 2024).
- Description offinal expected outcome/result
o PHAC will leverage lessons learned and adjust its supply management strategy,
minimizing oversupply where possible while continuing to support PT
immunization needs.
- Expected final completion date
o Conclusion of COVID-19 pandemic vaccine agreements
- Key interim milestones (description/dates)
o Conduct survey of PTs on 2023 vaccine supply preferences (November 2022)
o Share PT survey results with Pan-Canadian Public Health Network stakeholders
and explore common strategies to managefuture supply (November-
December 2022)
o Work with PTs on demand planning and forecasting for COVID-19 vaccine supply
leveraging the various governance and advisory committees within the Pan-
Canadian Public Health Network (ongoing)
o Instruct Public Services and Procurement Canada, as contracting authority, to
work with vaccine suppliers to adjust contractual commitments and delivery
schedules, where possible (ongoing)
o Work with Global Affairs Canada and COVAX to make surplus doses available for
donation to support global health and vaccine equity objectives (ongoing)
o Continue to evaluate internal processes, identify lessons learned and make
adjustments to approach in order to optimize vaccine supply management
(ongoing)
o Draft lessons learned document on PHAC public health response, including
vaccine procurement (December 2024)
Report Ref. No. Para 61
- OAG Recommendation
o Public Health Agency of Canada should complete implementing
VaccineConnect. This should include the data quality procedures.
- Departmental response
o Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working to advance the
implementation and data quality procedures of the three modules of
VaccineConnect; namely, the Intelligent Supply Chain (ISC), the Immunization
InformationSystem (IIS) and the Immunization Program Management (IPM).
The Agency will continue to actively engage jurisdictional partners on
identification of service gaps and needs to support future integration of the
systems.
o Building on investments to date in theISC module of VaccineConnect, the
Agency will work closely with other federal departments, as well as provincial
and territorial partners to support supply chain management and distribution of
vaccines.
o The Immunization Information System (IIS) will replace the Canadian Adverse
Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS), upon completion
of acceptability testing.
o PHAC will test and validate the cloud CAEFISS system in order to prepare for the
anticipated minimum viable product launch in fall 2022.
o The development of the Immunization Program Management (IPM) module is
complete, and it was leveraged by a number of jurisdictions during the
deployment of the COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
- Description of final expected outcome/result
o an agile,modular digital platform supporting FPT and internal partners.
VaccineConnect can be scaled up and down to support business needs related
to medical countermeasures for COVID-19, and beyond, across HC and PHAC.
Data quality procedures are in place to optimise both user experience and
system functionality. VaccineConnect is owned by PHAC, and operated Health
Canada, as stipulated by Memorandum of Understanding.
- Expected final completion date
o While VaccineConnect will continue to evolve in order to address identified
business needs, implementation of the ISC, IIS, Cloud CAEFISS MVP and IPM
modules are expected to be completed in 2023 based on current
requirements.
o Any future VaccineConnect additions or features to support integration of the
systems will be contingent on future resourcing beyond March 2023.
- Key interim milestones (description/dates)
o The 2.0 iteration of the Intelligent Supply Chain (ISC) module was released in Fall
2022. The release has provided a streamlined user experience while providing
business owners with additional reporting capabilities. Additional prioritized
enhancements including wastage and inventory data collection, analysis, and
interpretation for management of current and future demand and supply will be
completed by March31, 2023.
o The Immunization Information System (IIS) is evolving to a renewed foundation
for vaccine data transfers of vaccine surveillance data between provinces,
territories and PHAC. Cloud CAEFISS, a component of the IIS, is advancing to
replace the end-of-life Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System (CAEFISS), with a planned Minimum Viable Product targeted
for early 2023 (Q4 2022/23). This release will include user-requested capabilities
for automated inter-jurisdictional interoperability and new vaccine surveillance
monitoring tools. Subsequent releases, MVP+2 and MVP+3, including additional
functionality are planned for Q1 2023 and Q2 2023 respectively, depending on
securing further funding.
o PHAC will complete parallel validation of the Cloud CAEFISS system and data
quality procedures to inform the decision regarding timing of full transition from
the existing CAEFISS to Cloud CAEFISS. (Completion date: November 30, 2023).
Report Ref. No. Para 77
- OAG recommendation
o Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality data
among health partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
should expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-
Canadian Health Data Strategy.
- Departmental response
o Agreed. The Public Health Agency of Canada created the Corporate Data and
Surveillance Branch in October 2020 to signal its commitment to continue
improving health data collection, sharing and use as their response to
recommendation 8.66 in the 2021 Report 8 of the Auditor General of Canada.
o The Agency and Health Canada have been working with provinces and
territories to co-develop the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy since December
2020. This Strategy will address the long-standing issues affecting Canada’s
ability to collect, share, access and use health data.
o Through the Strategy’s series of commitments and proposed actions for
improving Canada’s health data foundation, it will enable better health
outcomes and public health responses for individuals, communities, and
Canadian society through learning health systems.
o Implementation will take place over several years, guided by aligned policies
and frameworks with an integrated workplan. A review is planned for every
three years. The pace ofimplementation will respect individual jurisdictions’
capacity, readiness, and seek opportunities to accelerate implementation
through collaboration and re-use of expertise.
- Description of final expected outcome/result
o Endorsement by the federal, provincial, and territorial Ministers of Health
- Expected final completion date
o March 31 2023
- Key interim milestones (description/dates)
o Endorsement by the federal, provincial, and territorial Ministers of Health
o Date: March 31, 2023
Report Ref. No. Para 78
- OAGrecommendation
o The Public Health Agency of Canada in collaboration with Health Canada and the
provinces and territories should resolve barriers to:
o 1. Better share vaccine surveillance information among themselves
▪ Departmental response
• Agreed.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada understands that
information sharing is an important component of Canada’s
vaccine safety surveillance system, which is a collaboration
between provinces and territories (P/Ts), the Agency, Health
Canada (HC), and vaccinemanufacturers, and will continue to
advance better information sharing with its partners.
▪ Description of final expected outcome/result
• Governance documentation and processes for vaccine safety
data-and information-sharing, which were enhanced in
responseto the COVID-19 pandemic, will be strengthened
through formalization between PHAC and relevant partners.
• Expected outcome is consistent with PHAC’s mandate, and
focussed on facilitating collaboration and consensus among
partners.
▪ Expected final completion date
• November 30, 2023
▪ Key interim milestones (description/dates)
• Identified milestones are in alignment with PHAC’s mandate,
with a focus on facilitating collaboration and consensus with
partners to achieve the desired outcomes.
• 78.1.1 PHAC will lead areview and update of governance
documentation and work plan for the Vaccine Vigilance Working
Group, the F/P/T governance table for vaccine safety
monitoring and information sharing, to reflect lessons learned
from the safety surveillance of COVID-19 vaccines and the
identified needs of members. (November 30, 2023)
• 78.1.2 PHAC will collaborate with HC on review and update of
governance documentation for PHAC-HC vaccine safety
collaboration and information sharing, to reflect lessons learned
from the safetysurveillance of COVID-19 vaccines and the
identified needs of members. (November 30, 2023)
o 2. Provide access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System for Health Canada
▪ Departmental response
• The Agency is leading consultations with provincial and
territorial partners on a proposal to provide Health Canada with
access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System (CAEFISS). CAEFISS receives reports from all
provincial and territorial public health authorities and from
some federal departments. Some Provinces and territories have
put conditions on the access to and use of the health
information they provide to the Agency.
▪ Description of final expected outcome/result
• Barriers to Health Canada accessing CAEFISS will be identified
and action plan created to address them.
▪ Expected final completion date
• December 1, 2024
▪ Key interim milestones (description/dates)
• 78.2.1 PHAC will complete a series of P/T consultations first
initiated by the Agency on February 24, 2022 through a
presentation to Canadian Immunization Committee (CIC), on a
proposal to provide Health Canada staff access to CAEFISS and
obtain from each P/T written assent or an articulation of
persisting barriers toimplementation. (Completion date
December 1, 2023)
• P/T consent is required for any use of case-level data beyond
national public health monitoring.
• P/Ts have cited concerns related to risk of public disclosure of
personal information on AEFIs and lack of related patient
consent.
• 78.2.2 PHAC will continue to share CAEFISS data per the
parameters of the Letter of Agreement between Health Canada
and PHAC on CAEFISS data sharing, which was extended beyond
its October 2022 expiry date for an additional ten years.
(Ongoing)
• 78.2.3 PHAC will develop a new Letter of Agreement between
Health Canada and PHAC to include any new parameters
established during the engagement discussions with P/Ts
around access to CAEFISS for HC staff (Completion date: 12
months following the completion of 78.2.1 above)
• 78.2.4 Should parameters remain at status quo following these
discussions, PHAC will work with Health Canada to identify
avenues that may address any persisting barriers.
o 3. Provide surveillance data, including case-level details as needed, to the World
Health Organisation and vaccine companies in a timely manner
▪ Departmental response
• The Agency will continue to share CAEFISS data in aggregate
form with the World Health Organization (WHO) on a regular
schedule, and on anas-needed basis with vaccine companies.
The Agency will engage with provinces and territories in an
effort to allow it to release more granular data to the WHO and
vaccine companies, as needed, while recognizing the
importance of protecting patient confidentiality, respecting
privacy laws, and supporting accurate interpretation of the
data.
▪ Description of final expected outcome/result
• Canada is sharing vaccine pharmacovigilance data with the
WHO and with vaccine manufacturers, to the level of
granularity supported by Canadian F/P/T Immunization
programs.
▪ Expected final completion date
• March 31, 2024
▪ Key interim milestones (description/dates)
• 78.3.1 PHAC will continue to share aggregate vaccine
surveillance data with the WHO per their requests, and to
provide tailored presentations and/or updates to relevant
committees (e.g. the Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine
Safety). (Ongoing)
• 78.3.2 PHAC will review and update (as necessary) the process
for sharing of case-level data on identified safety issues with
vaccine manufacturers, inclusive of target
performance/timelines standards. (March 31, 2023).
• 78.3.3 PHAC will facilitate consultations with HC and F/P/T
immunization programs on options to share more granular
vaccine safety data with the WHO and vaccine manufacturers,
with a focus on addressing barriers identified by F/P/T
immunization programs. PHAC will report on the results of
consultations held. (Report date: March 31, 2024)
• 78.3.4 Should parameters remain at status quo following these
discussions, PHAC will work with Health Canada to identify
avenues that may address any persisting barriers.
Health Canada: Summary of Activities Undertaken and Planned in response to 2022 Audit of
COVID-19 Vaccines
Report Para 9.79
- OAG recommendation
o Given the urgency and importance of improving timely access to quality data
among health partners, the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
should expedite their work with provinces and territories to implement the Pan-
Canadian Health Data Strategy.
- MRAP commitment
o End of 2022:
▪ Infoway to complete a draft pan-Canadian interoperability roadmap,
detailing steps for confirmation and adoption of standards (working
with CIHI, StatCan and PTs).
o End of 2023:
▪ Ministers endorse the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy as a long-
term vision for better health data management guided by the Health
Data Charter.
▪ Ministers affirm support for interoperability standards to enable data
access and exchange.
▪ Ministers agree to Common Aims for supporting jurisdictional
approaches to health data access and exchange, including through
policy or legislative approaches.
▪ FPT officials confirm governance, priorities and implementation plans.
- Current status and next steps
o Actions Taken To Date:
▪ The Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy is currently being finalized by
Federal-Provincial-Territorial governments.
▪ Infoway’s interoperability roadmap has been drafted and engagement
with PT governments is underway. On track for publication in Spring
2023.
o Current Actions/ Next Steps:
▪ Confirm the elements of the proposed Health Data Charter (which will
help guide implementation of Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy)
▪ Finalize the governance structure for the Strategy
▪ Develop a collaborative work plan.
▪ Hold discussions with FPT governments to achieve jurisdictional
consensus on priorities to be advanced in the short-term.
Statement from Minister Duclos and Minister Jaczek on the Office of the Auditor General’s
performance audit on COVID-19 vaccines
December 6, 2022 | Ottawa, ON | Public Health Agency of Canada
The Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, and the Honourable Helena Jaczek,
Minister of Public Services and Procurement, issued the following statement today on the
tabling of the Auditor General of Canada’s performance audit of January 1, 2020, to May 31,
2022, on COVID-19 vaccines.
"We thank the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) for its performance audit on COVID-19
vaccines. We welcome the audit findings and its conclusion that the Government of Canada
procured sufficient supply, expedited regulatory authorization while maintaining due diligence
of the regular processes, provided timely distribution, and ensured equitable access to safe and
effective COVID-19 vaccines for everyone in Canada.
Canada’s response toCOVID-19 has involved significant collaboration between federal,
provincial, and territorial governments, and Indigenous partners. While Canada’s overall COVID-
19 immunization strategy has been a success, with modelling suggesting that public health
measures without vaccination could have seen up to 16.5 million cases, 1.2 million
hospitalizations, and nearly 500,000 deaths, improvements can and will be made to ensure
continued success and future preparedness.
To address the recommendations made in the audit, Canada is continuing steps to reduce its
COVID-19 vaccine surplus. In addition to working with provincial and territorial partners to
ensure procurement and allocation strategies align with their requirements and demand
planning, we are also continuing to make surplus vaccine doses available to other countries for
donation. To support global access to COVID-19 vaccines, Canada is actively working bilaterally
and multilaterally with its partners to place vaccine donations with countries experiencing a high
burden of disease and low vaccination coverage.
To date, Canada, in consultation with provinces and territories, has donated the equivalent of
more than 140 million doses to other countries. At the same time, the Government of Canada
will continue to make sure there is a sufficient supply of COVID-19 vaccine doses for people in
Canada, including new formulations and recommended booster doses.
Only vaccines that meet Health Canada’s safety, effectiveness and quality standards are
approved for use inCanada. Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada continue to
support and improve on Canada’s well-established and effective vaccine safety monitoring
systems. These systems currently engage healthcare professionals, vaccine manufacturers,
provincial and territorial health authorities, as well as Indigenous partners.
As recommended in the audit, we will engage with provincial and territorial counterparts to
seek further opportunities to enhance COVID-19 vaccine data sharing between federal,
provincial and territorial vaccine surveillance partners, and with vaccine manufacturers and the
World Health Organization (WHO).
To this end, we also strongly welcome the call to action by the OAG to expedite work to
complete the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, as well as other actions noted in the audit, to
ensure that provincial, and territorial governments share vaccine data with the federal
government in a timely fashion. Better information sharing will lead to better health outcomes
and enhance the safety of communities across the country.
As mentioned at the last Health Ministers’ Meeting, our government is fully committedto
advance the use of health data and digital health to improve the health services Canadians
receive. The COVID-19 pandemic revealed just how important it is to collect, share, and use
health data in a timely, responsible manner for informed decision making and the benefit of all.
By working together, governments in Canada can improve pandemic preparedness and
healthcare services for their populations using data-driven results.
The Government of Canada acknowledges the importance of this audit on COVID-19 vaccines.
Along with other audits, evaluations, and lessons learned from the pandemic, recommendations
from the Office of the Auditor General will inform future and current vaccine programs that
safeguard our health and protect the capacity of our healthcare systems.”
Quick Facts:
• The Office of the Auditor General's performance audit on COVID-19 vaccines covered
the period of January 1, 2020, to May 31, 2022. The Government of Canada will address
recommendations in this audit, including:
o Reviewinglessons learned and collaborating with other governments and stakeholders
in Canada to optimize COVID-19 vaccine supply management and further reduce surplus
throughout the duration of COVID-19 vaccine contracts.
o Working with provinces and territories to co-develop the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy. This Strategy will address the long-standing issues affecting Canada’s ability to collect,
share, access and use health data.
o Leading consultations with provincial and territorial partners to provide additional data
to the WHO and vaccine manufacturers, as needed, while protecting patient confidentiality and
privacy.
o Working with provinces and territories to further implement VaccineConnect IT systems
to enhance vaccine program administration and data sharing in Canada.
Media Lines
Office of the Auditor General Report on COVID-19 Vaccines
Issue Statement: On December 6, 2022, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) will publish its
audit on COVID-19 vaccines covering the period of January 1, 2020, to May 31, 2022. The
findings indicate that the procurement (PSPC), authorization (HC), allocation, and distribution
(PHAC) of vaccines was efficient. The OAG also found, however, that PHAC failed to manage
vaccine surplus to prevent wastage, based on an estimation that there are 32.5M unused doses
valued at $1B as of May 31, 2022. The OAG also concluded that PHAC and HC effectively
responded to vaccine safety surveillance data, but highlighted data-sharing issues between
federal-provincial-territorial governments and international partners that are recommended to
be addressed.
Key Messages:
• On December 6, 2022, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) published its audit on
COVID-19 vaccines. The OAG assessed the procurement, authorization, allocation, and
distribution, and surveillance of COVID-19 vaccines from January 1, 2022, to May 31, 2022.
• The OAG concluded that:
o Health Canada’s vaccine regulatory process was expedited, while at the same time
ensured the same level of diligence as the regular authorization process;
o Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC) successfully secured a sufficient supply
of COVID-19 vaccines for Canada;
o The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) equitably allocated and distributed COVID-
19 vaccines to provinces and territories in a timely manner;
o PHAC and Health Canada responded to vaccine safety surveillance data in a timely
manner, despite data-sharing issues between federal, provincial, and territorial governments.
• The successful procurement anddistribution of vaccines have contributed to the health
and well-being of people in Canada, allowing for widespread protection against severe COVID-19
outcomes and the safe re-opening of our economy and society.
• As of April 2022, based on a published study by PHAC, Canada’s collective efforts in
achieving high vaccine coverage and adhering to public health measures may have saved or
prevented up to an estimated:
o 760,000 lives,
o 1.85 million hospitalizations, and
o 30 million COVID-19 cases.
• Canada’s response to COVID-19 has involved significant collaboration between the
federal government, provinces, and territories. While Canada’s overall COVID-19 immunization
plan has been successful, further improvements can be made to ensure continued support for
the health and well-being of Canadians.
Vaccine surplus and supply
• Canada’s vaccine procurement was undertaken with the goal of protecting the health
and safety of Canadians at a time of considerable uncertainty as to whether any manufacturer
would ultimately produce safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines.
• The Government of Canada will continue working with provinces and territories to
reduce vaccine wastage, including continuing to make vaccine surplus available to other
countries for donation.
• Canada will continue to actively work multilaterally and bilaterally to place surplus
vaccine donations, including bivalent vaccines, recognizing that it is more difficult to donate
vaccine doses due to global oversupply and diminishing demand.
• Public Services and Procurement Canada will also continue to evolve its vaccine
procurement strategy based on the best scientific advice available. Work continues with
manufacturers to secure new vaccine formulations, including updated booster doses and
pediatric vaccines, as they become available and are approved by Health Canada.
• Ensuring the availability of vaccines in Canada continues to be a priority, as the future
epidemiology and evolution of COVID-19 remain uncertain. As COVID-19 continues to circulate,
it is important to stay up to date on vaccinations, as protection can decrease over time.
Vaccination continues to be effective against severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Vaccine surveillance
• Health Canada and PHAC havea robust, well-established, and effective vaccine safety
monitoring system that engages health care professionals, vaccine manufacturers, provincial
and territorial health authorities, and Indigenous partners.
• If a safety issue is confirmed, PHAC and Health Canada take appropriate action. This
includes issuing public information and updating vaccine label changes on expedited timelines.
As indicated in the audit, safety signals about very rare cases of adverse events following
immunization were effectively detected and managed in Canada.
• Long-standing collaborative relationships with provinces and territories enabled PHAC to
leverage pre-existing vaccine surveillance governance bodies to pull together unprecedented
surveillance data on vaccine safety. In combination with increased safety reporting by vaccine
companies to Health Canada and other international data, Canadian vaccine safety surveillance
data continues to be useful in informing public health guidance and regulatory action.
• The safety andeffectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines continue to be monitored in Canada.
Canada is committed to ongoing transparency and providing Canadians with the information
they need to make informed decisions.
• The Government of Canada will continue working with provincial, territorial, and
Indigenous partners to implement best practices and audit recommendations, including
opportunities to further enhance data-sharing across governments.
If pressed–vaccine surveillance data sharing
• PHAC understands that information sharing is an important component of Canada’s
vaccine safety surveillance system. It is a collaboration between provinces and territories, PHAC,
Health Canada and vaccine manufacturers. We will continue to advance better information
sharing with partners.
If Pressed–data sharing with international partners and vaccine manufacturers
• PHAC shares aggregate data on a monthly basis with the World Health Organization
(WHO) and information to support the work of the WHO Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine
Safety.
• Although the World Health Organization (WHO) has not articulated any concerns with
the existing arrangement, PHAC is supportive of enhancements to data-sharing with the WHO in
the interest of furthering global pharmacovigilance efforts.
• Health Canada has implemented enhanced safety monitoring for COVID-19 vaccines,
including the requirement for manufacturers to make regular submission of safety summary
reports.
• Through these measures from Health Canada, all vaccine manufacturers are required to
provide safety data from real-world use and the results from ongoing and planned studies
related to safety and effectiveness as they become available. PHAC has also shared case-level
data with vaccine manufacturers on safety issues identified inCanada.
• PHAC and Health Canada will continue to work with provinces and territories to identify
additional options to share more granular vaccine safety data with the WHO and vaccine
manufacturers.
If Pressed–CAEFISS data sharing
• Provinces and territories provide reports of adverse events following immunization
(AEFI) to PHAC through the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance
System (CAEFISS) to support national monitoring of trends and the identification and
assessment of potential safety signals.
• There is an expectation among provinces and territories that PHAC will safeguard the
data to ensure privacy of patient information, and this includes restrictions on sharing case-level
data with other parties.
• Over the course of the pandemic, aggregated national vaccine safety data was shared on
an ongoing basis between PHAC and Health Canada to ensure ongoing monitoring to protect the
health and safety of Canadians.
• PHAC is leading ongoing consultations, which began in February 2022 with provinces
and territories on a proposal to provide Health Canada access to the case-level data in CAEFISS,
submitted by provincial and territorial immunization programs to PHAC.
Questions and Answers:
Q1. Why did Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine procurementstrategy result in a surplus?
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada’s primary objective has been
to protect the health and safety of Canadians. This includes early procurement steps to ensure
timely access to safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines for the Canadian population. Decisions on
vaccine procurement were made at a time when global demand was high, and there was
uncertainty, over which, if any, vaccine candidates would ultimately be effective or available.
To help the Government make the necessary evidence‑based decisions in this uncertain
environment, the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force (VTF) was established in April 2020 as a
multidisciplinary group of external experts and industry leaders in the fields of vaccines and
immunology.
Guided by the advice of the VTF, Canada adopted a diversified vaccine strategy to secure access
to the most promising COVID-19 vaccine candidates. To ensure the best chance for success,
Canada built its vaccine portfolio through Advance Purchase Agreements (APAs) with seven
vaccine suppliers to mitigate risks surrounding product development and timely delivery.
This strategy proved successful. Canada was among the first countries to administer doses in
December 2020. Canada successfully secured a sufficient supply of COVID-19 vaccines for our
population. Health Canada expedited regulatory approvals while maintaining its high level of
due diligence, and vaccines were allocated and distributed to provinces and territories in a
timely and equitable manner with an initial focus on priority populations.
Q2. What is being done to minimize Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine surplus?
The Government of Canada will review lessons learned, and working with provinces and
territories, will continue efforts to optimize its COVID-19 vaccine supply management and
further reduce COVID-19 vaccine surpluses and wastage to help inform vaccine supply planning
for future pandemics. These continued efforts will include:
• Working with provinces, territories and federal partners on demand planning and
forecasting, based on evolving scientific evidence and NACI recommendations, to determine
supply requirements for future campaigns;
• Working closely with Public Services and Procurement Canada and vaccine suppliers to
adjust contractual commitments and delivery schedules, where possible;
• Ongoing collaboration with Global Affairs Canada and COVAX to donate surplus doses to
support global health and vaccine equity objectives, recognizing the surplus of doses available
globally anddeclining demand for donations; and
• Working with vaccine manufacturers, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) will
monitor vaccine shelf-life/expiry date extensions to maximize the use of doses delivered in
Canada.
Canada’s vaccine supplymanagement is complex and is continually impacted by an uncertain
disease trajectory, evolving public health advice, changes in global demand, and fluctuating
vaccine uptake and intentions. The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with
provincial, territorial, and indigenous partners to ensure vaccine supply aligns with program
requirements, the most recent scientific data, and expert advice.
Q3. What is Canada doing to address global vaccine equity, given Canada’s vaccine surplus?
The Government of Canada recognizes the importance of a global response to the COVID-19
pandemic and supports efforts to promote global access to vaccines. Canada has committed to
donating the equivalent of at least 200 million doses to the COVAX Facility, for distribution to
low and middle-income countries, by the end of 2022.
COVAX is a global vaccine-sharing initiative jointly co-ordinated by the World Health
Organization, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations, and Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance. Thegoal of COVAX is to accelerate the development and manufacture of COVID-19
vaccines, and to guarantee fair and equitable access for every country in the world.
Currently, global production and dose donations from high-income countries are exceeding
administration capacity and demand of low-and middle-income countries. Given the current
global imbalance in supply and demand, many countries are experiencing similar difficulties in
donating excess supply, and some wastage is inevitable.
Q4. How much vaccine wastage has there been?
Vaccines are a biological product, therefore have limited shelf life for use. Despite efforts of
supply management and good stewardship of goods, both in Canada and in other countries
globally, there will be wastage as doses expire before they are used in country or are eligible for
donation and must be disposed of in accordance with appropriate handling and storage
guidelines.
As of December 1, 2022, Canada has received 163.8M vaccine doses and over 116M doses have
beendistributed to provinces and territories. As of December 1, 2022, approximately 10.8M
doses held domestically in federal inventory have been disposed of or are awaiting disposal due
to expiry. This includes doses from Moderna (7.7M), Pfizer (27,834), andNovavax (3.1M).
In addition, Canada had approximately 13.6M AstraZeneca doses held at the manufacturer that
were purchased by Canada bilaterally and through COVAX. These doses expired at the end of
March, April and May and were disposed of. Canada made every effort to donate these vaccines
including a public announcement to offer 17.7M doses in July 2021 as soon as they were made
available by the manufacturer.
Due to limited demand for the vaccine and recipient country challenges with distribution and
absorption, of approximately 21.8M AstraZeneca doses offered to COVAX, only 8.2M were
donated, and 13.6M doses could not be used and expired. Canada continues to work with
COVAX to help address barriers to vaccination.
Q5. Based on performance audit onCOVID-19 vaccines, the average cost of a vaccine dose can
be calculated at approximately $30. Can the government confirm this price?
The Government of Canada is committed to transparency and accountability and has publicly
disclosed contracting information to the fullest extent possible that is permitted by contract and
law. However, the Government of Canada is prohibited from disclosing commercially sensitive
pricing information, as per the confidentiality agreements in place for each contract.
The figures presented by the Office of the Auditor General are general estimates based on a
limited amount of publicly available information. The Auditor General can provide additional
details on the methodology used to arrive at this calculation, and any limitations.
Q6. What is an Adverse Event Following Immunization (AEFI)?
Only vaccines that meet Health Canada’s safety, effectiveness and quality requirements are
approved for use in Canada. COVID-19 vaccines are tested during their development according
to international standards and then carefully reviewed by Health Canada. The benefits of COVID-
19 vaccines continue to outweigh the risks of the disease.
An adverse event following immunization (AEFI) is any untoward medical event following
immunization, though does not necessarily have a causal relationship with the use of a vaccine.
Adverse events following immunization commonly include mild side effects like soreness at the
site of injection or a fever, or more rare serious events, such as a severe allergic reaction.
Although adverse events may occur after being vaccinated with a COVID-19 vaccine, it is
important to note that they arenot necessarily related to the vaccine. It can be expected that
other unrelated medical events will occur by chance after immunization, particularly when
millions of people are being vaccinated.
Investigations are carried out to determine if a particular AEFI has a causal relationship to the
administration of a vaccine, which may result in adjustments in terms of public health guidance,
for example, and/or regulatory action like adding information to the product monograph.
Q7. How are AEFIs monitored inCanada for COVID-19 vaccines? Is the process working?
Health Canada and PHAC have a well-established and effective vaccine safety monitoring system
that engages health care professionals, vaccine manufacturers, provincial and territorial health
authorities, and Indigenous partners. Long-standing collaborative relationships with provincial
and territorial immunization programs enabled PHAC to leverage pre-existing vaccine
surveillance governance bodies to pull together unprecedented surveillance data on COVID-19
vaccine safety.
In combination with international data, Canadian vaccine safety surveillance data was useful in
informing public health guidance. As indicated in the audit on COVID-19 vaccines by the Office
of the Auditor General, safety signals about very rare cases of adverse events following
immunization were effectively reported in Canada. This includes issuing public information and
updating vaccine label changes on expedited timelines.
The safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines continues to be monitored in Canada. Health
Canada and PHAC remain committed to ensuring that Canadians and health care professionals
have access to the latest information to make informed decisions and are aware of symptoms,
including by publishing regular summaries of AEFIs, and online information.
Q8. What is PHAC doing specifically to resolve any barriers identified by the Office of the Auditor
General in the sharing of vaccine surveillance information between provinces, territories, and
Health Canada?
The safety and effectiveness of all authorized COVID-19 vaccines continue to be monitored
effectively in Canada and work will continue to implement best practices and audit
recommendations, including opportunities to enhance data-sharing across governments.
PHAC understands that information sharing is an important component of Canada’s vaccine
safety surveillance system, which is a collaboration between provinces and territories, PHAC,
Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers, and will continue to advance better information
sharing with its partners.
PHAC has implemented internal processes for data and information sharing that respect
provincial and territorial concerns and requirements while ensuring that Health Canada officials
have the information required to effectively conduct ongoing regulatory monitoring and
reviews. These processes, which pre-dated the COVID-19 pandemic, were strengthened prior to
the COVID-19 vaccination program roll-out to ensure timely sharing of AEFI data.
Despite data-sharing limitations between federal, provincial and territorial governments in
Canada, the OAG found that PHAC and Health Canada responded effectively to COVID-19
vaccine surveillance data. The OAG audit on COVID-19 vaccines found that PHAC and Health
Canada monitored the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines by obtaining and analyzing
surveillance data, including post-market studies, safety reports, and AEFI reported
internationally and domestically.
Q9. What is PHAC doing to advance discussions withprovinces and territories to provide Health
Canada with access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System
(CAEFISS)?
PHAC is committed to addressing barriers that prevent information sharing of data on adverse
events following immunization with its partners. The Agency will continue to lead consultations
with provincial and territorial partners on a proposal to address data sharing barriers, including
to provide Health Canada with access to the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System (CAEFISS).
CAEFISS receives reports from all provincial and territorial public health authorities and from
some federal departments. Some provinces and territories have put conditions on the access
and use of the health information they provide to the Agency.
The Public Health Agency of Canada understands that information sharing is an important
component of Canada’s vaccine safety surveillance system, which is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, the Agency, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers, and will
continue to advance better information sharing with its partners.
Q10. Why is Canada the only G7 country not providing the recommended vaccine surveillance
case-level data to the WHO, instead providing this data in aggregate?
The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to share Canadian Adverse Events Following
Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS) data in aggregate form with the World Health
Organization (WHO) on a regular schedule, and on an as-needed basis with vaccine
manufacturers.
Although the World Health Organization (WHO) has not articulated any concerns with the
existing arrangement, PHAC is supportive of enhancements to data-sharing with the WHO in the
interest of furthering global pharmacovigilance efforts. The Agency will engage with provinces
and territories in an effort to allow it to release more granular data to the WHO and vaccine
manufacturers as needed, while recognizing the importance of protecting patient
confidentiality, respecting privacy laws, and supporting accurate interpretation of the data.
Q11. What is the Government of Canada doing to fully implement VaccineConnect?
PHAC is actively working to advance the implementation and data quality procedures of the
three modules of VaccineConnect. The Agency will continue to actively engage jurisdictional
partners on identification of service gaps and needs to support future integration of the
systems. PHAC will continue to work closely with provinces and territories to identify data
quality gaps and support future integration of systems.
Q12. Did data sharing with provinces and territories and the limited functionality of
VaccineConnect contribute to vaccine wastage?
Data sharing with provinces andterritories on vaccine surveillance information is distinct and
separate from data sharing on vaccine inventory and usage with the functionality of
VaccineConnect, which is an IT platform.
Provinces and territories report on vaccine wastage and inventory; however, not all have an
inventory tracking systems that electronically monitors supply at the local level. The limited
functionality of VaccineConnect in tracking vaccine wastage was largely due to the inability of
provinces and territories to track and share usage and wastage data at the local level once
COVID-19 vaccines had been distributed to pharmacies and primary care providers.
Vaccine surplus was largely a consequence of the limited ability to adjust Advanced Purchase
Agreements for COVID-19 vaccine doses, combined with diminishing domestic demand over
time and challenges placing international donations given changes in global demand.
In addition, there were challenges related to product management once vaccine vials are
opened for use. The vaccines we primarily used in Canada were frozen; once distributed and
thawed to support use, the shelf life was significantly decreased, increasing the risk of wastage.
Furthermore the vials were multi-dose; once a vial is opened all the doses had to be used or
discarded within 6 hours; as demand decreased for vaccination, wastage at the local level
increased as local authorities focused on prioritizing offering vaccination to individuals under or
un-vaccinated in order to support population protection, despite that meaning only one or two
doses might have been used in a given vial.
Q13. What is Government of Canada doing to expedite its work with provinces and territories to
complete the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy?
The Public Health Agency ofCanada created the Corporate Data and Surveillance Branch in
October 2020 to signal its commitment to continue improving health data collection, sharing
and use as their response to recommendation 8.66 in the 2021 Report 8 of the Auditor General
of Canada.
PHAC and Health Canada have been working with provinces and territories to co-develop the
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy since December 2020. The strategy will address long-
standing issues that have been hindering the ability to collect, share, accessand use health data.
Through the Strategy’s series of commitments and proposed actions for improving Canada’s
health data foundation, it will enable better health outcomes and public health responses for
individuals, communities and Canadian society through learning health systems.
OAG AUDIT REPORTS DURING THE PANDEMIC
Issue
Since 2021, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled reports for four COVID-19
performance audits that involved the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC): the Audit of
PandemicPreparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures (March 25, 2021); the Audit
of Securing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Medical Devices (May 26, 2021); the Audit
of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders (December 9, 2021);and COVID-19
Vaccines (December 6, 2022). PHAC has been actively working on addressing the
recommendations from these audits.
Key Facts
• Management has accepted the recommendations found in all four Audits.
• A Deputy Head approved Management Response Action Plan (MRAP) was developed for
each Audit, which includes milestones and timelines.
• PHAC has begun making progress toward the completion of the Audit
recommendations.
• The status of MRAPs is monitored on an ongoing basis and progress on deliverables and
deadlines is reported quarterly to the PHAC Executive and Departmental Audit Committees.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top
priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s top priority is supporting Canada’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic. The Agency will be taking all lessons learned intoaccount to be prepared
for potential future pandemics.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the recommendations from the four
Auditor General reports related to the pandemic that involve the Agency. Work is underway to
respond to these recommendations.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to consider these findings, along with
other audits, evaluations, and further lessons learned from the response to COVID-19, to inform
future planning and to position Canada well to respond to future global health events.
If pressed on how PHAC has addressed the recommendations from the audits
• The Agency accepts each of the Auditor General’s recommendations and work is
currently underway to respond to the recommendations from these four audits.
Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
• In the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, the
Auditor General made seven recommendations for the Agency related to pandemic planning,
health surveillance information, early warning of public health threats, and border measures.
• The Agency has begun making progress in addressing recommendations related to
health surveillance information and early warning of public health threats.
• Some recommendations will be completed by March 31, 2025, as the Public Health
Agency of Canada and its partners resume regular operations.
Audit of Securing PPE and Medical Devices
• The Audit of Securing PPE and Medical Devices resulted in two recommendations for the
Public Health Agency of Canada related to assessing needs and managing the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
• The Agency has already completed one recommendation, specifically related to
documenting and enforcing a contract management protocol and governance structure, and has
begun work on the remaining recommendation.
Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
• For the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, the Public
Health Agency of Canada has developed a corresponding action plan to address the
recommendations.
• Action plans slated for completion by the beginning of 2024, involve improving the
Agency’s enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit the spread of COVID-19 and
improving the use of information on the outcomes of its referrals for follow-up.
Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines
• For the Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines, the Public Health Agency of Canada has developed
action plans in response to the recommendations related to reducing wastage, completing the
implementation of VaccineConnect, expediting work on the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy,
and resolving barriers to sharing vaccine surveillance data.
• The Agency has begun making progress in addressing these recommendations.
Ifpressed on how PHAC will address standing issues and be better prepared for the next
pandemic
• There are and will be many lessons for everyone from this pandemic, in Canada and
around the world, which we are learning from in order to adjust our approach and ensure we
remain well positioned and prepared to respond to future global health events.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s response, its guidance, and its advice have
evolved during the pandemic and been informed by the latest available scientific evidence,
epidemiology, and expert opinions, which can change as new information becomes available.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) plays a leadership role in preparing for and
responding to public health emergencies.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC has directed the implementation of border
restrictions and border control measures to help prevent travellers from spreading the virus that
causes COVID-19 in Canada.
On March 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory
quarantine under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
Since then, there has been a strong focus from the Office of the Auditor General of Canada
(OAG) on the Health Portfolio.
Audit of PandemicPreparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
On March 25, 2021, the Auditor General of Canada tabled a performance audit of Pandemic
Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures. Both PHAC and the Canada Border
Services Agency were implicated in this audit. The audit objectives were to:
• Determine whether PHAC was prepared to respond to a pandemic to protect the health
and safety of Canadians, supported by accurate and timely public health surveillance
information;
• Determine whether PHAC and the Canada Border Services Agency implemented border
control and quarantine measures to limit the introduction and further spread in Canada of the
virus that causes COVID 19.
Taking into consideration the OAG’s recommendations, PHAC’s response, its guidance, and its
advice have evolved during the pandemic and have been informed by the latest available
scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert opinions, which can change as new information
becomes available. PHAC has been actively working to address the OAG’s recommendations to
be better prepared in the future.
Audit of Securing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Medical Device
On May 26, 2021, the OAG tabled their audit on PPE and Medical Devices, which implicated
PHAC, Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada. This audit focused on:
• whether PHAC and Health Canada, before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, helped
meet the needs of provincial and territorial governments for selected PPE and medical devices;
and
• whether Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement
support. Selected equipment for this audit included N95 respirators, medical gowns, testing
swabs and ventilators. These items were considered to be at risk due to high global demand,
limited suppliers, specific technical requirements and limited domestic production.
PHAC recognized that this audit identified areas for improvement to be better prepared for
future health events, including for the management of the National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile. PHAC is committed to acting on these recommendations to enhance its preparedness
for future public health emergencies.
Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Within the same year of the first two audits, the OAG conducted their third PHAC audit, the
audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders. This audit, concentrating
solely on PHAC, was the follow-up on the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and
Border Control Measures. This audit focused on:
• Whether PHAC improved its administration of mandatory orders to limit the
introduction of the COVID-19 virus and its variants in Canada;
• Whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures introduced in
early 2021 (such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and quarantine of air
travellers at government-authorized hotels pending the results of their on-arrival COVID-19
tests).
PHAC is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it canbetter follow up
with travellers who are subject to border measures and is implementing gender-based analysis
plus (GBA+) considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and future
programs on diverse and vulnerable groups.
Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines
On December 6, 2022, the OAG tabled the Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines. This audit concentrated
on PHAC, Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada. This audit focused on
whether:
• Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support to
secure COVID-19 vaccines;
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada efficiently provided access to
COVID-19 vaccines; and
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada’s surveillance of COVID-19
vaccines was effective and timely.
Based on their four findings, PHAC will:
• reduce vaccine wastage and continue working with stakeholders to adjust the
management of COVID-19 vaccine surpluses;
• complete the implementation of VaccineConnect, the national vaccine management
information technology system;
• expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-Canadian Health
Data Strategy in order to improve access to quality data;
• resolve barriers to sharing vaccine surveillance data and provide access to the Canadian
Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System for Health Canada and case-level
details, as needed, to the World Health Organisation and vaccine companies in a timely manner.
PHAC will continue to address the action plans and complete them accordingly, taking into
consideration the ongoing response to the pandemic.
VACCINATION–GENERAL
Issue
Routine immunization programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect
Canadians against vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs), such as measles, mumps and tetanus.
Many common infectious diseases that were once a major cause of morbidity and mortality in
Canada are now preventable with vaccines. Nevertheless, VPDs remain a public health concern
in Canada, andit is important to achieve the highest possible levels of vaccination.
As Canada and the world have returned to broader socio-economic activity following the acute
phase of the COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of VPDs has increased. Monitoring uptake of routine
childhood vaccinations and ensuring that Canadians of all ages are up to date with their routine
vaccinations remain important ways to minimize outbreaks and prevent further spread of VPDs.
Key Facts
• In Canada, immunization is a shared responsibility among the federal, provincial and
territorial (FPT) governments. The provinces and territories (PTs) design, plan and deliver
immunization programs. The federal government leads the regulatory approval of vaccines and
supports the vaccine administrationof PTs across multiple functions, including coordinating the
bulk purchasing of vaccines for jurisdictions, conducting national vaccine surveillance, and
facilitating FPT engagement on immunization policies and programs.
Key Messages
• Routinevaccination programs prevent illness, save lives and are critical in supporting the
health of Canadians.
• When enough people are vaccinated, we protect ourselves and those around us.
Children, immunocompromised individuals, the elderly, and those who do not have up-to-date
routine vaccinations, as outlined in the Provinces’ and Territories’ recommended immunization
schedules, are at greater risk of contracting vaccine preventable diseases.
• When outbreaks occur, vaccine preventable diseases can have a profound impact on
access to and operations of all areas of our health services. This prospect is especially
concerning as health systems across Canada are already operating beyond capacity due to the
ongoing co-circulation of COVID-19, influenza, and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) among other
respiratory viruses during the winter months.
• The federal government is working with provinces, territories and health professional
partners to promote, strengthen and support “catch up” within routine vaccinationprograms
that have been disrupted due to the pandemic to increase individuals’ and communities’
protection from vaccine preventable diseases.
If pressed
• The Government of Canada is committed to supporting routine vaccination, as a vital
means of preventing disease, disability, and death, and reducing pressure on healthcare
systems.
Background
Immunization is a shared responsibility among federal, provincial and territorial (FPT)
governments. Health Canada leads the regulatory approval of vaccines. This involves rigorous
scientific review and testing to assess the quality, safety, and efficacy of vaccines before they are
approved for use. Once a vaccine is authorized, Health Canada, together with the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC), conducts post-market surveillance to monitor vaccine safety, detect
and respond to possible adverse events.
The provinces and territories (PTs) administer vaccines within their jurisdictions, which includes
all policy and program decision-making, design and implementation required to determine
which public programs to offer, which vaccines to buy, where to administer vaccines, and
priority populations and eligibility criteria for vaccination.
PHAC supports PTs in delivering their immunization programs by: leading FPT engagement and
coordination; bulk purchasing vaccines for all jurisdictions; conducting vaccine confidence
research, policy, and programming; managing vaccine coverage, effectiveness and safety
surveillance; facilitating immunization research; enhancing domestic manufacturing capacity;
and supporting the delivery of the Vaccine Injury Support Program(VISP).
FPT Engagement
To support FPT engagement on immunization policies and programs, the Canadian
Immunization Committee (CIC) is a key national forum that brings together PT representatives
and federal departments responsible for immunization programming, including Health Canada,
Indigenous Services Canada, and Correctional Service Canada, among others. Under the
direction of the Communicable and Infectious Diseases Steering Committee of the Pan-Canadian
Public Health Network Council, the CIC provides a platform to implement the objectives of the
National Immunization Strategy, foster FPT collaboration, engage with non-governmental
stakeholders, and discuss and provide strategic operational and technical advice and best
practices on issues related tovaccination in the interest of coordinating and improving
immunization policies and programs in Canada.
Vaccine Supply and Assurance
PHAC works with PT partners and Public Services Procurement Canada (PSPC) to lead vaccine
supply management. This includes routine immunization and influenza vaccine procurement
and maintaining a national state of readiness by securing pandemic influenza vaccine
preparedness contracts. Through the Bulk Procurement Program, PHAC works with PSPC to lead
and advise on vaccine acquisition and allocation for FPT programs. The team coordinates
jurisdictional needs, seeks to enhance the security of supply, and manages challenges and
disruptions that could impact immunization program delivery.
Vaccine Confidence
The World Health Organization (WHO) identified vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten risks to
global health in 2019, threatening to reverse the progress that has been made in addressing
VPDs. Vaccine hesitancy is complex and can be more common in certain populations, including
marginalized or underserved communities who have historically experienced systemic racism
and often do not trust the government. PHAC acts as the focal point for vaccine confidence
policy, research and behavioural analysis to inform development of evidence-based awareness
and outreach campaigns and tools and training to support healthcare providers communicate
credible information about vaccine effectiveness and safety to Canadians.
A core part of federal vaccine confidence efforts, the Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF)
supports public health actors, trusted partners, and communities across Canada to increase
vaccine acceptance and uptake through grants and contributions. The IPF provides funding to
local, regional and national organizations, and PTs to develop evidence-based approaches
designed to improve vaccination coverage rates and combat mis-and dis-information.
Supporting trusted representatives from within communities is proven to be an effective way to
deliver programming, communicateinformation about vaccines, and increase vaccine
confidence and uptake.
Vaccine Surveillance
High levels of vaccination coverage for VPDs are required to help ensure the ongoing health and
safety of Canadians, particularly children, immunocompromised (weakened immune system)
individuals, and the elderly. PHAC monitors and leads surveillance of national vaccine coverage
and effectiveness for the general population as well as vulnerable populations. Updated
vaccination coverage goals and VPD reduction targets were agreed to by PTs in 2017, in line with
current evidence. Coverage goals range from 80-95% depending on the age group and the VPD.
The most recent Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey (CNICS), which is a
longstandingstudy that measures the immunization coverage among children in Canada,
showed that while the majority of the vaccine coverage estimates are below the set goals, gains
were made in some areas since earlier iterations of the survey. The most up to-date results are
available from CNICS 2019 (pre-pandemic). Results from CNICS 2021 will be released in spring
2023, and we will shed additional light on the impact of the pandemic on routine childhood
vaccine uptake and changes that may have occurred towards achieving vaccine coverage
targets. Therefore, there is a need for ongoing vaccine coverage surveillance through CNICS.
After a vaccine is authorized for use in Canada, post-market safety surveillance is conducted to
monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the entire population and their real-world
impact. This is critical for rapidly detecting and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the
benefits of a vaccine continue to outweigh the risks, and supporting vaccine uptake by building
public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs. Canada has a well-established vaccine
safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between PTs, PHAC, Health Canada, and
vaccine manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health
Canada as the national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global
safety information. Health Canada reviews these reports and takes appropriate regulatory
actions should new safety issues be identified. In addition, PHAC receives, and reviews reports
of adverse events following immunization from FPTs immunization programs and two active
surveillance networks through the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System. Adverse events following immunization reports are continuously assessed
and potential safety issues are flagged immediately for further investigation.
Immunization Research
Emerging, real-world research is a critical component of immunization program evidence-
informed decision-making. PHAC works with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
to support public health research. The Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) is an
example of this; a multi-disciplinary network that addresses diverse immunization research
requirements in Canada on topics related to vaccine safety, immunogenicity and effectiveness,
vaccine hesitancy, and immunization program implementation and evaluation. Knowledge
translation activities are also supported by PHAC to promote the communication of key research
findings to decision-makers, academia and relevant stakeholders.
Biomanufacturing
Recognizing the importance of a resilient and innovative biomanufacturing and life sciences
sector, in July 2021, the Ministers of Innovation, Science and Industry and Healthlaunched, and
share joint accountability for the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy). The
Health Portfolio is working with Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada to
advance the Strategy, which outlines a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic
capacity to rapidly develop and produce vaccines, therapeutics, and other lifesaving medicines
to improve readiness for future pandemics or other health emergencies.
Recognizing the evolution of technology and the advantages of leveraging newer, more rapidly
adaptable vaccine platforms, in 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that
Moderna would build a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Laval, Quebec.
On November 7, 2022, the Prime Minister, took part in the facility’s ground-breaking ceremony
When completed, the facility will be able to produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine doses per
year in non-pandemic times and up to 100 million doses per year during a pandemic.
Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and
a global mRNA research and development hub. Moderna is committed to partnering with
Canada’s leading research universities and institutions to help advance research and
development here at home. For example, Moderna has already partnered with McGill University
through Moderna’s mRNA Access program to accelerate vaccine innovation, as well as with the
University of Toronto to do research across a range of scientific disciplines to develop new ways
to treat infectious diseases.
The facility will boost the Canadian economy through the creation of hundreds of jobs during
construction and operationof the facility, including direct and indirect biomanufacturing and
research jobs. Moderna’s facility will also mean domestic opportunities for the brightest young
minds in the field through internships, co-op positions, and other Moderna-supported training
and development opportunities. In this way, the facility will enhance Canada’s talent pipeline by
attracting, developing and retaining a highly skilled workforce. The facility will also offer the
potential for Canadian companies to work with Moderna, and, where possible, opportunities to
comprise part of Moderna’s supply chain.
The facility is expected to be operational in 2024 at the earliest, subject to planning and
regulatory approvals. In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, the facility is expected to beable to
produce vaccines for other respiratory diseases, such as influenza –pending their ongoing
development by Moderna and approval by Health Canada.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Six COVID-19 vaccines have been authorized and approved foruse by Health Canada
since December 2020.
KEY FACTS
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other
departments and the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Vaccine Rollout Task Force to develop
and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
• Both the Department and the Public Health Agency of Canada have recently initiated
lessons learned review processes that will serve to inform future public health emergency
planning and response.
• Health Canada only authorizes avaccine if it is supported by scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
KEY MESSAGES
• The availability of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines is of the utmost priority. Health
Canada hasauthorized COVID-19 vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca,
Janssen, Novavax and Medicago
• In addition, there is one other vaccine currently under review by Health Canada from
Sanofi.
• On January 12, 2023, Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
vaccine as a booster dose in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age.
• On December 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age.
• On December 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-
19 vaccine in adolescents 12 to17 years of age.
• On October 21, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On October 7, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On September 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine for young children aged 6 months to under 5 years of age.
• On September 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the first bivalent COVID-19 vaccine for
use in Canada.Moderna Spikevax bivalent vaccine targets the original SARS-CoV-2 virus from
2019 and the Omicron (BA.1) variant and is authorized for use as a booster dose in individuals
18 years of age or older.
• A submission from Moderna for a bivalent (original/Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine for
children and adolescents 6 to 17 years of age is also under review.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as
possible, while maintaining rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the
same vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review
processes, while still making independent authorization decisions for Canada.
• Health Canada will continue to review safety data submitted by the manufacturers and
adverse event reports received in the Canada Vigilance Database. In addition, Health Canada will
continue to work closely with the Public Health Agencyof Canada, Provinces and Territories, and
international regulators to monitor the safety of the vaccines. The Department will take
appropriate action in a timely manner if safety concerns are identified and will ensure that
relevant information is available to all Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety
monitoring system.
IF PRESSED ON MEDICAGO …
• Our government recognizes the need for a strong and resilient domestic bio-
manufacturing industry, and that is why we have made a significant investment in Medicago.
• This is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a Canadian-based company,
and the first that uses a plant-based technology.
• In July 2022, Medicago notified Health Canada that they were investigating a
manufacturing quality issue that prevented them from distributing Covifenz as planned. Due to
these unanticipated manufacturing issues, Medicago has not marketed its COVID-19 vaccine for
commercial use in Canada.
• The tobacco company, Philip Morris International, has since divested all of its shares
from Medicago, opening the door to allow their Covifenz vaccine to be approved in other
international jurisdictions.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON …
• On December 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age.
• On November 3, 2022, Health Canada authorized Moderna Spikevax bivalent
Original/Omicron BA.4/5 COVID-19 booster vaccine in adults 18 years of age and older
• On October 21, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On October 7, 2022, Health Canada authorized thePfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On September 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized Moderna Spikevax bivalent
Original/Omicron BA.1 COVID-19 booster vaccine in adults 18 years of age and older.
• Spikevax Bivalent Original/Omicron is a next-generation bivalent vaccine that targets the
original strain of SARS-CoV2 and the Omicron variant of concern (BA.1). This is the first vaccine
authorized in Canada containing both the original Wuhan SARS-CoV-2 and the Omicron variant.
• On November 4, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a
bivalent (original/Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine for children and adolescents 6 to 17 years of
age. The submission is under review.
• Health Canada issued regulatory letters to manufacturers of authorized COVID-19
vaccines and to those under review, requesting plans to evaluate and address the impact of the
Omicron variants on their product and include any proposed studies, timelines for completion
and risk minimization measures. Canadians continue to be informed in a timely manner of any
new key information about the impact of Omicron on vaccine effectiveness.
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners,
including WHO, to assess the potential impact of the Omicron variant and its subvariants, on
approved vaccines and treatments.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada takes action and informs Canadians if there are
changes to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada related to variants
of concern.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the Omicron or any other variants,
Health Canada will prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible
while maintaining high standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON BOOSTER DOSE SUBMISSIONS …
• People who have received a complete COVID-19 vaccine primary series, including older
adults, have good protection against severe disease, hospitalization and death. This includes
protection from variants of concern currently circulating in Canada. However, a booster dose
would ensure further protection.
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) strongly recommends that
Canadians over the age of 50 and other vulnerable populations receive a third dose of an mRNA
vaccine. Canadians aged 18 to 49 can also receive a third dose at least six months after they
have received their second.
• Health Canada authorized the booster dose of the Pfizer Comirnaty vaccine for
adolescents 16-17 years of age on June 1, 2022, and for children 5 to 11 years of age on August
19, 2022.
• On January 12, 2023, Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
vaccine as a booster dose in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS FOR VACCINES UNDER REVIEW …
• COVID-19 vaccines are reviewed as rolling submissions under the Food and Drug
Regulations, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness and quality to
Health Canada as it becomes available. The Food and Drug Regulations were amended in March
2021 to provide the same flexibilities as under the Interim Order that was used for the initial
authorizations.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan identifying the timing and content of the
submissions in terms of subsequent data and information to Health Canada to support the
rolling reviews.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review
teams forCOVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams
continue to work around the clock to expedite reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submissions depends on the outcomes of the
companies’ ongoing clinical trialsand the review of the data submitted to Health Canada, as well
as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian supply.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS …
• Health Canada put in place Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19
drugs and vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021, to permanently transition measures
from the Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs
authorized under the InterimOrder can continue to be sold and that new COVID-19 products
can be reviewed and authorized using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required
to make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food and Drug
Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Moderna, Novavax
and Medicago have been authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccine(s) not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as the one from Sanofi, are also
being reviewed under the new Regulations.
BACKGROUND
Summary of approved vaccines, status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Original vaccine approvals
• Health Canada authorized thePfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® vaccine under the Interim
Order on December 9, 2020 and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
• Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax® vaccine under the Interim Order on
December 23, 2020 and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
• Health Canada authorized the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine under the Interim Order
on February 26, 2021 and authorized it under the Regulations on November 19, 2021. Health
Canada worked closely with the European Medicines Agency on the initial review.
• Health Canada authorized the Janssen Jcovden vaccine on March 5, 2021, under the
Interim Order, and authorized it under the Regulations on November 23, 2021.
• Health Canada authorized theNovavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine on February 17,
2022, under the Regulations.
• Health Canada authorized the Medicago Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine on February 24,
2022 under the Regulations. This is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a
Canadian-based company, and the first that uses a plant-based technology.
Pediatric and Adolescent approvals
• Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 5-11 years on
November 19, 2021, in children aged 12-15 years on May 5, 2021, and in younger children 6
months to under 5 years of age on September 9, 2022.
• The Moderna vaccine was authorized for use in individuals aged 12-17 years on August
27, 2021, in children aged 6-11 years on March 17, 2022, and in younger children aged 6 months
to 5 years on July 14, 2022.
• Health Canada authorized the use of Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine in
adolescents 12 to17 years of age on December 6, 2022.
(Please see separate QP on COVID-19 vaccines for children).
Boosters and Bivalent Boosters
• On January 12, 2023, Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
booster vaccine in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age.
• On December 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
Bivalent (original/Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age.
• On October 21, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On October 7, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On November 9, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine as a booster shot. On November 12, 2021, Health Canada
authorized the use of the Moderna Spikevax vaccine as a booster shot and on May 11, 2022,
Health Canada authorized the Janssen (Jcovden) booster dose.
• On June 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the booster dose of the Pfizer Comirnaty
vaccine for adolescents aged 16-17 years and for children aged 5-11 years on August 19, 2022.
On March 16, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19 booster for
individuals 12 to 17 years of age.
• On September 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the first bivalent COVID-19 vaccine for
use in Canada. Moderna Spikevax bivalent vaccine targets the original SARS-CoV-2 virus from
2019 and the Omicron (BA.1) variant and is authorized for use as a booster dose in individuals
18years of age or older.
• On June 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the booster dose of the Pfizer Comirnaty
vaccine for adolescents aged 16-17 years and for children aged 5-11 years on August 19, 2022.
• On November 9, 2021, Health Canadaauthorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine as a booster vaccine dose. On November 12, 2021, Health Canada
authorized the use of the Moderna Spikevax vaccine as a booster vaccine dose and on May 11,
2022, Health Canada authorizedthe Janssen (Jcovden) booster dose.
• Submissions from Pfizer-BioNTech for their BA.1 bivalent and BA.4/5 bivalent vaccines
are under review. A submission from Moderna was received on November 4, 2022 for their
bivalent (original/Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine in children and adolescents 12 to 17 years of
age and is under review.
Ongoing review(s) of other vaccine(s)
• A vaccine submission from Sanofi and Vaccigen is under review. Timelines for decisions
depend on the submission of outstanding data from thecompany, discussions with the sponsor,
and completion of Health Canada’s review.
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and
the Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy. The Department
has recently initiated a lessons learned review process that will serve to inform future public
health emergency planning and response.
In September 2020, Health Canada issued an Interim Order toexpedite the review of drugs and
vaccines by allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as they become
available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and
evidence showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Since the Interim Order was temporary (valid for 1 year, expired on September 16, 2021), in
March 2021 Health Canada introduced amendments to the Food and Drugs Regulations
(Regulations) to provide a mechanism for COVID-19 products to gain permanent legal status and
allow the vaccines to continue to be sold in Canada. Companies were required to file a
submission to Health Canada under the amended Regulations.
The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®, Moderna Spikevax®, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria®, Janssen Jcovden,
Novavax Nuvaxovid and Medicago Covifenz vaccines were authorized under the modified
Regulations
Medicago
On February 24, 2022, after a rigorous and independent scientific review of the evidence, Health
Canada authorized the use of Medicago’s Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine for individuals 18 to 64
years of age.
On August 30, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Medicago for the use of the
Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine in individuals 65 years of age and older. The submission is under
review.
Medicago is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a Canadian-based company,
and the first that uses a plant-based protein technology to prevent COVID-19 infection.
Health Canada is prepared towork closely with regulatory authorities in other countries or
regions to share information on the Department’s review of Covifenz and support authorization
in other countries, as well as enable other countries’ access to Covifenz vaccine supplies that
maybecome available..
The Government of Canada has studied the matter of its investment in Medicago carefully and
considers that it is compliant with its treaty obligations related to tobacco control under the
WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco (FCTC). TheFCTC requires Parties to the Convention to
specifically protect “public health policies with respect to tobacco control” from “commercial
and other vested interests of the tobacco industry.” As such, the FCTC does not preclude the
Government of Canada from working with Medicago on vaccine development and procurement
to ensure that a ready and effective supply of vaccines is available for its population.
Article 5.3 of the FCTC requires Parties to the Convention to specifically protect “public health
policies with respect to tobacco control” from “commercial and other vested interests of the
tobacco industry.”
Health Canada’s interactions with the tobacco industry will continue to be transparent in
accordance with Health Canada’s openness and transparency requirements and in alignment
with guidelines under the WHO FCTC.
ACCESS TO COVID-19 VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
ISSUE
• Vaccine use in children under 12 years of age.
KEY FACTS
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty is authorised as primary series in younger children aged 6
months and up and Comirnaty and Comirnaty bivalent vaccines (Original/BA.4/5) are authorised
as booster dose for 5 to11 years old. The Comirnaty bivalent vaccine (original/Omicron BA.1) is
also authorized as a booster dose for individuals 12years of age and older.
• Moderna Spikevax is also authorised as primary series in younger children aged 6
months and as a booster dose in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age. Spikevax bivalent (original/
Omicron BA.1) is also under review as booster dose for 6 to 17 years old.
• The positive results in Pfizer’s clinical trials involves approximately 4,600 children aged 5
to 11 years in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites.
The 90.7% efficacy was established in1,968 vaccine recipients, and vaccine safety was evaluated
in 3,300 vaccine recipients.
• The positive results in Moderna’s clinical trials involve approximately 4,000 children
aged 6 to 11 years. The trial showed that the vaccine produced similar levels of antibodies in
children 6 to 11 years compared to adolescents and young adults.
• Positive interim results from Moderna’s Phase 2/3 KidCOVE study showed a robust
immune response (antibodiesy) in the 6 months to 5 years of age group after a two-dose
primary series of the Moderna Spikevax, along with a favorable safety profile.
• On December 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-
19 vaccine in adolescents 12 to17 years of age.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada has authorized COVID-19 vaccines for children as young as 6 months old.
• Booster vaccines are also authorized in children 5 to 11 years of age and in individuals
12 to 17 years of age.
• Although children are less likely than adults to become severely ill from COVID-19, some
children may still require hospitalization. Children are also susceptible to multisystem
inflammatory syndrome (MISC) or long COVID as a result of infection and may transmit COVID-
19 to others.
• As with all COVID-19 submissions, Health Canada is prioritizing the review while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy, and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the
same vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review
processes, while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S REVIEW PROCESS …
• In order to expand the use of an authorized COVID-19 vaccine to younger children, the
manufacturer must provide evidence of safety, efficacy and quality to Health Canada for review.
• Timing for the completion of a Health Canada review depends on many factors,
including but not limited to, the need for additional data, discussions with the sponsor, and
requirements for updates to safety information. A decision will only be made once all of the
required information has been submitted by the manufacturer and thoroughly evaluated by
Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SAFETY OF VACCINES IN CHILDREN …
• Thesafety of vaccines for children is of the utmost priority for Health Canada. The
Department will not compromise on the evidence standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada conducted a detailed review of the safety data from clinical trials of
Comirnaty and Spikevax to support the authorization of the vaccine in adults, adolescents and
children.
• The risks and benefits are evaluated for each age group in the context of COVID disease.
This requires consideration of vaccine side effects and benefits.
• During clinical trials, dose-finding studies were conducted to determine the correct dose
for vaccine effectiveness in children aged 6 months to less than 12 years. This resulted in the
identification of a lower dose for children, while still maintaining effectiveness of the vaccine.
• Health Canada continuously monitors the safety of the vaccines after approval in
Canada and internationally and takes immediate action should any safety concerns arise.
BACKGROUND
The risk of severe illness due to COVID-19 might be lower in children than in adults, but this
does not mean that there is no risk:
• Children can still contract COVID-19 and get very sick.
• In Canada, more than 8,883 children (aged 0-19 years) have been hospitalized with
COVID-19, 842have been admitted to the ICU and 68 33 have died (as of January 9, 2023).
• In Canada, there have been 416,202(9.8%) COVID cases in children aged 0-11 years and
329,233 (7.7%) in adolescents aged 12-19 years (until January 9, 2023).
• Some children go onto develop a Multi Inflammatory Syndrome and become severely
affected. Although rare, this is not an insignificant risk.
• Emerging data suggest that children that survive COVID-19 despite of the severity, are at
risk of developing what is now called “long COVID”. This condition is yet poorly understood but
it has been observed in a percentage of adults and children that survive COVID-19.
• In addition, children like adults, can still spread the virus to others. In order to best
protect themselves and thewhole community, adolescents and children who are eligible should
be vaccinated if there are no contraindications.
PFIZER Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Comirnaty
• On December 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age.
• On October 21, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On October 7, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty Bivalent
(original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in individuals 12 years of age and older.
• On September 9, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine for young children aged 6 months to under 5 years of age.
• On August 19, 2022, Health Canada approved the use of Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®
booster vaccine in children 5-11 years old.
• On June 1st, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer Comirnaty booster dose vaccine in
adolescents 16-17 years of age.
• On May 5, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®
vaccine in adolescents aged 12-15.
• Pfizer completed their clinical trials involving up to 4,600 children aged 5 to 11 years in
the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The trials
evaluated the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine on a two-dose schedule (approximately 21 days apart).
• On November 19, 2021, Pfizer's pediatric vaccine (ages 5 to 11) was approved by Health
Canada and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) released their guidelines
also recommending the use in this age group.
MODERNA Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Spikevax
• On January 12, 2023, Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
vaccine as a booster dose in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age. Spikevax bivalent (original/
Omicron BA.1) is also under review as booster dose for 6 to 17 years old. The submission was
received on November 4, 2022.
• On July 14, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Moderna Spikevax® vaccine in
children 6 months to 5 years of age.
• On March 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of the vaccine in ages 6 to 11
years. The Moderna pediatric dose is half (50 micrograms) of the dose given to adolescents and
adults.
• On August 27, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Moderna COVID 19
Vaccine in adolescents aged 12 to 17.
• Health Canada reviewed clinical trial results from a placebo-controlled study designed to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in children 6 to 11 years of age. In total, 4,016
children 6 to 11 years of age were enrolled; 3,012 children received Spikevax and 1,004 children
received a placebo.
• The study used a two-dose vaccine regimen with the same formulation as the adult
vaccine. However, the dose used was smaller, at 50 micrograms rather than 100 micrograms.
• The clinical trial of Spikevax (50 mcg) in children 6 to 11 years of age studied the
immune response to vaccination based on antibody levels. The trial showed that the vaccine
produced similar levels of antibodies in children 6 to 11 years of age compared to adolescents
and young adults.
• Provisionally approved in Australia for ages 6 and over. The EMA's Committee for
Medicinal Products for Human Use (CHMP) has recommended granting an extension of
indication for the COVID-19 vaccine Spikevax and Spikevax bivalent (BA.1) to include use in
children 6 to 11 years of age.
Other COVID-19 Vaccines for Children
• Clinical trials for the Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines in children were paused in spring
2021 due to concerns with blood clots reported with the use of these vaccines in adults. The
Janssen & AstraZeneca trials have restarted; Janssen has plans to continue recruitment of
younger pediatric subjects.
• On December 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-
19 vaccine in adolescents 12 to17 years of age.
• Other manufacturers have also launched clinical trials to test their vaccine in
adolescents.
OVERVIEW OF KEY COVID-19 VACCINES AND TREATMENTS
Variant (Bivalent) Vaccines
Pfizer Comirnaty
• Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age –
Authorized onDecember 9, 2022. Submission was filed on September 2, 2022.
o FDA: On October 12, 2022 the EUA was amended to included children down to 5 years
of age.
o EMA: On November 10, 2022, the EMA's CHMP recommended authorization.
• Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine (ages 12+)–Authorized on October
21, 2022. Submission was filed on July 25, 2022.
o EMA (EU): authorized on September 1, 2022;
o MHRA (UK): authorized on August 15, 2022.
o Swissmedic: temporarily authorised on August 29, 2022.
o TGA (Australia): provisionally approved on October 27, 2022
• Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/BA.5) booster vaccine (ages 12+)–Authorized on
October 7, 2022. Submission was filed on September 2, 2022.
o EMA: On September 12, 2022 recommended authorising the adapted bivalent vaccine
targeting the Omicron subvariants BA.4 and BA.5.
o FDA (USA): On August 31, 2022 amended the Emergency Use Authorizations (EUAs) to
authorize bivalent formulations, including the BA.4 and BA.5.
Moderna Spikevax
• Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.4/5) booster vaccine (ages 18+)–Authorized on
November 3, 2022. Submission was filed on September 12, 2022.
o FDA: On August 31, 2022 amended the EUAs to authorize bivalent formulations,
including the BA.4 and BA.5.
o EMA: On October 21, 2022, provided authorization.
o TGA: On September 28, 2022, granted a provisional determination for the bivalent
BA.4/5.
• Bivalent (original/ Omicron BA.1) booster vaccine (ages 18+)–Authorized on September
1st, 2022. Submission was filed on June30, 2022.
o FDA: authorized on August 31, 2022.
o EMA: recommended authorization on September 1, 2022
• Bivalent (Original/Omicron BA.1) pediatric (6-17 years) booster vaccine–Submission
received on November 4, 2022. Under review.
o Moderna has indicated that it will not be pursuing the BA.4/5 bivalent for younger
populations at this time.
o FDA: On October 12, 2022 the EUA was amended to include children down to 6 years of
age.
Original Strain Boosters
• Pfizer 5-11 years booster:
o Authorizedon August 19, 2022. Submission filed on October 9, 2020.
• Pfizer 16-17 years booster:
o Authorized on June 1, 2022. Submission filed on October 9, 2020.
• Moderna 1st booster 12 to 17 years of age:
o Authorized on January 12, 2023. Submission was filed on October 12, 2020.
• Moderna 2nd booster (ages 18+):
o On October 28, 2022, Health Canada issued a Summary of Cancellation for the Moderna
Spikevax 2nd booster Covid-19 vaccine for adults 50 years ofage and older.
• Novavax (18-84 years) booster
o Authorized on November 17, 2022. Submission filed on June 29, 2022.
• Janssen booster (ages 18+)
o Janssen (Jcovden) seeking to extend interval between JCOVDEN primary vaccination and
booster dose (> 6months). Submission received on August 24, 2022. Under review.
Original Strain–Pediatric / Adolescent
• Novavax Nuvaxovid (12-17 years)
o Authorized on December 6, 2022. Submission filed on June 29, 2022.
‒ EMA: Recommended on June 23, 2022
‒ Swissmedic: Authorized September 2, 2022
‒ TGA: Provisional authorization July 25, 2022
Other Vaccines
• Medicago Covifenz
o Submission for adults 65 years of age and older received on August 30, 2022. Under
review.
o Submission expected in February 2023 (TBC) for adult booster dose. A submission is also
expected for adolescent indication primary series and booster dose for March 2023 (TBC)
o Following failure of the first commercial lot testing in June 2022, Medicago withdrew the
only lot releasepackage submitted to HC. Time until commercial production will restart
domestically is unknown.
• Vaccigen Covaxin
o Submission filed June 30, 2021 (IO) and July 12, 2021 (NDS-CV). A Notice of Cancellation
was issued on September 20, 2022.
• Sanofi VidPrevtyn
o Submission filed July 21, 2021 (NDS-CV). Under review. Beta-variant booster submission
(NDS-CV) received on December 16, 2022. Under review.
o On January 24, 2023, following a meeting with the sponsor, it was decided that both
submissions would be withdrawn by the sponsor as there will be no purchasing of Sanofi vaccine
for Canada. Summary of Cancellation will be issued later (date to be confirmed).
o EMA: On November 11, 2022 authorised VidPrevtyn Beta as a booster in adults
previously vaccinatedwith an mRNA or adenoviral vector COVID-19 vaccine.
o MHRA: Authorized December 21, 2022.
KEY TREATMENTS
• Hoffman-La Roche tocilizumab (Actemra): On October 13, 2022, authorized an
additional indication for the treatment of hospitalized adults with COVID-19, who are receiving
systemic corticosteroids and require supplemental oxygen, non-invasive or invasive mechanical
ventilation, or extracorporeal membrane oxygenation (ECMO). Submission was filed on
February 4, 2022.
o EMA: on December 6, 2021, recommended approval for certain hospitalized adult
COVID-19 patients.
• Gilead Remdesivir (Veklury): Authorized July 27, 2020 (FDR). Expanded indication
authorized April 22, 2022. Pediatric submission (28 days to 11 years) filed on August 2, 2022 and
is under review. Remdesivir is expected to retain effectiveness against the Omicron subvariants,
including BA.4/BA.5, BQ.1.1, and XBB.1.5, etc.
o FDA: Approved on April 25, 2022. EMA: On September 16, 2022, recommended
extending the use of Veklury to include treating children with COVID-19 needing supplemental
oxygen, or risking severe disease
• Merck Molnupiravir (Lagevrio): Filed on August 20, 2021 (FDR). Merck is seeking an
indication for high risk non-hospitalised patients with mild-to-moderate COVID-19. Additional
data was provided by Merck fall 2022. Under review. On January 18, 2023, Merck was informed
about an upcoming regulatory decision (i.e. NON) to be issued in February 2023.
o FDA: authorized under EUA on December 23, 2021.
o MHRA: authorized with conditions on November 4, 2021.
o HSA Singapore: Interim authorization on April 19, 2022.
o TGA: Provisional authorization on January 20, 2022.
o EMA: under review.
o Swissmedic: under review.
• Pfizer Nirmatrelvir + Ritonavir (Paxlovid): Authorized on January 17, 2022. Health
Canada will continue to monitor “rebound” (which is when patients experience a return of their
COVID-19 symptoms after completing treatment) as part of regular post-marketing activities.
Paxlovid is expected to maintain effectiveness against the Omicron subvariants, including
BA.4/BA.5, BQ.1.1, and XBB.1.5, etc.
o Submission for label revision for interaction with tacrolimus received on Sept.8, 2022.
Under review.
o Submission for extension of shelf life from 18m to 24m was authorized on November 30,
2022.
• AstraZeneca (Evusheld): Authorized on April 14, 2022.
o Authorized on November 9, 2022 for the updated dosage regimen for the pre-exposure
prophylaxis indication (600mg administered every 6 months).
o Authorized on October 18, 2022 for indication in the treatment of mild to moderate
COVID-19 in adults and adolescents (≥12 years of age weighing at least 40 kg).
o Evusheld is unlikely to be effective against Omicron BA.2.75.2, BA.4.6, BF.7, BQ.1, BQ.1.1
and XBB. On January 17, 2022, an HPRC issued on October 26, 2022 was updated to include
neutralization dataon Omicron BA.2.75.2, BF.7, BJ.1, BN.1, BQ.1, BQ.1.1 and XBB, and on
January 26, 2022, Info Watch was updated. The Canadian Product Monograph was also updated
to reflect these neutralization data.
• GSK Sotrovimab and Regeneron/Hoffman-LaRoche’s casirivimab-imdevimab (REGN-
COV2): The Department is reviewing what actions are required due to the lack of efficacy and
safety data of Sotrovimab and casirivimab-imdevimab against VoC (variants of concern). An
article was published in InfoWatch in October 2022 providing an update on loss of effectiveness
against Omicron BA.4/5.
• Veru (Sabizabulin): Submission received on November 24, 2022 for treatment of
moderate to severe hospitalized COVID-19 patients at high risk for ARDS.
o FDA: On November 9, 2022, the US FDA Pulmonary-Allergy Drugs Advisory Committee
recommended against sabizabulin. The FDA’s EUA decision is pending.
o EMA: Potential submission of a Conditional Market Authorization Application is
expected in Q2 2023.
COVID-19 Vaccine Approvals in Chronological Order. Information taken from Drug and vaccine
authorizations for COVID-19: List of authorized drugs, vaccines and expanded indications
Table 1. List of COVID-19 drugs (including vaccines) authorized by Health Canada
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 262408
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2023-01-12
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose (ages 12-17 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty Original & Omicron BA.4/BA.5
o Tozinameran, famtozinameran suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 268826
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-12-09
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Bivalent booster (ages 5-11 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Novavax Inc.
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Nuvaxovid
o SARS-CoV-2 recombinant spike proteinsuspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 265342
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-12-06
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Adolescent dose (ages 12-17 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
- Authorization holder
o Novavax Inc.
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Nuvaxovid
o SARS-CoV-2 recombinant spike protein suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 266285
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-11-17
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax Bivalent (Original / Omicron BA.4/5)
o Elasomeran, davesomeran dispersion for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 267589
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-11-03
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Bivalent booster (ages 18 years and over)
o Food andDrug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty Original/Omicron BA.1
o Tozinameran, riltozinameran suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 266189
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-10-21
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Bivalent booster (ages 12 years and over)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o AstraZeneca Canada Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Evusheld Cilgavimab and tixagevimab solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immune sera and immunoglobulins, for human use
- Control number
o 265382
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-10-18
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Expanded indication Food and Drug Regulations Authorized
- Authorization holder
o Hoffmann-La Roche Limited
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Actemra
o Tocilizumab solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immunosuppressants, for human use
- Control number
o 261220
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-10-13
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty Original & Omicron BA.4/BA.5
o Tozinameran, famtozinameran suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 267502
- Date of authorization or expandedindication
o 2022-10-07
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Bivalent booster (ages 12 years and over)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 265483
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-09-09
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 6 months-5 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax Bivalent
o Elasomeran, imelasomeran
o dispersion for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 265656
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-09-01
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Bivalent booster (ages 18 years and over)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeuticarea
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 264621
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-08-19
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose (ages 5-11 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 263775
- Date of authorization or expandedindication
o 2022-07-14
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 6 months-5 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 261729
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-06-01
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose (ages 16-17 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Janssen Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Jcovden (previously Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine)
o AD26.COV2.S (recombinant) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Contro Vaccines, for human use l number
o 259715
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-05-11
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Gilead Sciences Canada Inc.
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Veklury
o Remdesivir solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Antivirals for systemic use, for human use
- Control number
o 250151
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-04-22
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized
- Authorization holder
o AstraZeneca Canada Inc
- Brand name, proper name orcommon name
o Evusheld
o Cilgavimab and tixagevimab solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immune sera and immunoglobulins, for human use
- Control number
o 258295
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-04-14
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 258658
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-03-17
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 6-11 years)
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Medicago Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Virus-like particles (VLP) of SARS-CoV-2 spike protein
o emulsion for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 254598
- Date ofauthorization or expanded indication
o 2022-02-24
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Novavax Inc.
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Nuvaxovid
o SARS-CoV-2recombinant spike protein
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 255370
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2022-02-17
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized withterms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Janssen Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Jcovden (previously Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine)
o AD26.COV2.S (recombinant)
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 253702
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-11-23
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o AstraZeneca Canada Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Vaxzevria (previously AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine)
o ChAdOx1-S (recombinant)
o solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 253700
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-11-19
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2)suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 257698
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-11-19
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 5-11 years)
o Food and DrugRegulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Controlnumber
o 257293
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-11-12
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brandname, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 257162
- Date of authorization or expandedindication
o 2021-11-09
- Authorization or expanded indication
o First booster dose
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty(previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 252736
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-09-16
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 252733
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-09-16
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name,proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 253430
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-08-27
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 12-17 years)
o Interim Order Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o GlaxoSmithKline Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Sotrovimab
o Sotrovimab for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immune sera and immunoglobulins for human use
- Control number
o 251285
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-07-30
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Hoffmann-La Roche Limited
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Casirivimab and imdevimab
o Casirivimab and imdevimab solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immune sera and immunoglobulins for human use
- Control number
o 249830
- Date of authorization or expandedindication
o 2021-06-09
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 251730
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-05-05
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Pediatric indication (ages 12-15 years)
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Janssen Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Jcovden (previously Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine)
o AD26.COV2.S (recombinant)
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 246758
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-03-05
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms andconditions
- Authorization holder
o Verity Pharmaceuticals Inc/Serum Institute of India (in partnership with
AstraZeneca Canada Inc)
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Covishield
o ChAdOx1-S (recombinant)
o solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 248651
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-02-26
o (expired 2021-09-16)
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o AstraZeneca Canada Inc
- Brandname, proper name or common name
o Vaxzevria (previously AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine)
o ChAdOx1-S (recombinant)
o solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 244627
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2021-02-26
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Spikevax (previously Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Elasomeran
o suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 244946
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2020-12-23
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Comirnaty (previously Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine)
o Tozinameran (mRNA vaccine, BNT162b2) suspension for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Vaccines, for human use
- Control number
o 244906
- Date ofauthorization or expanded indication
o 2020-12-09
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Eli Lilly Canada Inc
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Bamlanivimab
o Bamlanivimab solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Immune sera and immunoglobulins for human use
- Control number
o 244947
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2020-11-20
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Interim Order
o Authorized with terms and conditions
- Authorization holder
o Gilead Sciences Canada Inc.
- Brand name, proper name or common name
o Veklury
o Remdesivir solution for injection
- Therapeutic area
o Antivirals for systemic use, for human use
- Control number
o 240551
- Date of authorization or expanded indication
o 2020-07-27
- Authorization or expanded indication
o Food and Drug Regulations
o Issued Notice of Compliance under the NOC/c Guidance
In addition to Health Canada’s review of the COVID-19 products in Table 1, many of the
submissions involved multiple (additional) supplemental submissions related specifically to
safety and quality (enumerated in Table 2 below).
• Supplemental New Drug Submissions (quality) are required when, for example, the
sponsor makes a change to the manufacturing process of a drug or changes are made at the
manufacturing facility.
• Supplemental New Drug Submissions (safety) are required when, for example, either
Health Canada or the sponsor want to make changes to the product monograph to clarify
contraindications, warnings, adverse events, etc. These updates are generally made as new
information becomes available to the sponsor.
• Notifiable Changes submissions are required when, for example, the sponsor is
requesting a change in the specifications of the drugs (e.g., changes that have the potential to
have an adverse effect on quality or changes that may increase the exposure levels of the drug).
These additional submissions required a significant amount of effort on the part of the scientific
review teams in the HealthProducts and Food Branch.
Table 2. Supplemental COVID-19 vaccine submissions reviewed by Health Canada
- BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH (Comirnaty)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety): 1
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality): 3
o # of Notifiable Changes: 22
- BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH (Comirnaty (BA.1))
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety): 0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality): 0
o # of Notifiable Changes: 0
- BioNTech Manufacturing GmbH (Comirnaty (BA.4/5))
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety): 0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality): 0
o # of Notifiable Changes: 0
- Medicago Inc (Covifenz)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety): 0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality): 0
o # of Notifiable Changes: 0
- Janssen Inc (JCOVDEN)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):4
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):0
o # of Notifiable Changes:4
- Novavax Inc. (Nuvaxovid)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):1
o # of Notifiable Changes:3
- ModernaTX, Inc (Spikevax)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):0
o # of Notifiable Changes:5
- ModernaTX, Inc (Spikevax (BA.1))
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):0
o # of Notifiable Changes:0
- ModernaTX, Inc (Spikevax (BA.4/5))
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):0
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):0
o # of Notifiable Changes:0
- AstraZeneca Canada Inc (Vaxzevria)
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submissions (Safety):2
o # of Supplemental New Drug Submission (Quality):0
o # of Notifiable Changes:2
Chronology of risk communications and Canadian Product Monograph updates for the main
AEFIs with Covid-19 vaccines
Detailed quality, safety and efficacy information about authorized COVID-19 vaccines is available
in their respective Canadian Product Monographs (CPMs). The CPMs are updated to reflect new
information when new safety signals are identified. The CPMs can be accessed on the Covid-19
vaccines and treatments portal. Health Canada (HC) regularly updates a post-authorization
activity table (PAAT) for each of the COVID-19 vaccines and treatments. The PAAT summarizes
the regulatory activities, including risk communications, undertaken since market authorization.
Since thetime of initial market authorisation of the Covid-19 vaccines, the following risk
communications have been issued to inform the Canadian public and Healthcare professionals
of new safety information:
• Pfizer Comirnaty vaccine
o Risk of serious allergic reactions (Public Advisory issued on Dec 12, 2020)
o Risk of myocarditis and or pericarditis (InfoWatch article published June 20, 2021; Public
Advisory issued on June 30, 2021)
o Risk of facial paralysis/Bell’s palsy (Public Advisory issued on August 06, 2021; InfoWatch
article published on August 26, 2021)
• Moderna Spikevax
o Risk of myocarditis and or pericarditis (InfoWatch article published June 20, 2021; Public
Advisory issued on June 30, 2021)
• Vaxzevria COVID-19 Vaccine (AstraZeneca)/Covishield
o Risk of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia (Public Advisory issued on March 11, 2021;
Statement issued on March 18, 2021; Dear Healthcare Professional Letter issued on March 24,
2021; Summary Safety Review issued on 19 April 2023; Public Advisory issued on March 11,
2021)
o Risk of Capillary Leak Syndrome (Public Advisory issued on June 29, 2021)
o Risk of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (InfoWatch article published on August 26, 2021)
• Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine
o Risk of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia (Dear Healthcare Professional Letter issued
on April 26, 2021; Summary Safety Review issued on May 04, 2023; InfoWatch article published
on August 26, 2021)
o Risk of Capillary Leak Syndrome (InfoWatch article published on August 26, 2021)
o Risk of Guillain-Barré Syndrome (InfoWatch article published on August 26, 2021)
Table of the chronology of risk communications and Canadian Product Monograph updates for
the main AEFIs with Covid-19 vaccines
AEFI: Seriousallergies
Vaccine: Comirnaty (Pfizer)
Communication:
- On December 12, 2020, HC issued a Public Advisory to inform Canadians and Healthcare
professionals of severe allergic reactions reported in Europe.
CPM update:
- A label update was not warranted following the publication of the Public Advisory as
serious allergic reactions was included in the Comirnaty CPM prior to the issuance of the
market authorization.
AEFI: Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome (TTS)
Vaccine: Vaxzevria COVID-19 Vaccine (AstraZeneca)/Covishield, Janssen COVID-19 vaccine
Communication:
- On March 11, 2021, HC issued a Public Advisory to inform Canadians about adverse
event reports (blood clots) in Europe and that HC is collaborating with international
regulators, including the EMA, in assessing these events.
- On March 18, 2021, HC issued a statement confirming that in collaboration with
international regulatory partners (EMA and UK) the benefit of this vaccine continue to
outweigh any risks.
- On March 24, 2021, HC issued an HPRC to inform health professionals about TTS and
labelling updates
- On April 19, 2021, the MHPD released the Summary Safety Review on TSS.
- On April 26, HC issued a HPRC on TTS with Janssen
- On May 4, 2021, MHPD published the Summary Safety Review for Janssen
- On June 29, 2021, HC further updated the labeling with information about very rare
events of blood clots associated with low platelets following immunization
- On August 26, 2021, HC published in the August 2021 InfoWatch a communication
regarding the labelling update to include TTS for the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine.
CPM update:
- Advisement letter was issued by HC to the AZ/Covishield on March 20, 2021 to update
the labelling with information on signs and symptoms of thromboembolism and/or
thrombocytopenia
- AZ/Covishield labelling was first updated on March 24, 2021, then again on April 14,
2021, April 23, 2021, etc.
- On April 23, 2021, the Janssen Canadian product monograph was updated to include the
risk of TTS (prior to distribution of the vaccine in Canada)
- On June 15, 2021, an Advisement letter issued requesting additional label revisions for
Janssen to include a warning for the risk of bleeding in individuals with TTS with
intramuscular administration. The CPM was revised on Aug 4, 2021
- On March 25, 2022,the Janssen CPM was updated to include a contraindication and a
serious warning and precaution for TTS
AEFI:Capillary Leak Syndrome (CLS)
Vaccine:Vaxzevria COVID-19 Vaccine (AstraZeneca)/Covishield, Janssen COVID-19 vaccine
Communication:
- On June29, 2021, HC issued a Public Advisory to inform Canadian on the risk of capillary
leak syndrome and the labelling update.
- On June 29, 2021, HC issued an HPRC on the risk of capillary leak syndrome
- On August 26, 2021, HC published in the August 2021 InfoWatch a communication
regarding the labelling update to include CLS for the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine.
CPM update:
- AZ CPM was updated on June 29, 2021 for CLS.
- Janssen CPM was updated on August 18, 2021 for CLS
AEFI:Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS)
Vaccine:Vaxzevria COVID-19 Vaccine (AstraZeneca)/Covishield, Janssen COVID-19 vaccine
Communication:
- On August 26, 2021, HC published in the August 2021 InfoWatch a communication
regarding the labelling update to include GBS for the AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine and
the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine.
CPM update:
- On July 8, 2021, MHPD requested AstraZeneca to update the labelling for Vaxzevria to
include GBS.
- On August 13, 2021, the labelling for the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine (Vaxzevria) was
updated to include GBS.
- On August 18, 2021, the labelling for the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine was updated to
include GBS.
AEFI:Myocarditis/Pericarditis
Vaccine:Comirnaty (Pfizer), Spikevax (Moderna)
Communication:
- This risk was communicated in the June 2021 issue of InfoWatch (published on June 24,
2021).
- Public Advisory was issued on June 30, 2021.
CPM update:
- On June 25, 2021, HC issued an Advisement Letter the MAHs to include of the risk of
myocarditis and pericarditis on the labelling of both mRNA vaccines.
- On June 30,2021, the labelling of both vaccines for these events were updated.
AEFI:Facial paralysis/Bell’s Palsy
Vaccine:Comirnaty (Pfizer), Spikevax (Moderna
Communication:
- On July 16, Facial paralysis/Bell’s Palsy was added to the AESI table on the online weekly
AEFI report
- On August 6, 2021, Health Canada issued a public advisory about the labelling update
for Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine and Bell’s palsy
- On August 26, Health Canada published in the August 2021 InfoWatch a communication
regarding the labelling update for Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine Bell’s Palsy.
CPM update:
- On July 14, 2021, HC issued an Advisement Letter requesting the MAH to label for this
event.
- Labelling update for this event was completed on August 6, 2021
HPRCs for Englishonly labels have not been included in this list
NOTE TO FOLLOW
Roles and Responsibilities in Pharmacovigilance-Key Stakeholders
Stakeholder
- Health Canada regulators
Specific group
- Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB): Biologic and Radiopharmaceutical Drugs
Directorate (BRDD)
Mandate
- BRDD regulates biological drugs (products made from living sources, including vaccines),
radiopharmaceuticals (drugs that have radioactivity), and cells, tissues and organs for
human use in Canada.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Requires sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and quality to authorize vaccine for sale
in Canada
- Vaccine lot release program
- Reviews/approves post-marketing product changes that could impact quality, safety or
efficacy
Stakeholder
- Health Canada regulators
Specific group
- Health Products and Food Branch (HPFB): Marketed Health Products Directorate
(MHPD)
Mandate
- MHPD monitors and assesses the safety and effectiveness of authorized health products
that are marketed in Canada. They conduct surveillance activities and take regulatory
action when safety issues are identified and communicate about those risks to help the
public make informed decisions.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Collects and assesses suspected adverse reaction reports from market authorization
holders, consumers and healthcare professionals.
- Reviews safety data submitted by market authorization holders (adverse reaction
reports, safety reports, issue-specific safety reports, risk management plans, post-
authorization studies, etc.)
- Conducts risk-benefit assessments
- Issues risk communications
Stakeholder
- Health Canada regulators
Specific group
- Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch (ROEB): Health Product Compliance
Directorate (HPCD)
Mandate
- HPCD is responsible for delivering a national compliance monitoring and enforcement
program for health products regulated under the Regulations.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Regular Good Manufacturing Practice inspections are conducted to ensure continued
compliance and renewal of establishment licences for vaccine manufacturing facilities
- During inspections, monitors and enforces vaccine industry compliance with the Food
and Drugs Act andRegulations, including Good Manufacturing Practice
Stakeholder
- Federal, provincial, and territorial (F/P/T) public health authorities
Specific group
- Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
Mandate
- PHAC is the lead federal organization facilitating nationalapproaches to public health in
cooperation with provincial and territorial health departments or agencies. It is
responsible for identifying vaccine needs, allocating and distributing vaccines to the
provinces and territories, and conducting surveillance of vaccines.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Collates, codes, reviews, analyzes and communicates national level AEFI report data
from multiple sources in collaboration with Health Canada
- NACI Secretariat coordinates and supports the activities of NACI such as evidence
reviews and publications, including the Canadian Immunization Guide and position
statements.
Stakeholder
- Federal, provincial, and territorial (F/P/T) public health authorities
Specific group
- Provinces and territories (P&Ts)
Mandate
- The P&Ts, in cooperation with PHAC, are responsible for the administration of vaccines
within their respective jurisdictions. This includes the establishment of vaccination
clinics, recruitment and training of healthcare workers, and coordination withlocal
public health officials to ensure equitable distribution of vaccines to those who need
them most.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- AEFI surveillance at the jurisdictional level
- Monitor vaccine uptake, coverage, effectiveness
- Jurisdictional vaccine safety signal detection/investigation
- Share de-identified jurisdictional AEFI report data with PHAC
Stakeholder
- Federal, provincial, and territorial (F/P/T) public health authorities
Specific group
- Local public health officials
Mandate
- Local public health officials prevent and control the spread of infectious diseases, such
as COVID-19, and promote healthy behaviours and environments. They work closely
with P&Ts, HC, and PHAC.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Report AEFIs to provincial and territorial public health officials
- Conduct individual public health action after an AEFI (e.g., AEFI validation and/or
investigation; decisions on future re-immunization)
Stakeholder
- Global Pharmacovigilance Partners
Specific group
- World Health Organization (WHO)
Mandate
- The WHO has a mandate from member states to develop, establish and promote
international standards with respect to a wide variety of products including biologics
such as vaccines. Since 1965, the WHO has had a globalprogram for International Drug
Monitoring based at the Uppsala Monitoring Centre in Sweden. In 1999, the WHO
established the Global Advisory Committee on Vaccine Safety (GACVS) to provide
independent evidence-based responses to safety issues of global concern.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- The committee receives a subset of AEFI report data gathered by member states which
enable the main objective of the program: safety signal detection at a global level. PHAC
shares aggregate data on a monthly basis with the WHO.
- The GACVS also maintains a subject-specific topic index at their website.
- As part of their work, GACVS established the Vaccine Safety Net which identifies and
promotes websites on vaccine safety that adhere to good information practices.
Stakeholder
- Global Pharmacovigilance Partners
Specific group
- Council for International Organizations of Medical Sciences (CIOMS)
Mandate
- The CIOMS is an international, non-governmental, non-profit organization established
jointly by the WHO andthe United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization (UNESCO) in 1949.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- CIOMS facilitates and promotes international activities in the field of biomedical
sciences
- This includes making recommendations on the assessment and monitoring of adverse
reactions.
Stakeholder
- Global Pharmacovigilance Partners
Specific group
- International Coalition of Medicines Regulatory Authorities (ICMRA)
Mandate
- ICMRA is an international organization that aims topromote cooperation and
collaboration among medicine regulatory authorities globally, to improve patient safety,
public health and the quality of healthcare. Health Canada plays an integral role in
setting ICMRA's strategic directions. In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the ICMRA
has expanded its scope of work to provide a global approach for aligning the approaches
of regulators to COVID-19 treatments and vaccines. Health Canada leads and
contributes to this work.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Vaccine Pharmacovigilance Group
o Aims to improve patient safety by promoting international collaboration among
regulatory authorities in the monitoring and assessment of the safety of
vaccines.
o Exchanges information and best practices on vaccine pharmacovigilance to
enhance the scientific and technical capacities of member regulatory agencies
o Fosters harmonization and provides a platform for regulatory authorities.
- COVID-19 Policy Group
o Provides a platform for regulatory authorities to share information, coordinate
efforts and collaborate to ensure the rapid development, authorization and
availability of COVID-19 vaccines.
o Provides guidance and recommendations on regulatory and scientific matters
related to the development and approval of COVID-19products
Stakeholder
- Vaccine Industry
Specific group
- Vaccine market authorization holders
Mandate
- Vaccine market authorization holders, such as pharmaceutical companies, develop,
manufacture and market vaccines that are safe and effective for use in the population.
This includes conducting clinical trials to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of the
vaccine, as well as obtaining authorization from regulatory agencies before it can be
made available to the public.
Role/responsibility in surveillance activities
- Monitor the safety of their vaccines and report AEFIs to Health Canada as per the
regulations.
- Comply with the Food and Drugs Act and Regulations, including Good Laboratory
Practice, Good Clinical Practice, and Good Manufacturing Practice
- Prepare Annual Summary Reports
Communications for Vaccine Surveillance
Health Canada-Public Health Agency of Canada-Provinces and Territories
Health Canada works in close collaboration with the PHAC, along with the Federal, Provincial
and Territorial health authorities (FPTs), to monitor and share information on AEFIs reported to
CAEFISS and CV databases. In addition, HC shares on an ongoing basis outcomes of safety
reviews and emerging safety information from international partners. Here is an outline of the
steps for sharing information on AEFIs between Health Canada and PHAC:
Informating sharing process between PHC and Health Canada on adverse effects following
immunization
PHAC
- Vaccine recipient
o Adverse event following immunization (AEFI)
- Health professional
o Collects information and reports event locally
- Local public health unit
o Evaluates and reports event to region
- Provincial/territorial immunization authority
o Evaluates and reports event to PHAC/Canadian adverse events following
immunization surveillance system (CAEFISS)
o Participate in vaccine vigilance working group
- PHAC-CAEFISS
o Data collection and analysis
o Medical case review
o Consultation with vaccine vigilance working group
o Shares summaries with HC
o Additional sources ofinformation include external networks monitoring vaccine
safety (e.g. Canadian Vaccine Safety Network)
HC and PHAC collaboration
- Issues identification
- Assess safety signals
- Strong links with communications response
- Weekly web-posting of combined adverse event data
Health Canada
- Vaccine manufacturer
o Collects and assesses information and reports to Health Canada and
International regulatory authorities
o Submits monthly safety reports
o Submits issue specific assessment on request
- Vaccine recipient health professional
o Can report adverseevents to Canada Vigilance, reporting through public health
authorities is encouraged.
- Health Canada
o Collects and evaluates adverse event data to detect and asses safety signals,
including causality assessment
o Shares summaries withPHAC and participates in Vaccine Vigilance Working
Group
o Takes regulatory action to address emerging risks (e.g.) update warnings, risk
communications, require additional studies)
REDACTED–CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION
COVID-19 Vaccine ClinicalTrials in Chronological Order. Information taken from Drugs and
vaccines for COVID-19: List of authorized clinical trials
Table 1. List of COVID-19 vaccines currently in clinical trials, authorized by Health Canada
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o VBI-2901E (Control # 268572)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to
COVID-19 Regulations
- Title
o A Phase 1, Open-Label, Adjuvant Dose-Escalation, Randomized Study To
Evaluate The Safety And Immunogenicity Of Vbi-2901e, A Trivalent Coronavirus
Vaccine Candidate Adjuvanted With Aluminum Phosphate And E6020 In Healthy
Adults Previously Vaccinated With Licensed Covid-19 Vaccines
- Interventions
o Vaccine:
o VBI-2901E
- Authorization holder
o Variation Biotechnologies Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2022-10-25
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o COVAC-1 (Control # 267708) =
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to
COVID-19 Regulations
- Title
o A Randomized, Observer-Blind, Dose Escalation, Placebo-Controlled, Phase 1
Clinical Trial To Study The Safety And Immunogenicity Of A Covac-1 Booster
Dose In Generally Healthy Adults
- Interventions
o Vaccine:
o COVAC-1 (nCOV19 S1)
- Authorization holder
o University of Saskatchewan
- Authorization date
o 2022-09-28
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o VBI-2901A (Control # 267517)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to
COVID-19 Regulations
- Title
o A Phase 1, Randomized Study To Evaluate The Safety And Immunogenicity Of
VBI-2901a, A Trivalent Coronavirus Vaccine Candidate In Healthy Adults
Previously Vaccinated With Licensed Covid-19 Vaccines
- Interventions
o Vaccine:
o VBI-2901A
- Authorization holder
o Variation Biotechnologies Inc
- Authorization date
o 2022-09-15
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o COVB-2022-1 (Control # 261144) Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim
Order
- Title
o Covid-19 Vaccine Booster in Immunocompromised Rheumatic Diseases
(COVBIRD)
- Interventions
o SPIKEVAX (Elasomeran (mRNA)) / NUVAXOVID (COVID-19 Vaccine (Recombinant
protein, Adjuvanted))
- Authorization holder
o CHU de Québec–Université Laval
- Authorization date
o 2022-02-18
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o CP-PRO-CoVLP-026
o (Control # 259935)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Randomized, Partially-Blind, Multicenter, Phase 3 Study to Assess the Safety,
Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of a Booster Dose of a Homologous or
Heterologous Recombinant Coronavirus-Like Particle COVID-19 Vaccine in
Adults Previously Vaccinated with a COVID-19 Vaccine
- Interventions
o Vaccines:
o Coronavirus-like Particle (CoVLP) COVID-19 Vaccine / CoVLP.B1351 COVID-19
Vaccine
- Authorization holder
o Medicago Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2022-01-19
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o COVAC-004
o (Control # 259104)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase 1/2 Clinical Trial to Study Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of a
COVAC-2 Booster Dose in Generally Healthy Adults Interventions
- Interventions
o Vaccine: COVAC-2 (nCoV19 S1)
- Authorization holder
o University of Saskatchewan, VIDO
- Authorization date
o 2021-12-23
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o MP-37-2021-7562
o (Control # 258049)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o COVID-19 Vaccine inImmunosuppressed Adults With Autoimmune Diseases
- Interventions
o Vaccines:
o SPIKEVAX (Elasomeran (mRNA))
- Authorization holder
o Research Institute of the McGill University Health Centre
- Authorization date
o 2021-11-08
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o M010
o (Control # 257190)
- Title
o Phase 1, Open Label Study to Evaluate the Safety and Immunogenicity of
ChAd68 and AdHu5 vector-based Trivalent COVID-19 Vaccines Delivered Via
Inhaled Aerosol
- Interventions
o ChAd-CoV/Mac / Ad5-CoV/Mac
- Authorization holder
o McMaster University
- Authorization date
o 2021-10-21
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o 3750
o (Control # 255889)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o BOOST KIDNEY: A Multi-Centre 12 MonthParallel-Group Randomized Control
Trial of BNT162b2 versus mRNA-1273 COVID-19 Vaccine Boosters in Chronic
Kidney Disease and Dialysis Patients With Poor Humoral Response following
COVID-19 Vaccination
- Interventions
o COMIRNATY Vaccine (BNT162b2 mRNA Covid-19Vaccine) / SPIKEVAX Vaccine
(mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine)
- Authorization holder
o Sunnybrook Research Institute
- Authorization date
o 2021-09-02
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o Moderna RCT LTCF
o (Control # 255430)
o Authorized under the ClinicalTrials Interim Order
- Title
o Third Dose of Moderna mRNA-1273 COVID-19 Vaccine in Residents of Long-
Term Care Facilities
- Interventions
o Moderna COVID-19 vaccine (mRNA-1273 vaccine)
- Authorization holder
o McMaster University
- Authorization date
o 2021-08-13
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o PRO-CL-002
o (Control # 253878) Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase 2, Randomized, Observer-Blind, Study to Evaluate the Safety,
Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of PTX-COVID19-B Compared to Pfizer-
BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine in Healthy Seronegative Adults Aged 18 to 64 Years
- Interventions
o PTX-COVID19-B / Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine
- Authorization holder
o Providence Therapeutics Holdings, Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2021-07-20
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o mRNA-1273-P204
o (Control #254169)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase 2/3, Two-Part, Open-Label, Dose-Escalation, Age De-escalation and
Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Expansion Study to Evaluate
the Safety, Tolerability, Reactogenicity, and Effectiveness of mRNA-1273 SARS-
CoV-2 Vaccine in Healthy Children 6 Months to Less Than 12 Years of Age
- Interventions
o COVID-19 Vaccine Moderna (mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine)
- Authorization holder
o ModernaTX, Inc
- Authorization date
o 2021-07-08
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o ALT-501-102
o (Control # 252058)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase 1, Open-label Study to Evaluate the Effect of Position and Duration on
the Safety and Immunogenicity of Intranasal AdCOVID Administration
- Interventions
o AdCOVID Vaccine
- Authorization holder
o Altimmune, Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2021-05-26
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o CT24
o (Control # 251972)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o Immunogenicity and adverse events following immunization (AEFI) with
alternate schedules of COVID-19 vaccines in Canada: is “mix and match” of the
second dose (MOSAIC-a;CT24a) and third dose (MOSAIC-2;CT24b) safe and
immunogenic?
- Interventions
o Vaccines: Comirnaty Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine, mRNA) / SpikeVax
(Moderna Elasomeran mRNA vaccine)
- Authorization holder
o Dalhousie University/Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN)
- Authorization date
o 2021-05-05
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o KBP-201
o (Control #251755)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase I/II, First-in-human, Observer-blinded, Randomized, Placebo-controlled,
Parallel Group Study to Evaluate theSafety and Immunogenicity of TAP-COVID-
19 SARS-CoV-2 Vaccine with CpG Adjuvant in Healthy Adults Aged 18-49 and 50-
85
- Interventions
o TAP-COVID-19
- Authorization holder
o Kentucky Bioprocessing, Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2021-05-03
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o UHN-TID-COVAX-2
o (Control # 251583)
- Title
o A randomised, single blind, controlled trial of a third dose of Moderna vaccine
versus placebo in solid organ transplant recipients
- Interventions
o Moderna COVID-19 vaccine (mRNA-1273 SARS-CoV-2 vaccine)
- Authorization holder
o University Health Network
- Authorization date
o 2021-04-26
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o ENTVAX01-101
o (Control # 250321)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o Phase I/II Study to EvaluateSafety, Tolerability, Immunogenicity of a
Prophylactic Plasmid DNA Vaccine against SARS CoV-2 (Covigenix VAX-001) in
Healthy Adults 18 Years and Older
- Interventions
o Covigenix VAX-001
- Authorization holder
o Entos Pharmaceuticals Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2021-03-24
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o VAC31518COV2004
o (Control # 250107)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o An Open-label, Phase 2 Study to Evaluate the Safety, Reactogenicity, and
Immunogenicity of Ad26.COV2.S in Healthy Pregnant Participants
- Interventions
o Jcovden (Ad26.COV2.S (JNJ-78436735))
- Authorization holder
o Janssen Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2021-03-17
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o COVAC-001
o (Control # 247198)
o Authorized under theClinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Randomized, Observer-Blind, Dose-Escalation Phase I Clinical Trial of COVAC-2
in Healthy Adults
- Interventions
o COVAC-2 (nCoV19 S1)
- Authorization holder
o University of Saskatchewan, VIDO
- Authorization date
o 2020-12-22
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o PRO-CL-001
o (Control # 246974)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase I, First-in-Human, Observer-Blinded, Randomized, Placebo Controlled,
Ascending Dose Study to Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity
of PTX-COVID19-B Vaccine in Healthy Seronegative Adults Aged 18-64
- Interventions
o PTX-COVID19-B
- Authorization holder
o Providence Therapeutics Holdings Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-12-22
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o VBI-2902a-CT01
o (Control # 246985)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Phase 1a/1b, Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Study to
Evaluate the Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of the COVID-19(SARS-
CoV-2) Vaccine Candidates VBI-2902a and VBI-2905a in Healthy Adults
- Interventions
o VBI-2902a / VBI-2905a
- Authorization holder
o VBI Vaccines Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-12-18
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o VAC31518COV2001
o (Control #246908)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled Phase 2a Study to Evaluate a
Range of Dose Levels and Vaccination Intervals of Ad26.COV2.S in Healthy
Adults Aged 18 to 55 Years Inclusive and Adults Aged 65 Years and Older and to
Evaluate 2 Dose Levels of Ad26.COV2.S in Healthy Adolescents Aged 12 to 17
Years Inclusive
- Interventions
o Jcovden (Ad26.COV2.S (JNJ-78436735))
- Authorization holder
o Janssen Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-12-14
- Trial name /Protocol # / Control #
o CP-PRO-CoVLP-021
o (Control # 245149)
o Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o A Randomized, Observer-Blind, Placebo-Controlled Phase 2/3 Study to Assess
the Safety, Efficacy, and Immunogenicity of a Recombinant Coronavirus-Like
Particle COVID-19 Vaccine in Adults 18 Years of Age or Older
- Interventions
o Coronavirus-like Particle (CoVLP) COVID-19 Vaccine
- Authorization holder
o Medicago Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-11-09
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o CP-PRO-CoVLP-019
o (Control # 240922)
- Title
o A Randomized, Partially-Blinded, dose-Ranging Phase 1 Study to Assess the
Safety, Tolerability, and Immunogenicity of a Recombinant Coronavirus-Like
Particle COVID-19 Vaccine in Adults 18-55 Years of Age
- Interventions
o Coronavirus-like Particle (CoVLP) COVID-19 Vaccine
- Authorization holder
o Medicago Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-07-09
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o IC.8
o (Control # 240586) Authorized under the Clinical Trials Interim Order
- Title
o COV-IMMUNO-A Randomized, Phase III Trial of Immunization with IMM-101
versus Observation for the Prevention of Severe Respiratory and COVID-19
Related Infections in Cancer Patients at Increased Risk of Exposure
- Interventions
o IMM-101
- Authorization holder
o Canadian Cancer Trials Group, Cancer Research Institute, Queen's University
- Authorization date
o 2020-06-24
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o Ad5-nCoV-2020003
o (Control # 239283)
- Title
o A Randomized, Observer-Blind, Dose-escalation Phase I/II Clinical Trial of Ad5-
nCoV Vaccine in Healthy Adults from 18 to <85 years of age in Canada
- Interventions
o Recombinant Novel Coronavirus Vaccine (Adenovirus Type 5) (Ad5-nCoV)
- Authorization holder
o CanSino Biologics Inc.
- Authorization date
o 2020-05-15
- Trial name / Protocol # / Control #
o COBRA
o (Control # 238868)
- Title
o A Randomized, Double-blind, Placebo-Controlled Phase 3 Study: Efficacy and
Safety of Recombinant BCG VPM1002 in Reducing SARS-CoV-2 Infection Rate
and COVID-19 Severity
- Interventions
o Recombinant
o Mycobacterium bovis
o BCGΔureC::hly
- Authorization holder
o Princess Margaret Cancer Centre
- Authorization date
o 2020-05-08
As indicated in Table 1, Health Canada reviewed 27 clinical trial applications (CTAs) for COVID-19
products between March 2020 andJanuary 2023. In addition to these CTAs, many of the trials
that were authorized by Health Canada underwent amendments that required Health Canada to
review additional submissions (CTA-Amendments). These amendments are required when
changes are made to thetrial protocol that are likely to impact the safety of the subjects or will
affect the analysis and the interpretation of the safety and efficacy of the drug(s) under
investigation. Examples of amendments include changes to the selection, assessment or
dismissal of clinical trial subjects; changes to the dose level, dose schedule or duration of the
treatment; and/or changes to the post-treatment follow-up period that may affect the safety
evaluation of the drug, among others. In total, Health Canada reviewed 61 CTA-Amendments for
the COVID-19 clinical trials “approved” by Health Canada. These additional submissions required
a significant amount of effort on the part of the scientific review teams in the Health Products
and Food Branch.
HEALTH DATA AND DIGITAL HEALTH TOOLS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has clearly demonstrated the need for improved health data
management in Canada, not only to inform how to best respond in the face of public health
emergencies but also to support the delivery of health care services and improve health
outcomes for Canadians.
• At present, only about one third of Canadians can access some of their health data
online. Clinicians can’t easily access or share health information because systems don’t always
connect. The lack ofthis available patient data can affect safety, add unnecessary or duplicative
tests, and result in longer wait times and hospital stays.
• Despite significant investments in health care, Canada continues to lag behind other
OECD countries when it comes tosharing and managing health data. Digital systems across the
country are highly fragmented leading to poor ability to collect, share and use health data.
• That is why the Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces and
territories to improve health data systems for Canada, so that Canadians can access their own
health information and benefit from it being shared across health systems.
KEY FACTS
• Canadians have made it clear they want seamless, modern access to their care, but
Canada lags behind other countries when it comes to providing citizens with access to their own
electronic health information.
o By March 2022, 49% of Canadians reported that they were offered virtual care visits
along with other non-virtual care modalities and 91% were satisfied with their experience.
o Almost all Canadian physicians say they will continue to use virtual care approaches, and
64% say they will maintain or increase its use.
o Today, only 32% of surveyed Canadians report ever electronically accessing their
personal health information. This is despite nearly 80% of Canadians wishing to have such
access.
o On top of that, only 35% of surveyed Canadian family health service providers and
specialists can share patient information outside of their practice.
• To support access to health care services through virtual approaches and digital tools,
the Government invested $240.5M in 2020. Of this, $150M was provided directly to provinces
and territories through bilateral agreements to address the challenges of delivering health care
during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.
• In Budget 2022, the Government made a commitment to strengthen public health care
with a focus on the effective use of high-quality data and digital systems in Canada, and this was
echoed as one of five key health priorities by the Minister of Health in March 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians deserve a modern and connected health system where they can interact
digitally with the health system, access their own health data electronically, and where data is
shared between health professionals and with policy makers to improve care and report on how
the system is working.
• Improving Canada’s ability to collect, access and share timely data will help to save lives.
• That is why the Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces and
territories to improve health data systems for Canada.
IF PRESSED ON DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY
• Just as banks protect financial information, it is essential to ensure that health data is
kept private and secure. As work to improve health data management advances, the
Government is committed to collaborating and coordinating with partners to ensure that
Canadians’ health data is protected.
• In June 2022, the Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry tabled reforms to the
federal privacy law. Bill C-27, the Digital Charter Implementation Act 2022, introduces a new
privacy law, the Consumer Privacy Protection Act (CPPA), which complements the important
work underway to leverage health data to improve individual patient and health system
outcomes, all while protecting privacy.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH DATA WILL HELP THE CURRENT HEALTH CARE SYSTEM CRISIS
• One of the most impactful tools at our disposal to ensure improvements to the health
system is data—to provide stronger evidence, inform better decisions and ultimately see
concrete outcomes for Canadians.
• When data flows through digitally connected health systems, health providers can work
better as a team to deliver higher quality and more efficient care
• Likewise, when data flows backthrough the system to support research and decision-
making, it can drive improvements in health care services and inform public health responses.
BACKGROUND
The COVID-19 pandemic exposed challenges in how health information is collected, shared and
usedto inform decisions in response to public health events. Making it easier to collect and
share health data will be essential for improving Canadians’ health care systems and health
outcomes.
Building off lessons learned from the pandemic, and recognizing the critical importance of
timely access to health data, FPT governments have been collaborating on the development of a
pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. This strategy intends to modernize how health data is
managed in Canada. It will support digital health systems that can connect to one another and
share data safely and appropriately, supporting care providers and empowering Canadians. It
will also help harness data to better understand what is happening in our health system, so
decision-makers have timely and comparable data to make decisions about public and
population health.
This strategy will complement an existing FPT Action Plan on Virtual Care and Digital Health
endorsed by Federal-Provincial-Territorial Ministers that commits to advancing standards for
digital sharing of health information and equitable access to virtual care. Virtual care and digital
health also emerged from the pandemic as massive disruptors to the way care is delivered.
Accordingly, on May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care
and digital tools for Canadians. Of this funding, $150M flowed to provinces and territories
through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services. In addition, Canada Health
Infoway received $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on secure messaging and
videoconferencing and support Provinces and Territories as they implement new initiatives
pursuant to the bilateral agreements.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with provinces andterritories on the
advancement of standards to support interoperability, as there is extensive FPT collaboration in
this space and PTs are prioritizing the advancement of approaches to support interoperability.
For example, Ontario has recently passed ‘digital health information exchange’ regulations
within its existing personal health information law, which requires IT vendors to use specific
technical standards to ensure data can be exchanged between IT systems and points of care.
Likewise, Quebec has tabled Bill-19, which enshrines the right to access health data and
requirements for IT vendors to use specific standards.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to working with provinces and
territories on strategies to better use health data tosupport health care system improvements
and Canadians’ access to their personal health records. It also speaks to the importance of
increasing virtual care for all Canadians. Further, Budget 2022 also reinforced the Government
of Canada’s commitment to supporting health innovation, including adoption and procurement.
For example, Budget 2022 provides a $30 million investment over four years, starting in 2022-
23, to build upon the success of the Coordinated Accessible National (CAN) Health Network and
expand it nationally to Quebec, the territories, and Indigenous communities.
In March 2022, Minister Duclos outlined five pillars for health to address systemic challenges to
enhancing access to high-quality, integrated care. These include:
• Better access tofamily doctors and teams;
• Reducing backlogs and growing our health workforce;
• Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
• Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
• Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer tohome.
Accessible health data and innovative digital solutions will be foundational to achieving progress
across all five priorities. That is why the federal government is working closely with provinces
and territories, stakeholders and experts to continueto drive this agenda forward. This will help
us modernize our health system, equip Canada to deal more effectively with public health
emergencies, and improve health care for Canadians.
PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
TO PROMOTE AND PROTECT THE HEALTH OF CANADIANS THROUGH LEADERSHIP,
PARTNERSHIP, INNOVATION AND ACTION IN PUBLIC HEALTH.
—Public Health Agency of Canada
Également disponible en français sous le titre :
Stratégie pancanadienne de données sur la santé
To obtain additional information, please contact:
Public Health Agency of Canada Address Locator 0900C2 Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9
Tel.: 613-957-2991
Toll free: 1-866-225-0709
Fax: 613-941-5366
TTY: 1-800-465-7735
E-mail: publications-publications@hc-sc.gc.ca
His Majesty the King in Right ofCanada, as represented by the Minister of Health, 2022
Publication date: November 2022
This publication may be reproduced for personal or internal use only without permission
provided the source is fully acknowledged.
Cat.: HP5-147/2022E-PDF ISBN: 978-0-660-45930-1
Pub.: 220497
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1.0 FOREWORD
2.0 OVERVIEW
2.1 Context
2.2 Common Vision and Guiding Principles
2.3 Intended Outcomes
3.0 KEY ELEMENTS
3.1 Public Trust and Data Literacy
3.2 Governance
3.3 Data Policies
3.4 Interoperability and Architectures
4.0 GOVERNANCE MODEL
5.0 PRIORITY ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
6.0 CONCLUSION AND WAY FORWARD
ANNEX A: PROPOSED HEALTH DATA CHARTER
GLOSSARY
1.0
FOREWORD
The Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (the‘Strategy’) sets a long-term vision for the collection,
access, sharing, use, and protection of health data and articulates initial steps towards that
vision.
It is based on the recognition by federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) governments that the
health sector requires reliable, person-centric, timely, quality, and trusted health data systems
that enable optimized health data management that achieves mutually beneficial outcomes.
Health data refers to data that is used for health care, public health, and population health
purposes.
FPT governments1 are committed to working together under this Strategy, in coordination with
pan-Canadian health organizations, First Nations, Inuit, and Métis (FNIM) partners and other
stakeholders, to achieve the visionof better health outcomes and public health responses for
individuals, communities, and Canadian society through learning health systems. The Strategy’s
commitments mobilize individual and collective jurisdictional actions to strengthen the health
data foundation and make health data systems more effective, efficient, secure, and person-
centric.
Progress on the Strategy will be guided by available funding, resources, and capacity within and
across jurisdictions.
1 Québec does not endorse this strategy because it intends to maintain its full autonomy
with regard to the planning, organization, and management of its health system and will
share information and best practices concerning the implementation of its Plan to
Implement Necessary Changes in Health.
2.0
OVERVIEW
2.1 CONTEXT
The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted longstanding issues that make it a challenge to collect,
share, access, and use health data for the benefit of all people in Canada. Simultaneously, the
pandemic served as a catalyst for fundamentally re-shaping how people interact with and access
publicly funded health services. Reliable, timely, relevant, and comparable data are crucial to
help make decisions, provide advice in public health emergencies and take proactive actions to
prevent emergencies in the future. Health data can drive equitable access to care, improve
health outcomes and enhance health system quality, safety and effectiveness. With quality,
secure, and readily accessible health data, patients and caregivers are empowered to actively
participate in the management of their own health care.
Current Canadian health data management and governance frameworks are fragmented,
resulting in data flows that are impeded by cultural disincentives, technical barriers and a lack of
interoperability within and among jurisdictions. Fragmentation of health data assets can lead to
inefficiency, cause clinical harm, duplicate investments, slow health sector innovation and
create challenges for all governments when responding to major public health events. Many
provinces, territories, and federal departments have developed or are developing innovative
methods to address these issues; however, successful scaling and spreading of these
innovations toward a pan-Canadian vision has been limited.
The COVID-19 pandemic spurred historic FPT collaboration on virtual care, digital health and
addressing Canada’s persistent health data management challenges. With this progress and
momentum over the past two years, the time has arrived to transform Canadian healthcare and
public health approaches through the development of world-class health data systems.
This transformation is different than previous efforts through its focus on issues related to
governance, policy, trust, literacy, and culture in addition to information technology.
Accelerating health sector transformation toward learning health systems will build flexibility,
helping all jurisdictions in Canada to anticipate and adapt to future health needs, reduce
inequities and expedite recovery from health emergencies, such as the COVID-19 pandemic. A
better prepared Canada will emerge, positioning the country to be a global leader in health data
innovation.
This Strategy has been co-developed by FPT governments and sets out a comprehensive
approach that anticipates joint actions, as well as public, stakeholder and First Nations, Inuit,
and Métis partnerships, working towards a common goal. The Strategy represents a long-term
vision to sustain a strong health data foundation that improves health care, public health and
population health.
Activities under the Strategy would initially focus on clear health system priorities such as
primary care, mental health, vaccination data, and health human resources, while recognizing
that jurisdictions havedifferent capacity, capability, and priority to advance this work.
The Strategy would be advanced in partnership with FPT governments and be integrated across
health systems, public health and population health data workplans to identify opportunities to
spread innovation and solve mutual challenges together. After three years, the Strategy would
be refreshed to review progress, confirm commitments, advance new areas of focus, and adjust
approaches as necessary to ensure it continues to meet the needs of jurisdictions and Canada as
a whole.
2.2 COMMON VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The Strategy’s Vision for health data in Canada is:
› A pan-Canadian health data foundation enables better health outcomes and public health
responses for individuals, communities, and Canadian society through learning health systems.
The Strategy’s Principles will guide work towards this vision. The principles are:
› Empowerment of Canadians–Put people first by honouring and respecting a person’s choices,
needs and values, andempowering the public to be active participants in the management of
their own health through access and control over their health data.
› Indigenous Data Sovereignty–Support First Nations, Inuit, and Métis data sovereignty using a
distinctions-based approach to ensure that the unique rights, interests and circumstances of the
First Nations, the Métis Nation and Inuit are acknowledged, affirmed, implemented, and
embedded in pan-Canadian approaches.
› Equity–Respect the rights and promote the inclusionof all people and communities by
supporting data that reflects the diversity of Canada and data use that produces justice and
fairness within the health sector, particularly for Indigenous peoples, racialized minorities, and
populations who are made marginalized.
› Stewardship–Foster a culture of stewardship that recognizes the imperative to share
interoperable health data and insights in a timely fashion using open standards, with privacy
protections, to support decision-making, evidence-based health policies, programs, services, and
research.
› Privacy and Security–The privacy and security of health data are maintained to maximize the
benefits of data use and reduce harms. An individual’s rights to privacy and to control their
information are respectedwhile ensuring data are available for socially beneficial purposes
related to health.
› Trust and Trustworthiness–Build trust in health data systems with the public by treating them
as equal partners in managing their health and increasing transparency on how health data are
collected, shared, accessed, used and protected.
› Collaboration–Promote collaborative, coordinated, and trusted processes between
governments, health sector organizations, and with the public that build on leading
international, domestic and regional data principles, best practices, and standards.
› Innovation–Enable social, economic, and technological development using health data,
through public and private sector investments, partnerships, invention, adoption, discovery, and
value creation.
2.3 INTENDED OUTCOMES
The goal of the Strategy is to support federal, provincial, and territorial governments to improve
health systems as a whole in areas that are agreed to be mutually beneficial. The ultimate
outcome of these improvements is to empower individuals with access to their own health data,
enable clinicians to provide better care, and support the use of health data to improve health
care, public health, and population health. Work under the Strategy will contribute to and build
on existing efforts already being made towards these goals, as well as transparency on health
systems results and outcomes.
The Strategy does not create a large technology system for the whole country; neither does it
replace jurisdictionalhealth data strategies, create legal requirements, legislative changes, nor
compel individual clinical data to be shared without consent. Rather, it defines common
approaches–in data standards, governance and policies, technologies, trust and literacy–to
enable pan-Canadian coordination of health data management and access, while recognizing
the need for flexibility to address jurisdictions’ unique circumstances, and the funding,
resources, and capacity to support this.
It is recognized that implementation of the Strategy will move at a pace that is dependent on
available funding, resources, and capacity. It is also understood that this pace can be
accelerated through deliberate collaboration, sharing of best practices, common technical
standards and effective change management within and across jurisdictions. By endorsing and
working to implement the Strategy with a focus on areas of mutual benefit, FPT governments
will overcome health data management barriers to yield immediate and long-term benefits.
3.0
KEY ELEMENTS
The Strategy will establish common, ongoing pan-Canadian commitments for federal, provincial,
and territorial governments across four foundational Key Elements:
› Public Trust and Data Literacy
› Governance
› Data Policies
› Interoperability and Architecture
3.1 PUBLIC TRUST AND DATA LITERACY
Commitment 1: Jurisdictions will work collaboratively to build strong public trust and data
literacy with transparent communication and meaningfully engaged stakeholders and partners.
Jurisdictions agree to:
› Increase health data literacy among the public and within the health sector, including clinicians
and other health sector stakeholders.
› Engage the public, clinicians, and other health sector stakeholders on pan-Canadian health
data activities, and clearly communicate with the public and stakeholders.
Activities under the Strategy will work to advance greater health data literacy among the public,
clinicians, the broader health workforce, and health decision-makers to foster theneeded trust.
Education and change management activities can be shared and scaled across jurisdictions to
reduce capacity needed to implement trust and literacy activities on a pan-Canadian scale.
3.2 GOVERNANCE
Commitment 2: Jurisdictions will establish clear and accountable pan-Canadian governance,
guided by a common health data charter.
Jurisdictions agree to:
› Establish FPT-FNIM governance structures.
› Monitor progress through mutually agreed upon metrics.
› Implement the Strategy through common frameworks, maturity assessments, and adaptable
jurisdictional roadmaps that reflect available resources and capacity.
› Endorse, in principle, the Health Data Charter (Annex A) as part of the Strategy, which reflects
the Strategy’s Guiding Principles, and which will help guide the Strategy’s implementation.
Clear and accountable governance for health data is essential to coordinate health data
management within and across jurisdictions and track progress towards desired outcomes. The
Strategy will be supported through a collaborative governance structure to guide
implementation, monitor progress through metrics that are mutually agreed upon, and revise
Strategy objectives when needed.
Governance will renew and update these commitments as well as identify three-year priority
action areas so that adjustments can be made to support achievement of the long-term vision.
3.3 DATA POLICIES
Commitment 3: Jurisdictions will work collaboratively to develop effective and equitable data
policies that enable safe and secure access to quality data for impactful insights.
Jurisdictions agree to:
› Review existing policies and frameworks to identify gaps and opportunities for alignment that
will promote person-centred access to health data and learning healthsystems.
› Develop a common framework for health data stewardship that encourages data re-use,
protection, and collaboration across organizations and networks.
Under the Strategy, jurisdictions will examine health data policies in areas of mutual benefit to
support stewardship-based health data management models. Co-developed health data policy
frameworks would be designed for jurisdictional flexibility and consistency in the areas of
greatest benefit to achieve the Strategy’s vision. Approaches to healthdata policies under the
Strategy would protect individual privacy, respect jurisdictions’ privacy legislation, recognize the
need for health data security, and enable data use for person-centred access to health data,
better health outcomes and the publicgood.
3.4 INTEROPERABILITY AND ARCHITECTURES
Commitment 4: Jurisdictions will adopt compatible, interoperable data standards and
architectures for timely data exchange and meaningful data access and use.
Jurisdictions agree to:
› Adopt common and integrated health data content and exchange standards, developed
through the Canadian Institute for Health Information, Statistics Canada, and Canada Health
Infoway, based on available resources at a pace appropriate for jurisdictional context.
› Develop and adopt compatible, person-centred, interoperable health data architectures that
leverage data standards to enable data exchange between personal, clinical and analytical
systems.
The Strategy will support the adoption of common standards as the base for person-centred,
compatible health data architectures and support oversight of standardization across
jurisdictional health sectors. The Strategy will support the use of interoperable, person-centric
data architecture principles, as well as data content and exchange standards developed by
Canadian Institute for Health Information, Statistics Canada, and Canada Health Infoway and
implemented by health data information technology vendors.
4.0
GOVERNANCE MODEL
Strategy activities will be implemented within a shared FPT governance structure, with partners
working together through appropriate channels to ensure the Strategy contributes to the
development of world-class health data systems in Canada.
The illustration in Figure 1 summarizes the proposed strategic governance structure for FPT
health data activities. This governance model requires participation and commitment of
resources at all levels of government and will be further refined and finalized through early
implementation work.
FIGURE 1:Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Governance Structure
1. Minister of Health
2. Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health (CDMH)
3. FPT-FNIM Digital Health/ Health Canada Integration Table
a. Public Advisory Body
b. Expert Advisory Bory
4. Coordination Body
FPTMinisters of Health
› Approve the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
FPT Conference of Deputy Ministers of Health (CDMH)
› Provide accountability and oversight for the Strategy
› Endorse Strategy priorities
› Build consensus on Strategy funding priorities
› Ensure Strategy alignment with FNIM health data work
FPT-FNIM Digital Health/Health Data Integration Table
› Oversee an integrated workplan for health data by setting shared priorities across health
systems, public health, and population health data
› Provide strategic advice and leadership to and eliminate duplication in health data activities
› Endorse key workplan items from the digital health and health system, public health and
population health data tables that are responsible for the Strategy’s implementation
FPT-FNIM Digital Health/Health Data Integration Table membership will seek to leverage the
membership of three existing Assistant Deputy Minister level tables:
› The FPT-FNIM Digital Health and Health System Data Table co-led by Health Canada;
› The FPT-FNIM Public Health Network’s Public Health Data Table co-led by PHAC; and
› The FPT-FNIM Population Health Table co-led by Statistics Canada.
These tables are responsible for leading implementation activities in the identified priority
areas.
The Digital Health/Health Data Integration Table will be responsible for setting strategic shared
priorities for implementation tables through the integrated workplan, which will establish
connections between health system, public health, and population health data.
The above tables are supported by a Coordination Body led by the Canadian Institute for Health
Information (CIHI) in partnership with Canada Health Infoway. The role of the Coordination Body
is to support jurisdictional implementation of the Strategy. The Coordination Body will:
› Support FPT governments in the development, implementation and support of agreed
priorities, enabling scaling and minimizing duplication.
› Support mutually re-enforcing FPT workplan activities and alignment between digital health/
health system, public health, and population health data tables, as well as the health research
community.
› Support and sustain the enabling health data policies, interoperability standards, and trust and
engagement that will helpall Committees achieve their outcomes.
› Identify common challenges and support FPT work to collaborate on solutions.
› Monitor and report on progress of the integrated workplan and other mutually agreed metrics.
› Help spread of best practices across jurisdictions.
› Enable ongoing communication among FPT tables.
› Support FPT, public and stakeholder communications to promote data literacy and trust.
› Incorporate deliverables from the FPT Digital Health Action plan agreed to in early 2022.
It is recognized that jurisdictions will need to work together and with FNIM partners to
determine appropriate ways to support First Nations, Inuit, and Métis participation in
governance and alignment between work under this Strategy and FNIM data strategies. The
intention is for FPT tables to evolve into FPT-FNIM tables through ongoing, distinctions-based
national and regional FNIM engagement, supporting and respecting the existing and emerging
jurisdictional FNIM relationships. In the interim, Indigenous Services Canada will be invited to
FPT-FNIM tables. Further, due to the important and cross-cutting role of research, including
their focus on learning health systems, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) will be
invited to participate in FPT-FNIM tables.
5.0
PRIORITY ACTIONS FOR IMPLEMENTATION
Strategy implementation is premised on an incremental approach, based on the four Key
Elements, including the collaborative governance model. The Key Elements and the governance
model are flexible andscalable, allowing adjustments over time that reflect changes in priorities
and to take advantage of new opportunities and partnerships, as they arise.
Jurisdictions are at varying states of readiness and capacity to begin implementation. Therefore,
a staged approach towards common actions is appropriate. This offers a valuable opportunity
for some jurisdictions to follow early implementers, leveraging the successes and lessons
learned by their counterparts who are further along. Implementation will be unique to each
jurisdiction based on readiness. Actions will be continually updated based on progress made.
Initially, actions to support the Strategy’s Key Elements will be focused in common FPT priority
areas, as determined by FPT governance. Priorities could include:
› Strengthening primary and urgent care systems
› Enhancing vaccination data management for individuals and public health
› Improving health human resource capacity
› Supporting work on mental health and substance use
It is anticipated that meaningful progress on initial priorities will take place within the first three
years, while recognizing that jurisdictions have different capacity and capability. A shared
workplan will be developed through the governance structure to sequence actions and will
consider additional priorities as feasible.
TABLE 1: Initial Actions for Implementation
1. Confirm the Health Data Charter to guide implementation of the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy.
2. Establish FPT governance for the Strategy andconfirm common health data priority areas.
3. Develop a shared FPT workplan to sequence actions.
4. Partner with First Nations, Inuit and Métis to build connections between national and regional
Indigenous health data governance and the Strategy.
5. Establish a public advisory council for health data and work with the public to co-develop a
pan-Canadian approach to increase health data literacy, particularly for the general public.
6. Support assessments of the maturity of health data capabilities in priority areas to identify
additional opportunities to share best practices.
7. Complete work on interoperability standards through the FPT Digital Health Action Plan,
including an initial draft roadmap for interoperability standards by Canada Health Infoway, in
collaboration with CIHI and Statistics Canada, for FPT review by the end of 2022.
8. Review existing policies and frameworks to collaboratively act on identified gaps and
opportunities for alignment to enable data access and utilization.
6.0
CONCLUSION
AND WAY FORWARD
As jurisdictions move toward the Strategy’s long-term vision, further discussions will be
necessary to achieve jurisdictional consensus on priorities to be advanced in the short-term. The
initial priority actions taken through the Strategywill create the structures necessary to support
those discussions in a way that fosters coordination and alignment between jurisdictions.
ANNEX A: PROPOSED HEALTH DATA CHARTER
Inspired by the universal human rights to health, to benefit from science, and to non-
discrimination and equity, and founded on the five principles of the Canada Health Act –public
administration, comprehensiveness, universality, portability, and accessibility–the Health Data
Charter affirms Canada’s commitment to improving data collection across health systems to
inform future decisions.
The Health Data Charter elaborates on the Strategy’s principles to promote:
1. Person-centric health information design to ensure that health data follow the individual
across points of care tosupport individual, clinical, and analytical access and use.
2. Common standards for terminology, health data design, stewardship, interoperability,
access and portability.
3. The quality, security and privacy of health data to maximize benefit and reduce harm to
individuals and populations.
4. Timely accessibility of meaningful and comprehensive health data to individuals,
decision makers, researchers, and the health workforce to support an individual’s health needs,
quality health programs and services, population and public health, and research.
5. The ethical use of health data for policies, programs, services, statistics and research for
the public good, including the importance of open science and being open-by-design.
6. Data-driven social and technological innovation through partnership, invention,
discovery, value creation and international best practice.
7. Literacy regarding health data and digital methods for the public, decision-makers and
the health workforce.
8. Harmonization of healthdata governance, oversight, and policy.
9. Support for First Nations, Inuit and Metis Nation data sovereignty.
10. Inclusion of diverse members of the public, patients, communities and other
stakeholders in health information system development and oversight.
GLOSSARY
Data Architecture: a framework for how IT infrastructure supports a data strategy; a mapping of
how data are collected, stored, shared, accessed, used, and protected.
Data Custodianship: a conceptual model of data management whereby the use of data is
governed by law, ethics, and other value-based considerations and prioritizes the protection
(privacy and security) of data.
Data Governance: the processes, roles and policies, standards, and metrics that ensure the
effective and efficient useof information in enabling organizations to achieve their goals.
Data Literacy: the knowledge an individual holds about ethical data collection, management and
analysis.
Data Management: activities related to the collection, access, sharing, use, including the
protection and governance of data.
Data Stewardship: a conceptual model of data management whereby use of data is governed by
law, ethics and other value-based considerations and prioritizes the imperative to share and use
health data for the public good with the appropriate and necessary privacy protections in place.
Data Stewards: individuals accountable for keeping data protected while delivering on the
responsibility to enable sharing and use of data for the public good.
Health Data:observations, facts or measurements –captured for possible further analysis,
calculation or reasoning–which relate to the physical or mental health status of individuals,
health system performance and socio-economic, community and health system characteristics.
Health Data System: the infrastructure that enables collection, access, sharing, use, and
protection of health data, supported by networks of people, organizations, policies, and
technologies.
Interoperability: the capacity for seamless sharing ofhealth data and information between
health sector stakeholders. Interoperability dimensions are generally categorized as either
technical (IT systems), semantic (language/definitions/data content), organizational
(governance) or legal (policy).
Intersectional Data Analysis: data analysis which identifies and aims to reduce inequities within
and between groups of people based on how multiple factors of a person’s identity–including
factors such as their background, ethnicity, gender, religion, disability, sexual orientation, and
others–come together.
Learning Health System: a health system in which internal data and experience are
systematically integrated with external evidence; these knowledge generation processes are
embedded in daily practice to produce continual improvement across the system. Learning
health systems drive better outcomes for individuals by providing personalized insights while
providing information to improve overall system quality.
Person-centric Data Architecture: a way of organizing health information systems where data
from all health encounters and sources are linkable so jurisdictions can support a
comprehensive and integrated view of the patient, population, and health system.
Person-centric Health Data System: a health data system in which person-centric data
architecture, policies and practices on data management are used to support analytics that
improve individual and collective health outcomes, and health system quality, equity, safety,
planning, and research–including improving insights and responsiveness to public health
threats.
Person-centric Health System: a health system that situates the individual at the centre of
interactions and decision-making, addressing the complexity of how individuals make health and
healthcare decisions within the broader context of their lives.
Public Good: the concept of acting for the benefit of all members of society as opposed to
specific individuals or organizations.
