Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:38.521013
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2021-2022:_Mandatory_Incident_Reporting
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-mandatory-incident-reporting.html
Package ID: 0de9a878-94a1-41b2-810c-4462850f5cee
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project', 'mandatory incident reporting', 'CCPSA reporting requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance with the mandatory incident reporting requirements of the CCPSA.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Mandatory Incident Reporting - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Mandatory Incident Reporting Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance with the mandatory incident reporting requirements of the CCPSA. Under section 14 of the CCPSA, industry must report to Health Canada after becoming aware of a health or safety incident involving a consumer product that they manufacture, import, distribute or sell. If applicable, they must also inform the person from whom they received the product. Subsections 14(2) and 14(3) of the CCPSA outline the timelines for reporting an incident. For this project, compliance of select establishments with section 14 of the CCPSA was determined through an inspection process by which Health Canada inspectors conducted inspections with establishments (physically or virtually), reviewed their incident management process, and assessed complaints and events related to their products. Inspectors determined if any complaints or events received by the company met the definition of an incident under section 14 of the CCPSA, and subsequently, should have been reported to Health Canada. Compliance with the requirements listed in section 14 of the CCPSA was verified through document review. Over the course of the 2021 to 2022 fiscal year, 8 inspections were carried out, whereby a total of 192 documents were reviewed. The document review resulted in 2 commitments to address non-compliance. There were 6 instances in which no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the establishments assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Establishment Determination Corrective Action Artika for Living inc. Did not meet the mandatory incident reporting requirement Commitment by Artika for Living inc. Brody Company | Great Canadian Dollar Store No compliance issues detected None Buropro Citation Did not meet the mandatory incident reporting requirement Commitment by Buropro Citation Germain Larivière Inc. No compliance issues detected None iParty Dollar Store No compliance issues detected None Mattel Canada Inc. No compliance issues detected None Nordstrom, Inc. No compliance issues detected None West Coast Kids No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: Inspectors apply a systematic bias during the selection of establishments and samples. Inspectors do not select products randomly; instead, they select the ones that are more likely not to meet health and safety requirements due to observed characteristics. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, Health Canada does not consider the findings of CV projects to reflect overall market compliance, unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria measured in this project. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-07-24 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy