Created: 2024-05-30T14:12:04.251599
Name: Health_Canada’s_2022-23_Departmental_Sustainable_Development_Strategy_Report
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/corporate/about-health-canada/reports-publications/sustainable-development/health-canada-departmental-sustainable-development-strategy-report-2022-2023.html
Package ID: 0f237757-b448-43be-b409-0b0c18d4f390
Keywords: ['Sustainable-Development-Strategy', 'Federal Sustainable-Development-Strategy', 'FSDS', '2022-23 Departmental Sustainable-Development-Strategy', 'Report', 'environmental sustainability', 'environmental decision-making', 'transparent-and-accountable to Parliament', 'departmental actions']
Notes: This report on progress contributes to an integrated, whole-of-government view of activities supporting environmental sustainability and helps to make environmental decision-making more transparent and accountable to Parliament. This report details Health Canada's individual departmental actions that support the targets and/or goals of the 2019 to 2022 Federal Sustainable Development Strategy (FSDS).
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Health Canada’s 2022-23 Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy Report - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada About Health Canada Reports and Publications - About Health Canada Health Canada’s 2022-23 Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy Report Download the alternative format (PDF format, 454 KB, 50 pages) Organization: Health Canada Type: Publication Published: 2023-11-10 November, 2023 Table of contents Introduction to the Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy Sustainable Development in Health Canada Effective Action on Climate Change Greening Government Clean Drinking Water Sustainable Food Safe and Healthy Communities Departmental Performance by FSDS Goal Report on Integrating Sustainable Development Health Canada's 2022-23 Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy Report This report on progress contributes to an integrated, whole-of-government view of activities supporting environmental sustainability and helps to make environmental decision-making more transparent and accountable to Parliament. The departmental information reported accounts for information previously prepared in accordance with Health Canada's 2022 to 20232 Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy. This report details Health Canada's individual departmental actions that support the targets and/or goals of the 2019 to 2022 Federal Sustainable Development Strategy (FSDS). For information on the Government of Canada's overall progress on the targets of the FSDS, please see the FSDS Progress Report, which, per the requirements of the strengthened Federal Sustainable Development Act, is released at least once in each three year period. 1. Introduction to the Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy The 2019 to 2022 Federal Sustainable Development Strategy (FSDS) presents the Government of Canada's sustainable development goals and targets, as required by the Federal Sustainable Development Act. In keeping with the requirements of the Act, Health Canada has developed this report to demonstrate progress in implementing its Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy in support of the 2019 to 2022 FSDS. In 2015, Canada, and 192 other United Nations (UN) Member States, adopted the UN 2030 Agenda for Sustainable Development. The 2030 Agenda includes seventeen Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) to address global challenges. Section 3 of this report indicates which UN SDGs are supported by the departmental actions outlined in Health Canada's Sustainable Development Strategy. 2. Sustainable Development in Health Canada Health Canada's 2022 to 2023 Departmental Sustainable Development Strategy describes the department's actions in support of achieving the following goals in the 2019 to 2022 FSDS: Effective Action on Climate Change Greening Government Clean Drinking Water Sustainable Food Safe and Healthy Communities This report presents available results for the departmental actions pertinent to these goals. Previous years' reports are posted on the Health Canada website. The Minister of Health shares responsibility with the Minister of Environment and Climate Change for the target related to the Chemicals Management Plan, which supports the goal of Safe and Healthy Communities. 3. Departmental Performance by FSDS Goal The following provides performance information on departmental actions in support of the FSDS goals listed in section 2. Context: Effective Action on Climate Change Climate change is a critical global problem that could affect future generations' ability to meet their basic needs. Adaptation, a key factor in addressing climate change, is about making smart, informed, forward-looking decisions that take future climate conditions into account. Health Canada contributed to this goal by increasing knowledge, capacity and tools, which helps decision-makers, such as health regions, develop and implement evidence-based adaptation measures to protect human health from extreme heat. In addition, the department provided information to governments, public health professionals and individual Canadians to help inform actions that reduce the health risks of extreme heat and support adaptation to climate change. FSDS Goal: Effective Action on Climate Change – A low-carbon economy contributes to limiting global average temperature rise to well below two degrees Celsius and supports efforts to limit the increase to 1.5 degrees Celsius. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Effective Action on Climate Change. FSDS Contributing Action Work with partners on climate change. Corresponding Departmental Action Increase knowledge, capacity and tools to support evidence-based adaptation measures to protect health from extreme heat as a result of climate change. Starting Point: As of March 2021, 79% of health regions in Canada had implemented evidence-based adaptation measures to protect health from extreme heat. Performance Indicator: Percentage of health regions implementing evidence-based adaptation measures to protect health from extreme heat. Target: At least 80% by March 31, 2026. Results to be Achieved: In 2022-23, 79% (89/112) of health regions in Canada had implemented evidence-based adaptation measures to protect health from extreme heat Key activities conducted by Health Canada: Commissioned physiological research to better understand the impact of indoor heat on older adults in order to support the development of evidence-based indoor temperature thresholds to protect health. Supported British Columbia (B.C.) health partners to better understand the health and health system impacts of the 2021 heat dome. Supported B.C.'s Interior Health Authority to further Heat Alert and Response Systems (HARS) knowledge and develop HARS strategies, particularly in Indigenous communities and organizations, and in the aftermath of the 2021 heat dome. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target By increasing knowledge, capacity, and tools, Health Canada helps decision-makers, such as health regions, develop and implement evidence-based adaptation measures to protect health from extreme heat as a result of climate change. For example, Health Canada's efforts support the creation and maintenance of heat alert and response systems, the dissemination of heat health information, and the development of training.. Extreme heat events are projected to double in frequency in many locations in Canada by 2050, and these efforts support adaptation and health protective measures from extreme heat. This work therefore contributes to the FSDS goal of effective action on climate change. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action and targets 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, and SDG 17: Partnerships for the Goals and target 17.17. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Effective Action on Climate Change. FSDS Contributing Action Provide support and funding for climate resilience. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide funding to support the health sector in preparing and adapting to the impacts of climate change. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of planned knowledge transfer activities were completed. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned knowledge transfer activities completed. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (39/39) of planned knowledge transfer activities were completed. For example: Health Canada hosted two Heat Health Community of Practice Webinars, to support knowledge transfer of lessons learned and best practices in protecting the health of Canadians from extreme heat events with partners and stakeholders. Health Canada hosted two webinars with the HealthADAPT Community of Practice, to showcase current initiatives in sustainable healthcare, and support knowledge transfer on opportunities and lessons learned for building resilient and low-carbon health systems. Health Canada also completed 17 presentations on the findings of the National Climate Change and Health Assessment. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides information to governments, public health professionals and individual Canadians to help inform actions that reduce the health risks of indoor and outdoor extreme heat and support adaptation to climate change. This includes supporting, developing and publishing and/or distributing guidance documents, guidelines and standards, and conducting outreach related to the health impacts of climate change. By raising awareness and helping to inform climate change adaptation activities, Health Canada supports this FSDS goal of effective action on climate change. This work links to SDG 1: No Poverty and target 1.5; SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.4; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.b; SDG 13: Climate Action and targets 13.1 and 13.3; and SDG 17: Partnerships for the Goals and target 17.17. Context: Greening Government The updated Greening Government Strategy (GGS), released in 2020, commits the Government of Canada to having net-zero emissions by 2050. Net-zero means reducing GHG emissions from operations to as close to zero as possible and then balancing out any remaining emissions with an equivalent amount of carbon removal. To implement net-zero in real property and fleet operations, the Government of Canada has committed to reducing absolute GHG emissions by 40% by 2025 and by at least 90% below 2005 levels by 2050. On this emissions reduction pathway, the government will aspire to reduce emissions by an additional 10% each 5 years starting in 2025. Health Canada's commitments under this goal advanced work to reduce greenhouse gas emissions from our facilities and our fleet. The department's greening government work also included initiatives to increase energy performance, completing a comprehensive climate change risk assessment for the department, and the integration of environmental considerations into procurement decisions. Note: the FSDS targets below reflect the direction from the original GGS that was released in 2017 and was in effect when the 2019 to 2022 FSDS was prepared. FSDS Goal: Greening Government – The Government of Canada will transition to low-carbon, climate-resilient and green operations. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action All new buildings and major building retrofits will prioritize low-carbon investments based on integrated design principles, and life-cycle and total-cost-of ownership assessments which incorporate shadow carbon pricing. Corresponding Departmental Action Adopt and maintain approaches and activities that reduce Health Canada's energy use and improve the overall environmental performance of departmental-owned buildings. Starting Point: GHG emissions from buildings in fiscal year 2005-06 = 20.8ktCO2e. Performance Indicator: Percentage change in GHG emissions from facilities from fiscal year 2005-06 GHG emissions from buildings in 2022-23 (kt CO2e). Target: 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (includes fleet and facilities). Results Met: Health Canada has reduced GHG emissions from facilities by 61% from the 2005-06 baseline. Total emissions: 8,0008 tCO2e. Energy use intensity: 2,600 MJ/m ². Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from facilities by reducing the demand for energy or supporting the switch to lower carbon sources of energy. These contributions are made by: establishing processes to track and publicly report on GHG emissions from Health Canada-owned facilities; facilitating planning to ensure that environmental performance can be reported; and increasing awareness about opportunities to improve the energy efficiency in our operations. This work links to SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy and target 7.3. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action All new buildings and major building retrofits will prioritize low-carbon investments based on integrated design principles, and life-cycle and total-cost-of ownership assessments which incorporate shadow carbon pricing. Corresponding Departmental Action Adopt and maintain approaches and activities that reduce Health Canada's energy use and improve the overall environmental performance of departmental-owned buildings. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Disclosure of potable water annual usage in custodial buildings. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (6/6) Health Canada custodial facilities have building-level water meters that allow the department to report total potable water use annually via RETScreen. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from facilities by reducing the demand for energy or supporting the switch to lower carbon sources of energy. These contributions are made by: establishing processes to track and publicly report on GHG emissions from Health Canada-owned facilities; facilitating planning to ensure that environmental performance can be reported; and increasing awareness about opportunities to improve the energy efficiency in our operations. This work links to SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy and target 7.3. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action Departments will adopt and deploy clean technologies and implement procedures to manage building operations and take advantage of programs to improve the environmental performance of their buildings. Corresponding Departmental Action Identify opportunities to facilitate awareness about energy use and technologies that improve environmental performance in order to improve the environmental performance of departmental-owned buildings. Starting Point: In 2019-20, Health Canada began using RETScreen, a Clean Energy Management Software system for energy efficiency, renewable energy and cogeneration project feasibility analysis as well as ongoing energy performance analysis. Performance Indicator: Percentage of building fit-ups, refits, major investments and new construction projects that use RETScreen to inform potential energy efficiency improvement decisions by March 31, 2022. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (n=2) of major building fit-ups, refits, major investments or new construction projects used RETScreen to inform decisions related to energy efficiency. In addition, RETScreen technology was used to review the energy use intensity of the six Health Canada custodial buildings. It was also used to assess energy performance and water consumption at the Longueuil Laboratory in Quebec. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from facilities by enabling an understanding and use of the range of applications of clean technology in building operations, including RETScreen, to inform decisions and raise awareness about energy use. These efforts help Health Canada to ultimately reduce greenhouse gas emissions and support more efficient production and consumption by improving the environmental performance of departmental-owned buildings. This work links to SDG 9: Industry Innovation and Infrastructure and target 9.4. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Promote behavior change – e.g. car sharing initiatives and public transportation options. Starting Point: GHG emissions from fleet in fiscal year 2005–06 = 1.6ktCO2e. Performance Indicator: Percentage change in GHG emissions from fleet from fiscal year 2005-06 GHG emissions from fleet in 2022-23. Overall fuel consumption. Target: 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (includes fleet and facilities). Results Met: In 2022-23, GHG emissions from Health Canada's fleet were 255 tCO2eq (0.255 ktCO2eq), with an overall fuel consumption of 108,659 Litre per Gasoline Equivalent (LGE). This represents an 84% reduction from the 2005-06 baseline. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The established practice of using telematics technology helps to inform decisions related to departmental fleet such as identifying opportunities to retire higher emitting vehicles. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Promote behavior change – e.g. car sharing initiatives and public transportation options. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Creation of new fleet management guidelines to "right-size" the fleet, based on recommendations from an audit of the existing fleet management program while respecting both operational and greening requirements. Target: One fleet management guideline document completed by March 31, 2023. Results Not Met: This work is planned to be completed in 2023-24. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The established practice of using telematics technology helps to inform decisions related to departmental fleet such as identifying opportunities to retire higher emitting vehicles. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Reduce GHG emissions from federal government facilities and fleets by 40% below 2005 levels by 2030 (with an aspiration to achieve this target by 2025) and 80% below 2005 levels by 2050 (with an aspiration to be carbon neutral). FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Promote behavior change – e.g. car sharing initiatives and public transportation options. Starting Point: Annual target. Performance Indicator: Percentage of employee air travel booked centrally to allow for tracking of GHG emissions. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% of employee air travel was booked centrally. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The established practice of using telematics technology helps to inform decisions related to departmental fleet such as identifying opportunities to retire higher emitting vehicles. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Divert at least 75% (by weight) of non-hazardous operational waste from landfills by 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Track and disclose waste diversion rates by 2022. Assess the waste stream to inform future decisions and options to divert operational waste from landfills. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Percentage of non-hazardous operational waste diverted from Health Canada's custodial buildings in the National Capital Region (NCR) is reported publicly.* * Applies to facilities over 10,000m2 within a municipality with a population of over 100,000 people. Target: 75% (annual). * Diversion percentages will be based on industry average weight by waste stream multiplied by number of bins collected at each site. Results Met: In 2022-23, 52, 970 kg of non-hazardous waste from Health Canada's custodial buildings was diverted from the landfill and recycled. The annual waste diversion rate for 2022-23 was 52%, in support of the target to divert at least 75% of non-hazardous operational waste from landfills by 2030. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to divert non-hazardous operational waste from landfills. Activities supporting waste diversion decisions and processes (e.g. waste audits, tracking and reporting) ultimately help to reduce Scope 3 emissions by diverting waste from landfills, reducing landfill gas and transport hauling emissions. Also, recovering material through recycling initiatives helps reduce emissions generated by the extraction and production of virgin materials. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.5. FSDS Target Divert at least 75% (by weight) of plastic waste from landfills by 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Track and disclose waste diversion rates by 2022. Eliminate the unnecessary use of single-use plastics in government operations, events and meetings. Implement initiatives and processes to facilitate plastic waste diversion from Health Canada's operations. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Percentage of plastic waste diverted is reported publicly.* * Applies to facilities over 10,000m2 within a municipality with a population of over 100,000 people. Target: 75% (annual) Results Met: In support of the target to divert at least 75% of plastic waste from landfills by 2030, Health Canada has completed waste audits at all custodial buildings to inform waste diversion projects. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to divert plastic waste from landfills. Activities supporting waste diversion decisions and processes (e.g. reporting on diverted plastic waste) ultimately help to reduce Scope 3 emissions by diverting waste from landfills, reducing landfill gas and transport hauling emissions. Also, recovering material through recycling initiatives helps reduce emissions generated by the extraction and production of virgin materials (e.g. nitrile glove recycling). This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.5. FSDS Target Divert at least 90% (by weight) of all construction and demolition waste from landfills (striving to achieve 100% by 2030). FSDS Contributing Action Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Track and disclose our waste diversion rates by 2022. Starting Point: No waste data available at this time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of construction and demolition waste diverted and disposable methods reported publicly.* * When projects meet the minimum threshold of $5M and in areas where diversion facilities exist. Target: 90% (annual) Results Met: In 2022-23, no projects were undertaken that met the minimum threshold of $5M. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Activities supporting waste diversion decisions and processes (e.g. tracking and publicly reporting diversion of construction and demolition waste) help to reduce Scope 3 emissions by diverting waste from landfills, and reducing landfill gas and transport hauling emissions. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.5. FSDS Target Our administrative fleet will be comprised of at least 80% zero-emission vehicles (ZEV) by 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Increase the percentage of departmental fleet that are ZEV or hybrid, whenever operationally feasible. Starting Point: In 2019-20, telematics was installed on all vehicles in the Health Canada fleet to collect data that informs the management of the departmental fleet. Performance Indicator: Percentage of compatible and/or applicable vehicles logged via telematics. Target: 100% (annual). Met: In 2022-23, 100% of compatible and applicable vehicles in the Health Canada fleet had telematics devices installed. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The use of telematics helps to inform decisions and planning related to fleet purchases, which facilitates replacement of conventional vehicles over their lifetimes with ZEVs. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Our administrative fleet will be comprised of at least 80% zero-emission vehicles (ZEV) by 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Increase the percentage of departmental fleet that are ZEV or hybrid, whenever operationally feasible. Starting Point: In 2019-20, Health Canada had 188 vehicles in its administrative fleet, 23 of which were ZEV or hybrids. Performance Indicator: Percentage of new light-duty unmodified administrative fleet vehicle purchases that are ZEV or hybrid* Total number of vehicles in administrative fleet in 2022-23. Total number of new light-duty unmodified administrative fleet vehicles purchased in 2022-23. Total number of ZEV or hybrid purchased in 2022-23. Percentage of ZEV in administrative fleet (to indicate progress on HC's contribution to the FSDS goal for Government of Canada's overall administrative fleet to be at least 80% ZEV by 2030). * Although hybrid vehicles are included, HC will prioritize ZEV purchases to the extent possible depending on market availability. Target: 75% (annual) Aligns with annual procurement target per TBS criteria. Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% of vehicles purchased were hybrid or ZEV. Total number of vehicles in administrative fleet in 2022-23 was 156. Total number of new light-duty unmodified administrative fleet vehicles purchased in 2022-23 was eight. Total number of plug-in hybrid vehicles (PHEV) purchased in 2022-23 was eight. Two medium duty vehicles were purchased in 2022-23 which were not ZEV or Hybrid as there were no green options for this category of vehicle. 12.8% (20 of 156 vehicles) of Health Canadas fleet vehicles are ZEV (1 Battery Electric Vehicle, 19 PHEV). Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The use of telematics helps to inform decisions and planning related to fleet purchases, which facilitates replacement of conventional vehicles over their lifetimes with ZEVs. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Our administrative fleet will be comprised of at least 80% zero-emission vehicles (ZEV) by 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Fleet management will be optimized including by applying telematics to collect and analyze vehicle usage data on vehicles scheduled to be replaced. Corresponding Departmental Action Use telematics analysis to right-size the fleet. Increase the percentage of departmental fleet that are ZEV or hybrid, whenever operationally feasible. Starting Point: In 2019-20, Health Canada had three executive vehicles in its fleet, one of which was ZEV or hybrid. Performance Indicator: Percentage of executive vehicle purchases that are ZEV or hybrid Total number of new executive vehicles purchased in 2022-23. Total number of ZEV or hybrid purchases in 2022-23. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, Health Canada procured no new executive vehicles. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to reduce GHG emissions from fleet. The use of telematics helps to inform decisions and planning related to fleet purchases, which facilitates replacement of conventional vehicles over their lifetimes with ZEVs. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target By 2022, departments have developed measures to reduce climate change risks to assets, services and operations. FSDS Contributing Action Increase training and support on assessing climate change impacts, undertaking climate change risk assessments and developing adaptation actions to public service employees, and facilitate sharing of best practices and lessons learned. Corresponding Departmental Action Understand the wide range of climate change impacts that could potentially affect federal assets, services and operations across the country. Starting Point: New Initiative. Performance Indicator: Specific indicators will be established following completion of a climate change risk assessment taking into account Health Canada-owned buildings. Target: Completed by March 31, 2023. Met: In 2022-23, Health Canada completed a Climate Change Risk Assessment on departmental assets, services, and operations. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Factoring climate variability and change into policy, programs, and operations supports the FSDS target to reduce climate change risk to assets, services and operations. Activities that increase the understanding of climate change impacts, and maximize the use of existing tools and information sources (e.g. Building Condition Reports, Building Specific Continuity Plans) help to support the department's ability to adapt to a changing climate. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target By 2022, departments have developed measures to reduce climate change risks to assets, services and operations. FSDS Contributing Action By 2021, adopt climate-resilient building codes being developed by National Research Council Canada (NRC). Corresponding Departmental Action Integrate climate change adaptation into the design, construction and operation aspects of real property projects. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Percentage of real property projects that integrate climate resilient building codes and NRC energy and building code requirements in the project design process. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, no real property projects were undertaken that required consideration of climate resilient building codes and NRC energy and building code requirements. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Early adoption of the codes in the construction of buildings (e.g. through integration of building code requirements at the design stage) and integrating adaptation in construction and operations demonstrates federal leadership in establishing climate resilient building standards. This work links to SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Use 100% clean electricity by 2025. FSDS Contributing Action Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Purchase megawatt hours of renewable electricity equivalent to that produced by the high-carbon portion of the electricity grid. This includes the use of renewable electricity generated on-site or purchased off-site. Starting Point: New initiative. Performance Indicator: Percentage of clean electricity Electricity consumption (kWh) in 2022-23. Electricity consumption (kWh) from non-emitting sources (including renewable energy certificates) in 2022-23. Target: 100% by March 31, 2025. Results to be Achieved: In support of the target of 100% clean electricity by 2025, Health Canada established a contract to start purchasing Renewable Energy Certificates (RECs) to offset less renewable local energy production with electricity generated from renewable energy resources. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results achieved under this departmental action directly support the FSDS target to use 100% clean electricity by 2025 (e.g. through the purchase and use of renewable electricity). The use of clean electricity eliminates GHG emissions in jurisdictions with emitting generation sources. This work links to SDG 7: Affordable and Clean Energy and target 7.2. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Greening Government. FSDS Contributing Action Minimize embodied carbon and the use of harmful materials in construction and renovation. Corresponding Departmental Action Specification of low embodied carbon materials in major construction and renovation contracts. Starting Point: No data available at this time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of major* construction projects in which embodied carbon in building materials was minimized. * The Greening Government Strategy - Real Property Guidance has defined "major" as "Projects in which changes proposed to the building envelope and HVAC systems or the proposed value of work is more than 50% of the assessed value of the building". Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, no real property projects were undertaken that required consideration of embodied carbon in building materials. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Specifying the need for low embodied carbon materials in major construction projects expands the market for alternative/greener methods and encourages industry to adopt low carbon extraction, production and disposal practices. This will reduce Scope 3 emissions and other harmful environmental impacts. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and SDG 13: Climate Action. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Greening Government. FSDS Contributing Action Departments will use environmental criteria to reduce the environmental impact and ensure best value in government procurement decisions. Corresponding Departmental Action Promote environmental sustainability by integrating environmental performance considerations into departmental procurement process, including planning, acquisition, use and disposal, and ensuring there is the necessary training and awareness to support green procurement. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of procurement related documents, guides, and tools posted on Health Canada's Materiel and Assets Management intranet site were reviewed and updated to reflect green procurement objectives. Performance Indicator: Percentage of procurement related documents, guides, and tools posted on Health Canada's Materiel and Assets Management intranet site reviewed and updated to reflect green procurement objectives, where applicable. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% of procurement related documents, guides and tools posted on Health Canada's Procurement, Materiel and Assets Management Division intranet were reviewed. New content (Low Dollar Value Contracting Guide and Checklist) published on the intranet reflected green procurement objectives and considerations related to the Government of Canada's Greening Government Strategy. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Green procurement incorporates environmental considerations into purchasing and is expected to motivate suppliers to reduce the environmental impact of the goods and services they deliver, and their supply chains. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and targets 12.5 and 12.7. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Greening Government. FSDS Contributing Action Departments will use environmental criteria to reduce the environmental impact and ensure best value in government procurement decisions. Corresponding Departmental Action Promote environmental sustainability by integrating environmental performance considerations into departmental procurement process, including planning, acquisition, use and disposal, and ensuring there is the necessary training and awareness to support green procurement. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 98% of office supply purchased included criteria to reduce the environmental impact associated with the production, acquisition, use and/or disposal of the supplies (excluding purchases made on acquisition cards). Performance Indicator: Percentage of office supply purchases that include criteria to reduce the environmental impact associated with the production, acquisition, use and/or disposal of the supplies (excluding purchases made on acquisition cards). Target: 90% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 95% of in-scope office supplies included considerations of environmental impacts associated with the production, acquisition, use and/or disposal of the supplies. For example, recycled content and environmental attributes of the supplier (such as efficient manufacturing processes, "green" offices, or recycling programs). Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Green procurement incorporates environmental considerations into purchasing and is expected to motivate suppliers to reduce the environmental impact of the goods and services they deliver, and their supply chains. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and targets 12.5 and 12.7. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Greening Government. FSDS Contributing Action Departments will use environmental criteria to reduce the environmental impact and ensure best value in government procurement decisions. Corresponding Departmental Action Promote environmental sustainability by integrating environmental performance considerations into departmental procurement process, including planning, acquisition, use and disposal, and ensuring there is the necessary training and awareness to support green procurement. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of information technology hardware purchases included criteria to reduce the environmental impact associated with the production, acquisition, use and/or disposal of the equipment (excluding laboratory and field equipment as well as purchases made on acquisition cards). Performance Indicator: Percentage of information technology hardware purchases that include criteria to reduce the environmental impact associated with the production, acquisition, use and/or disposal of the equipment (excluding laboratory and field equipment as well as purchases made on acquisition cards). Note: This is done in conjunction with Shared Services Canada and/or Public Services and Procurement Canada as the IT procurement authority. Target: 95% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% of in-scope information technology hardware purchases (e.g., laptops) included criteria to reduce the environmental impact associated with the production, acquisition, use, and/or disposal of the equipment. With regards to disposal, Health Canada used the services of Government of Canada Surplus as well as the Computers for Schools Program, which helps to extend the useful life of electronic equipment and reduce the environmental impact of electronic waste. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Green procurement incorporates environmental considerations into purchasing and is expected to motivate suppliers to reduce the environmental impact of the goods and services they deliver, and their supply chains. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and targets 12.5 and 12.7. Actions supporting the Goal: Greening Government. FSDS Contributing Action Support for green procurement will be strengthened, including guidance, tools and training for public service employees. Corresponding Departmental Action Ensure material management and specialists in procurement have the necessary training and awareness to support green procurement. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of specialists in procurement and materiel management completed training on green procurement or had included it in their learning plan for completion within a year. Performance Indicator: Percentage of specialists in procurement and materiel management who have completed training on green procurement or have included it in their learning plan for completion within a year. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (53/53) of specialists in procurement and materiel management completed the Canada School of Public Service's green procurement course or have included it in their learning plan for completion within a year. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Green procurement incorporates environmental considerations into purchasing and is expected to motivate suppliers to reduce the environmental impact of the goods and services they deliver, and their supply chains. This work links to SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and targets 12.5 and 12.7. Context: Clean Drinking Water Clean drinking water is a fundamental human need, and helping to ensure that all Canadians have clean water to drink is a federal government priority. Providing safe drinking water requires a great deal of knowledge and coordination among multiple stakeholders, including governments, businesses and individuals across Canada. Health Canada continued its efforts to support this goal through its work with federal, provincial and territorial partners to develop and/or update health-based drinking water quality guidelines and guidance documents for use by all jurisdictions in Canada as the basis for their own drinking water requirements. FSDS Goal: Clean Drinking Water – All Canadians have access to safe drinking water and, in particular, the significant challenges Indigenous communities face are addressed. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Clean Drinking Water. FSDS Contributing Action Work with partners on drinking water quality. Corresponding Departmental Action Develop and/or update health-based drinking water quality guidelines and guidance documents in collaboration with Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) partners. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 88% of planned final water quality guidelines/guidance documents were published in Canada Gazette, Part I and online. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned final water quality guidelines/guidance documents published in Canada Gazette, Part I and online. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (4/4) of the planned final water quality guidelines/guidance documents were published in Canada Gazette, Part I and online. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada works with other federal government departments and agencies and the provincial and territorial governments to establish the science-based Guidelines for Canadian Drinking Water Quality, which are published in the Canada Gazette, Part I and online. These guidelines and related guidance documents are used by all jurisdictions in Canada as the basis for establishing their drinking water requirements. The development of these guidelines and guidance documents helps support the FSDS goal of ensuring all Canadians have access to safe drinking water in Canada. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation and target 6.1, 6.3 and 6.b. Context: Sustainable Food Canada's food system, including agriculture, aquaculture, fisheries and food and beverage processing, provides safe and healthy food for Canadians, helps ensure long-term food security, and is an important part of our economy. Health Canada contributed to this goal by encouraging the uptake of Canada's Food Guide, which promotes food literacy and skills that can support healthy eating, safe food handling and help reduce food waste. The department also took steps to re-design food regulations to reduce impediments that prevent industry from bringing innovative products to market, while protecting the health and safety of Canadians. FSDS Goal: Sustainable Food – Innovation and ingenuity contribute to a world-leading agricultural sector and food economy for the benefit of all Canadians. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Sustainable Food. FSDS Contributing Action Make healthier food choices easier. Corresponding Departmental Action Advance core components of the Healthy Eating Strategy, launched in 2016, which include: improving healthy eating information; strengthening labelling and claims, improving the nutrition quality of foods; and protecting vulnerable populations (e.g. marketing to children). Starting Point: In 2017, 28.6% of Canadians reported eating fruits and vegetables 5 or more times a day. Performance Indicator: Percentage of Canadians who report eating fruits and vegetables 5 or more times per day. Target: 30% by March 31, 2023. Results Not Met: 21.8% of Canadians surveyed as part of the 2020 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) reported eating fruits and vegetables 5 or more times per day. Note: The COVID-19 pandemic had major impacts on the data collection operations for the 2021 CCHS. The low response rate increases the risk of bias, which could affect results. Moreover, the pandemic is an important factor that impacted the food habits of Canadians. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results under this departmental action directly support the FSDS goal of Sustainable Food resulting in improvements to the overall food environment. By encouraging the uptake of Canada's Food Guide, a key component of the Healthy Eating Strategy, the department continued efforts to raise awareness about healthy eating habits and improved the reach of the food guide recommendations by facilitating their integration across various settings including post-secondary institutions and recreation facilities. To support integration, Health Canada is engaging extensively and collaborating with stakeholders in these settings to develop practical food guide friendly principles, that outline specific actions organizations can take to improve the food environment. The food guide also promotes food skills that can support healthy eating, safe food handling and help reduce food waste. This work links to SDG 2: Zero Hunger and targets 2.1 and 2.2 and SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Sustainable Food. FSDS Contributing Action Make healthier food choices easier. Corresponding Departmental Action Advance core components of the Healthy Eating Strategy, launched in 2016, which include: improving healthy eating information; strengthening labelling and claims, improving the nutrition quality of foods; and protecting vulnerable populations (e.g. marketing to children). Starting Point: The baseline was calculated in 2020-21 from the analysis of the 2015 Canadian Community Health Survey dietary intake data and food composition data (Canadian Nutrient File and food label information) which showed that 96.9% (19, 053/19, 670) of Canadians met the World Health Organization recommendations of trans fat intakes below 1% total energy intake. Performance Indicator: Percentage of Canadians who have trans fat intakes below 1% total energy intake. Target: ≥90% by December 31, 2023. Results to be Achieved: Results are not available for 2022-23. The reporting on trans-fat intakes is targeted for March 31, 2025. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The activities and results under this departmental action directly support the FSDS goal of Sustainable Food resulting in improvements to the overall food environment. By encouraging the uptake of Canada's Food Guide, a key component of the Healthy Eating Strategy, the department continued efforts to raise awareness about healthy eating habits and improved the reach of the Food Guide recommendations by facilitating their integration across various settings including post-secondary institutions and recreation facilities. To support integration, Health Canada is engaging extensively and collaborating with stakeholders in these settings to develop practical food guide friendly principles, that outline specific actions organizations can take to improve the food environment. The food guide also promotes food skills that can support healthy eating, safe food handling and help reduce food waste. This work links to SDG 2: Zero Hunger and targets 2.1 and 2.2 and SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Sustainable Food. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to ensure safe food. Corresponding Departmental Action Re-design food regulations to reduce impediments that prevent industry from bringing innovative products to market (e.g. supplemented foods and foods that use new processes and technologies), while protecting the health and safety of Canadians. Starting Point: Baseline related to the impediments will be developed after the first year of data collection (by 2021-22). Performance Indicator: Percentage of stakeholders who indicate the proposed regulations published in Canada Gazette, Part I reduce impediments. Target: 60% by March 31, 2023 (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, there were no regulatory proposals published in Canada Gazette, Part I related to food regulations to reduce impediments. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target In implementing food safety and nutritional quality regulations and standards for all foods sold in Canada under the authority of the Food and Drugs Act and Regulations, Health Canada responds to emerging science and conducts pre-market safety assessments to ensure that decisions taken by the department protect the health and safety of Canadians. As always, Health Canada is committed to ensuring the health and safety of Canadians and will strive to maintain a 100% performance rating in addressing high-risk food safety and nutritional safety issues through regulatory and non-regulatory responses (e.g. policies, guidance, etc.). This work links to SDG 2: Zero Hunger and target 2.1. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Sustainable Food. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to ensure safe food. Corresponding Departmental Action Re-design food regulations to reduce impediments that prevent industry from bringing innovative products to market (e.g. supplemented foods and foods that use new processes and technologies), while protecting the health and safety of Canadians. Starting Point: Baseline related to the impediments will be developed after the first year of data collection (by 2021-22). Performance Indicator: Percentage of stakeholders who indicate the proposed regulations published in Canada Gazette, Part I, reduce impediments. Target: 60% by March 31, 2023 (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, there were no regulatory proposals published in Canada Gazette, Part I related to food regulations to reduce impediments. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target In implementing food safety and nutritional quality regulations and standards for all foods sold in Canada under the authority of the Food and Drugs Act and Regulations, Health Canada responds to emerging science and conducts pre-market safety assessments to ensure that decisions taken by the department protect the health and safety of Canadians. As always, Health Canada is committed to ensuring the health and safety of Canadians and will strive to maintain a 100% performance rating in addressing high-risk food safety and nutritional safety issues through regulatory and non-regulatory responses (e.g. policies, guidance, etc.). This work links to SDG 2: Zero Hunger and target 2.1. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Sustainable Food. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to ensure safe food. Corresponding Departmental Action Re-design food regulations to reduce impediments that prevent industry from bringing innovative products to market (e.g. supplemented foods and foods that use new processes and technologies), while protecting the health and safety of Canadians. Starting Point: In 2018-19, 100% of high-risk food safety and nutrition issues generated a regulatory or non-regulatory response (i.e., guidance documents, national strategies, regulatory amendments). Performance Indicator: Percentage of high-risk food safety and nutrition issues which generate a regulatory or non-regulatory response. Target: 100% by March 31, 2023 (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% of high-risk food safety and nutrition issues generated a regulatory or non-regulatory response. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target. In implementing food safety and nutritional quality regulations and standards for all foods sold in Canada under the authority of the Food and Drugs Act and Regulations, Health Canada responds to emerging science and conducts pre-market safety assessments to ensure that decisions taken by the department protect the health and safety of Canadians. As always, Health Canada is committed to ensuring the health and safety of Canadians and will strive to maintain a 100% performance rating in addressing high-risk food safety and nutritional safety issues through regulatory and non-regulatory responses (e.g. policies, guidance, etc.). This work links to SDG 2: Zero Hunger and target 2.1. Context: Safe and Healthy Communities It is important that Canadians enjoy a clean, safe environment that contributes to their health and well-being. Among other things, this means reducing pollution to improve air quality and mitigating potential human and environmental impacts of exposure to contaminants and harmful substances. Health Canada continues to play an extensive role in advancing work under this goal. Science and outreach, including new information on the health burden of air pollution, has helped to increase knowledge and raise awareness related to the health impacts of air pollution, through the Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards, the Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool, and the Air Quality Health Index. As part of its commitment to delivering the Chemicals Management Plan, Health Canada continued to assess substances for potential health and environmental impacts and developed risk management actions to mitigate those risks. In addition, ongoing work related to the Canadian Health Measures Survey and the Northern Contaminants Program has provided invaluable data and research for scientists, health and environment officials, and communities to help inform decisions and develop policies aimed at reducing exposure to chemicals and contaminants. Finally, the department provided scientific advice on health risks related to contaminants exposure to inform federal contaminated sites clean-up, and to reduce and mitigate future potential human health effects by providing expertise on impact assessments for proposed major projects. FSDS Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities – All Canadians live in clean, sustainable communities that contribute to their health and well-being. FSDS Target Increase the percentage of Canadians living in areas where air quality standards are achieved from 70% in 2015 to 85% in 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Conduct research; develop, publish, and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards; analyze health benefits; and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution and actions to improve outdoor air quality. Starting Point: In 2021-20, Health Canada's Air Quality Program published and/or distributed externally 43% of planned federal air quality health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards related to outdoor air quality. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned federal air quality health assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards related to outdoor air quality published or distributed externally. Target: 100% (annual). Results Not Met: In 2022-23, 83% (5/6) of planned federal air quality health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards related to outdoor air quality were published and/or distributed externally by Health Canada's Air Quality Program. The completion of the remaining assessment is now anticipated for 2023-24. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada science and outreach activities help to increase knowledge and raise awareness related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution, and help inform actions to improve air quality. For example, they help to inform the development of the Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS), as well as actions, such as new regulatory requirements, to increase the percentage of Canadians who live in areas where the standards are achieved. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Increase the percentage of Canadians living in areas where air quality standards are achieved from 70% in 2015 to 85% in 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Conduct research; develop, publish, and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards; analyze health benefits; and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution and actions to improve outdoor air quality. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of planned knowledge transfer activities were completed related to the health impacts of air pollution. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned knowledge transfer activities related to health impacts of air pollution. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (94/75) of planned knowledge transfer activities related to the health impacts of air pollution were completed. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada science and outreach activities help to increase knowledge and raise awareness related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution, and help inform actions to improve air quality. For example, they help to inform the development of the Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS), as well as actions, such as new regulatory requirements, to increase the percentage of Canadians who live in areas where the standards are achieved. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Increase the percentage of Canadians living in areas where air quality standards are achieved from 70% in 2015 to 85% in 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Conduct research; develop, publish, and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards; analyze health benefits; and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution and actions to improve outdoor air quality. Starting Point: In 2020-21, the number of deaths attributable to air pollution in Canada was 42 deaths per 100,000 population. Performance Indicator: Number of deaths per year attributable to air pollution (per 100,000). The indicator is calculated every 3 years. Target: Less than an annual 42 deaths per 100,000 population by March 31, 2030. Results to be Achieved: Results will next be available in 2023-24. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada science and outreach activities help to increase knowledge and raise awareness related to the health impacts of outdoor air pollution, and help inform actions to improve air quality. For example, they help to inform the development of the Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS), as well as actions, such as new regulatory requirements, to increase the percentage of Canadians who live in areas where the standards are achieved. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Increase the percentage of Canadians living in areas where air quality standards are achieved from 70% in 2015 to 85% in 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess proposed actions to reduce air pollution for health benefits using the Air Quality Benefits Assessment Tool (AQBAT). Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of requested foundational information products were delivered within the established deadline. Performance Indicator: Percentage of requested foundational information products delivered within the established deadline to support evidence-based decision making. Target: 100% (annual). Met: In 2022-23, 100% (3/3) of the requested foundational information products were delivered within established timelines to support evidence-based decision making. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada uses the AQBAT, a computer model that estimates the human health impacts from changes in air quality, to calculate the potential health benefits to be gained from actions meant to improve air quality. This is foundational information that supports evidence-based decision-making, such as the development of regulations, which contributes to the FSDS target of increasing the percentage of Canadians living in areas where the air quality standards are achieved. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Increase the percentage of Canadians living in areas where air quality standards are achieved from 70% in 2015 to 85% in 2030. FSDS Contributing Action Work with partners on outdoor air quality and chemicals management. Corresponding Departmental Action Work collaboratively with provinces, territories and stakeholders to develop and regularly update the Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS). Starting Point: Updates to the CAAQS for ozone were completed in 2019 and updates to the CAAQS for PM2.5 are on track to be completed by December 31, 2022. Performance Indicator: Percentage of Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards reviewed and updated. Target: 100% of planned CAAQS (i.e., for PM2.5 and ozone) by December 31, 2022. Not met: In 2022-23, 50% (1/2) of planned Canadian Ambient Air Quality Standards (CAAQS) were reviewed and updated. The review of the CAAQS for PM2.5 has taken longer than anticipated to address issues identified by partners and is now expected to be updated by December 2025. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The CAAQS are outdoor air quality targets based on health and environmental objectives. Their purpose is to drive actions to reduce emissions of harmful air pollutants and ultimately improve air quality across Canada. CAAQS for fine particulate matter (PM2.5), ground-level ozone, sulphur dioxide, and nitrogen dioxide have been endorsed by the Canadian Council of Ministers of the Environment and issued as federal objectives under the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999. Health Canada works with the provinces, territories, and stakeholders to review and update the CAAQS as needed in order to drive continuous improvement to air quality in Canada. This work therefore supports the FSDS target of increasing the percentage of Canadians living in areas where the air quality standards are achieved. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target By 2022, take risk management actions in a timely manner for 100% of substances found to be a risk to the environment or human health. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to address outdoor air pollutant emissions and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess and manage, where appropriate, the potential health risks associated with chemical substances, including pesticides. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 94% of existing substances were assessed within targeted timelines. Performance Indicator: Percentage of existing chemicals assessed within targeted timelines Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (74/74) of existing substances were assessed within targeted timelines. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the risks posed by chemicals to Canadians and their environment. Through the Chemicals Management Plan, Health Canada assesses substances for potential health and environmental impacts and develops risk management actions to mitigate the risks of harmful substances, such as new regulatory requirements. Health Canada's actions therefore directly support this FSDS target of taking timely risk management action on substances found to be a risk. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target By 2022, take risk management actions in a timely manner for 100% of substances found to be a risk to the environment or human health. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to address outdoor air pollutant emissions and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess and manage, where appropriate, the potential health risks associated with chemical substances, including pesticides. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of new substances (chemicals, polymers, and animate products of biotechnology) were assessed within prescribed timelines. Performance Indicator: Percentage of new substances (chemicals, polymers and animate products of biotechnology) assessed within prescribed timelines. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23,100% (351/351) of new substances(chemicals, polymers and animate products of biotechnology) were assessed within targeted timelines. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the risks posed by chemicals to Canadians and their environment. Through the Chemicals Management Plan, Health Canada assesses substances for potential health and environmental impacts and develops risk management actions to mitigate the risks of harmful substances, such as new regulatory requirements. Health Canada's actions therefore directly support this FSDS target of taking timely risk management action on substances found to be a risk. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target By 2022, take risk management actions in a timely manner for 100% of substances found to be a risk to the environment or human health. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to address outdoor air pollutant emissions and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess and manage, where appropriate, the potential health risks associated with chemical substances, including pesticides. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of risk management actions were completed within targeted timelines. Performance Indicator: Percentage of actions taken in a timely manner to protect the health of Canadians from substances found to be a risk to human health. Target: 100% (annual). Results Not Met: In 2022-23, 95% (20/21) of actions were taken in a timely manner to protect the health of Canadians from substances found to be a risk to human health. The publication of one risk management instrument was delayed. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the risks posed by chemicals to Canadians and their environment. Through the Chemicals Management Plan, Health Canada assesses substances for potential health and environmental impacts and develops risk management actions to mitigate the risks of harmful substances, such as new regulatory requirements. Health Canada's actions therefore directly support this FSDS target of taking timely risk management action on substances found to be a risk. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target By 2022, take risk management actions in a timely manner for 100% of substances found to be a risk to the environment or human health. FSDS Contributing Action Use legislation and regulations to address outdoor air pollutant emissions and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess and manage, where appropriate, the potential health risks associated with chemical substances, including pesticides. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 95% of post-market decisions were implemented within specified timelines to protect the health of Canadians from pesticides found to be a risk to human health and the environment. Performance Indicator: Percentage of post-market decisions implemented within the specified timelines to protect the health of Canadians from pesticides found to be a risk to human health and the environment. Target: 100% (annual). Results Not Met: In 2022-23, 83% (137/165) of post-market decisions were implemented within specified timelines to protect the health of Canadians from pesticides found to be a risk to human health and the environment. The result was lower due to delays in receiving product amendment submissions pertaining to one active ingredient. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Re-evaluating older pesticides against current health and environmental standards allows Health Canada to determine whether they are still acceptable. When alerted to potential issues, a special review may be conducted to determine continued acceptability. When a pesticide is found to have unacceptable risk, Health Canada is responsible for taking action to protect human health and the environment by having post-market regulatory decisions implemented according to specified timelines (e.g. cancellation of products, label changes, and voluntary withdrawals) as per the Policy on Cancellations and Amendments Following Re-evaluation and Special Review. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Provide information to inform action and decision-making. Corresponding Departmental Action Develop, publish and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards, and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of indoor air pollution and actions to improve indoor air quality, including information to inform action on indoor radon exposure. Starting Point: In 2020-21, Health Canada published and/or distributed 67% of planned federal air quality health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards related to indoor air quality. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned federal air quality health assessments, guidance documents, guidelines, and standards related to indoor air quality published or distributed externally. Target: 100% (annual). Results Not Met: In 2022-23, 75% (3/4) of planned federal air quality health assessments, guidance documents, guidelines, and standards related to indoor air quality were published or distributed externally. Completion of one guideline - the residential indoor air quality guideline for benzene - required more time than anticipated to support a coordinated approach across Health Canada publications and is now expected to be published in 2023-24. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides information to inform actions by governments, public health professionals, building professionals and individual Canadians to reduce exposure to indoor air pollutants. For example, Health Canada participates in Radon Action Month every November by working with partners to raise awareness and inform Canadians about the actions they can take to reduce their risk from radon exposure. By raising awareness and informing risk mitigation activities, Health Canada supports this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities, and ultimately helps to protect health. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Provide information to inform action and decision-making. Corresponding Departmental Action Develop, publish and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards, and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of indoor air pollution and actions to improve indoor air quality, including information to inform action on indoor radon exposure. Starting Point: The 2019 Households and the Environment Survey showed that 63% of Canadian surveyed were knowledgeable about radon, an increase of 10% since the 2013 survey. Results of the 2021 Households and the Environment Survey will be made available in 2022-23 (reports every two years). Performance Indicator: Percentage of Canadians surveyed who are knowledgeable about radon. Target: 65% by March 31, 2023. Results Met: In 2022-23, 69% of Canadians surveyed were knowledgeable about radon. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides information to inform actions by governments, public health professionals, building professionals and individual Canadians to reduce exposure to indoor air pollutants. For example, Health Canada participates in Radon Action Month every November by working with partners to raise awareness and inform Canadians about the actions they can take to reduce their risk from radon exposure. By raising awareness and informing risk mitigation activities, Health Canada supports this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities, and ultimately helps to protect health. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Provide information to inform action and decision-making. Corresponding Departmental Action Develop, publish and/or distribute health risk assessments, guidance documents, guidelines and standards, and conduct outreach related to the health impacts of indoor air pollution and actions to improve indoor air quality, including information to inform action on indoor radon exposure. Starting Point: The 2019 Households and the Environment Survey showed that 6% of Canadian homeowners surveyed had tested their homes for radon. Results of the 2021 Households and the Environment Survey will be made available in 2022-23(reports every two years). Performance Indicator: Percentage of Canadian homeowners surveyed who have tested their homes for radon. Target: 10% by March 31, 2026. Results to be Achieved: In 2022-23, 9% of Canadian homeowners surveyed had tested their homes for radon Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides information to inform actions by governments, public health professionals, building professionals and individual Canadians to reduce exposure to indoor air pollutants.. For example, Health Canada participates in Radon Action Month every November by working with partners to raise awareness and inform Canadians about the actions they can take to reduce their risk from radon exposure. By raising awareness and informing risk mitigation activities, Health Canada supports this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities, and ultimately helps to protect health. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Provide information to inform action and decision-making. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide Canadians with access to information that will enable them to take protective action to reduce impacts from outdoor air pollution Starting Point: In 2020-21, 1,393, 580 sensitive individuals were reached by Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) risk communications. Performance Indicator: Number of sensitive individuals* reached by AQHI risk communications * 'Sensitive individuals' are those who are more vulnerable to the health impacts of air pollution,, including people with pre-existing health conditions, children, and the elderly. Target: 4,000,000 by March 31, 2026. Results to be Achieved: In 2022-23, 1,462,369 sensitive individuals were reached by AQHI risk communications. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The AQHI helps Canadians make decisions about how to protect their health by limiting short-term exposure to air pollution and adjusting their activity levels when there are increased levels of air pollution. The AQHI pays particular attention to people who are more vulnerable to the health impacts of air pollution and provides them with advice on how to protect their health during air quality levels associated with low, moderate, high, and very high health risk. By providing this information to Canadians, Health Canada supports actions to protect health and therefore contributes to the overall FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; SDG 11: Sustainable Cities and Communities and target 11.6; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Conduct research, monitoring, and surveillance (including biomonitoring), in order to better understand and manage the health risks of harmful substances. Starting point: In 2020-21, 100% of planned knowledge transfer activities related to research on chemicals of concern were completed. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned knowledge transfer activities completed related to research on chemicals of concern. Target: 100% (annual) Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (68/24) of planned knowledge transfer activities were completed related to research on chemicals of concern. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada's research, monitoring, and surveillance related to harmful substances helps inform decisions by providing information to stakeholders (e.g. policy analysts, regulators, decision makers, international partners, and the public). For example, it provides new data for scientists and health and environment officials to use in assessing exposure to environmental chemicals and in developing and assessing policies aimed at reducing exposure to toxic chemicals. This helps inform actions that support this FSDS goal of clean and sustainable communities, and ultimately helps protect the health of Canadians. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Conduct research, monitoring, and surveillance (including biomonitoring), in order to better understand and manage the health risks of harmful substances. Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of planned knowledge transfer activities related to monitoring and surveillance on chemicals of concern were completed. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned knowledge transfer activities completed related to monitoring and surveillance on chemicals of concern. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (13/8) of planned knowledge transfer activities were completed related to monitoring and surveillance on chemicals of concern. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada's research, monitoring, and surveillance related to harmful substances helps inform decisions by providing information to stakeholders (e.g. policy analysts, regulators, decision makers, international partners, and the public). For example, it provides new data for scientists and health and environment officials to use in assessing exposure to environmental chemicals and in developing and assessing policies aimed at reducing exposure to toxic chemicals. This helps inform actions that support this FSDS goal of clean and sustainable communities, and ultimately helps protect the health of Canadians. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Better understand air pollutants and harmful substances. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide funding for research studies to monitor contaminant levels in wildlife and people in the Canadian North Starting Point: In 2020-21, the Northern Contaminants Program (NCP) provided funding for five research studies. Performance Indicator: Provide funding for research studies under the NCP. Target: Funding provided by March 2023. Results Met: In 2022-23, funding was provided for six research studies that monitor contaminant levels in wildlife and people in the Canadian North as part of the Northern Contaminants Program (NCP). These projects address exposure to contaminants, including through consumption of country foods and links to nutritional status in multiple northern regions (Yukon, Northwest Territories, Nunavik), as well as the development and evaluation of health communication tools. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target The Northern Contaminants Program (NCP) funds research aimed at addressing contaminants of concern in Canada's North. Health Canada participates in the NCP's governance process to identify priorities, select and fund research and biomonitoring projects to address contaminants of concern in the North, and inform national and international chemicals risk management. The research findings provide data to inform risk assessment and risk management of substances, and are also used to influence the development and implementation of international agreements to reduce and/or eliminate the production, use and release of contaminating substances into the environment. This funding is provided through a competitive process to individual researchers. Ultimately the program objective is to reduce, and where possible eliminate, contaminants from the Arctic environment. Therefore, the findings of this research directly inform Canada's actions towards its goal of safe and healthy communities, in this case in Canada's North. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and targets 3.4 and 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Prevent environmental emergencies or mitigate their impacts. Corresponding Departmental Action Collaborate with other federal partners and provincial authorities to strengthen nuclear emergency preparedness and response. Starting Point: In 2020-21, Canada participated in 63% of planned nuclear emergency preparedness drills and exercises. Performance Indicator: Percentage of planned nuclear emergency preparedness drills and exercises completed. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, Health Canada participated in 100% (10/10) of planned nuclear emergency preparedness drills and exercises. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada helps to ensure that federal authorities are prepared to manage the federal response to a nuclear emergency and provide coordinated support to provinces and territories in order to minimize the impact on public health, safety, property, and the environment. This preparation is done through a series of drills and exercises to test the response to various nuclear emergency scenarios in order to identify gaps so issues can be resolved prior to a real emergency situation. Health Canada's role in emergency preparedness therefore contributes to this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Demonstrate leadership on assessing and remediating contaminated sites. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide human health advice to other federal departments that are responsible for assessing and remediating contaminated sites. Starting Point: In 2020-21, the established service standard for the review of site classification was met 98% of the time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of times the established service standard (15 working days) for the review of site classification is met. Target: 90% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (32/32) of times the established service standard (15 working days) for the review of site classification was met. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Under the Federal Contaminated Sites Action Plan, Health Canada serves as an Expert Support Department by providing guidance, guideline development, training, and advice related to human health risks from exposure to various contaminants on federal contaminated sites, in the air, water, soil, sediment, dust and country foods. This includes the review of site classifications, which are used to prioritize risk management and remediation activities, and other site-specific scientific and technical reports as they relate to human health. By providing guidance and advice, Health Canada supports the remediation of contaminated sites and thereby contributes to this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation and target 6.3; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Demonstrate leadership on assessing and remediating contaminated sites. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide human health advice to other federal departments that are responsible for assessing and remediating contaminated sites. Starting Point: In 2020-21, the agreed upon time frame for document-specific review of site-specific scientific and technical documents was met 96% of the time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of times the review of site-specific scientific and technical documents within the document-specific agreed upon time frame is met. Target: 90% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 94% (30/32) of times the review of site-specific scientific and technical documents within the document-specific agreed upon time frame was met. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Under the Federal Contaminated Sites Action Plan, Health Canada serves as an Expert Support Department by providing guidance, guideline development, training, and advice related to human health risks from exposure to various contaminants on federal contaminated sites, in the air, water, soil, sediment, dust and country foods. This includes the review of site classifications, which are used to prioritize risk management and remediation activities, and other site-specific scientific and technical reports as they relate to human health. By providing guidance and advice, Health Canada supports the remediation of contaminated sites and thereby contributes to this FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; SDG 6: Clean Water and Sanitation and target 6.3; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Safe and Healthy Communities – Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess the extent to which regulatory decisions and actions are keeping pesticides at acceptable limits in order to protect the health of Canadians and the environment from risks associated with the use of pesticides. Starting Point: No data available at this time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of pesticide re-evaluations that are completed within specified timelines. Target: 90% or higher (annual). Results Not Met: In 2022-23, 76% (22.29) of pesticide re-evaluations were completed within specified timelines. The target was not met due to several factors including the complexity of some re-evaluations. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada reviews pesticides on the market to ensure that regulatory decisions remain relevant against evolving science. A post-market review decision can maintain the status quo, change the conditions of registration or result in the cancellation of pesticide product(s). Post-market reviews are a key legislative tool in protecting Canadians and the environment from risks associated with pesticides, and decisions are published on the Health Canada website. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Safe and Healthy Communities – Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Assess the extent to which regulatory decisions and actions are keeping pesticides at acceptable limits in order to protect the health of Canadians and the environment from risks associated with the use of pesticides. Starting Point: No data available at this time. Performance Indicator: Percentage of pesticide special reviews that are completed within specified timelines. Target: 90% or higher (annual). Not Met: In 2022-23, 0% (0/1) of pesticide special reviews were completed within specified timelines. Only one special review was completed in 2022-23, which led to the deviation between the target (90%) and the result (0%). Delays were due to several factors, including consolidation of the review with similar ongoing re-evaluations, and additional consultation and engagement requirements with stakeholders. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada reviews pesticides on the market to ensure that regulatory decisions remain relevant against evolving science. A post-market review decision can maintain the status quo, change the conditions of registration or result in the cancellation of pesticide product(s). Post-market reviews are a key legislative tool in protecting Canadians and the environment from risks associated with pesticides, and decisions are published on the Health Canada website. This work links to SDG: 3 Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.4. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Safe and Healthy Communities – Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide health expertise to support the strategic assessment of proposed major projects (such as pipelines and mines). Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of requests for expertise and advice were responded to within established timelines. Performance Indicator: Percentage of requests for expertise and advice that are responded to within established timelines. Target: 100% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (189/189) of requests for expertise and advice were responded to within established timelines. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides expertise and advice to help prevent, reduce and mitigate the potential human health-related impacts of proposed major projects, including project-related exposure to contaminants and the impacts of other changes to the environment on human health. This input helps to support the FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.2. FSDS Target Actions supporting the Goal: Safe and Healthy Communities. FSDS Contributing Action Safe and Healthy Communities – Other. Corresponding Departmental Action Provide health expertise to support the strategic assessment of proposed major projects (such as pipelines and mines). Starting Point: In 2020-21, 100% of early planning, impact assessment and/or follow-up and monitoring was influenced by Health Canada expertise. Performance Indicator: Percentage of early planning, impact assessment and/or follow-up and monitoring influenced by Health Canada expertise. Target: 90% (annual). Results Met: In 2022-23, 100% (13/13) of early planning, impact assessment and/or follow-up and monitoring was influenced by Health Canada expertise. Contribution to the FSDS Goal and Target Health Canada provides expertise and advice to help prevent, reduce and mitigate the potential human health-related impacts of proposed major projects, including project-related exposure to contaminants and the impacts of other changes to the environment on human health. This input helps to support the FSDS goal of safe and healthy communities. This work links to SDG 3: Good Health and Well-Being and target 3.9; and SDG 12: Responsible Consumption and Production and target 12.2. 4. Report on Integrating Sustainable Development In 2022-23, Health Canada continued to ensure that FSDS goals and targets were considered as part of the Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) process. In keeping with the requirements of the Cabinet Directive on the Environmental Assessment of Policy, Plan and Program Proposals (Cabinet Directive), and the Health Canada Policy on Strategic Environmental Assessment, Health Canada completed assessments on 60 proposals (Memoranda to Cabinet, Treasury Board submissions and regulatory proposals). The SEA process was also followed for all Health Canada Budget 2023 proposals. Important environmental effects were not identified as part of the Preliminary Scans; therefore, Detailed Analyses were not required. However, during the 2022-23 reporting cycle, Health Canada co-led 5 proposals that required contributions to the development of a Detailed Analysis and subsequent public statement. Health Canada continued to report SEA compliance results to senior management and the Assistant Deputy Minister Sustainable Development Champion on a quarterly basis. In 2022-23, 100% of proposals applied the Cabinet Directive and were compliant with the full Health Canada SEA Process. Health Canada provided annual training to employees on the SEA process and requirements to help maintain compliance with the Cabinet Directive and to reinforce the importance of SEA as a tool for incorporating environmental considerations into the decision-making process. Employees were encouraged to include SEA training as part of their annual learning plan. Two half days sessions of training were offered to Health Canada employees. In addition, Health Canada updated the departmental SEA form to incorporate references to the new Federal Sustainable Development Strategy 2022-26. Page details Date modified: 2023-11-10 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy