Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:26.547490
Name: Information_on_Health_Canada's_approach_to_the_General_Prohibitions_under_the_Canada_Consumer_Product_Safety_Act
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/legislation-guidelines/guidelines-policies/information-regulated-parties-enforcement-approach-general-prohibitions.html
Package ID: 13d246d4-bf24-405b-9d64-78400404cdf7
Keywords: ['Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'general prohibitions', 'regulated parties', 'consumers', 'sell-or-distribute consumer-products', 'dangers to human-health', "consumer-products' safety"]
Notes: Under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA), the Government of Canada, regulated parties – those who manufacture, import, advertise, sell or distribute consumer products in Canada – and consumers, all play important roles in addressing dangers to human health or safety posed by consumer products. The intent of this page is to inform regulated parties of Health Canada's approach to the General Prohibitions (GPs) under the CCPSA.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Information on Health Canada's approach to the General Prohibitions under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Consumer product safety reports Information on Health Canada's approach to the General Prohibitions under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act Introduction Under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA), the Government of Canada, regulated parties – those who manufacture, import, advertise, sell or distribute consumer products in Canada – and consumers, all play important roles in addressing dangers to human health or safety posed by consumer products. The intent of this page is to inform regulated parties of Health Canada's approach to the General Prohibitions (GPs) under the CCPSA. Health Canada may revisit certain aspects of this approach when warranted. On this page General prohibitions on consumer products Health Canada's approach to consumer product prohibitions Table 1: Identification of hazards of concern Table 2: Comment period for danger to human health or safety assessments Table 3: Determination of notice of danger to human health or safety Industry responsibilities Useful links General prohibitions on consumer products Paragraphs 7(a) and 8(a) of the CCPSA set out the GPs for consumer products that pose a danger to human health or safety. Generally, the GPs: Prohibit the manufacturing, importing, advertising or selling of a consumer product that is a danger to human health or safety; and Prohibit the advertising or selling of a consumer product that a regulated party knows is a danger to human health or safety. The CCPSA defines danger to human health or safety as: Any unreasonable hazard — existing or potential — that is posed by a consumer product during or as a result of its normal or foreseeable use and that may reasonably be expected to cause the death of an individual exposed to it or have an adverse effect on that individual's health — including an injury — whether or not the death or adverse effect occurs immediately after the exposure to the hazard, and includes any exposure to a consumer product that may reasonably be expected to have a chronic adverse effect on human health. For more information on when a hazard associated with a class of consumer products poses a danger to human health or safety, please see: Industry Guidance - "Danger to Human Health or Safety" Posed by Consumer Products. Regulated parties are responsible for the safety of their products. They are responsible for making sure that their products do not pose a danger to human health or safety, without waiting for communication from Health Canada. Health Canada's approach to consumer product prohibitions Health Canada regularly monitors the marketplace to verify whether consumer products comply with the CCPSA and do not pose a danger to human health or safety. The Department uses the following 3-step process to determine whether a class of consumer products poses a danger to human health or safety: Identification (Hazards of Concern); Comment Period (Danger to Human Health or Safety Assessments); and Determination (Notice of Danger to Human Health or Safety) When identifying hazards of concern and assessing whether a hazard poses a danger to human health or safety, Health Canada may consider, among other things, if the product meets nationally or internationally recognized performance criteria for the hazard of concern, such as: voluntary safety standards for that class of consumer product or other products with the same or similar hazards; Canadian legislation for other products with the same or similar hazards; and laws enacted in other countries for that class of consumer product or other products with the same or similar hazards. While Health Canada may consider a number of options to mitigate a danger to human health or safety, regulated parties are responsible for assessing their consumer products for dangers to human health or safety and implementing effective hazard mitigation measures. A regulated party must ensure that they are compliant with the CCPSA. Health Canada's GPs approach: provides regulated parties with general information about their roles and responsibilities; engages regulated parties and other stakeholders to communicate and explain the process (described above); uses evidence-based decision making, and; is designed in such a manner that: enforcement actions are applied in a reasonable manner and are proportional to the level of risk presented by the consumer product based on its seriousness and likelihood of occurring, and risk mitigation may involve multiple measures and is designed to address hazards and help protect consumers. The details below outline the various steps of Health Canada's process for determining whether a hazard associated with a class of consumer product poses a danger to human health or safety. Transparency, openness and communication of information are key elements in achieving the objectives sought by this approach. Health Canada will notify regulated parties when a change is made to Tables 1, 2 or 3 via the News and Updates email service. The items listed in the Tables associated with this approach do not represent an exhaustive list of all hazards associated with classes of products that are or may be a danger to human health or safety. Health Canada may take immediate compliance and enforcement action when there is a reason to believe that a consumer product poses a danger to human health or safety or is non-compliant with the CCPSA or its regulations, even if it is not on Table 3 or any of the other tables described below. Figure 1. Canada Consumer Product Safety Act General Prohibitions Figure 1 - Text description A process flow showing the hazard identification and danger determination approach through the general prohibition tables 1, 2, and 3. Table 1 – Identification – Hazards of concern Hazard(s) of concern are identified with class of consumer products and listed on Table 1. Health Canada monitors product class and conducts further assessment, as necessary. Industry is also encouraged to mitigate the hazard. Table 2 – Assessment & comment period – Danger to human health or safety If assessment provides sufficient reason to believe that there is a danger to human health or safety, then the product class and associated hazard(s) are listed on Table 2. The danger to human health and safety assessment will be posted to Table 2 and open for comment from stakeholders. Once the comment period is closed, Health Canada will review comments and determine if a danger to human health or safety exists. If the conclusion is that there is a danger to human health or safety, the class of consumer products moves to Table 3, if not, the class of consumer products will be moved back to Table 1 for monitoring. Table 3 – Determination – Danger to human health or safety Health Canada concludes the hazard(s) associated with a class of consumer products to be a danger to human health or safety and lists the class of consumer products, associated hazards and completed assessment on Table 3. The manufacture, import, advertisement or sale of consumer products that pose a danger to human health or safety is prohibited. Health Canada can take enforcement actions such as seizure, orders to take measures, orders to recall, or prosecution concerning consumer products that do not comply with the CCPSA. The tables are linked by a dotted line underneath and it states "Please note, that at any time in the process, Health Canada may take enforcement actions if there is a reason to believe that a consumer product is a danger to human health or safety." Table 1: Identification of hazards of concern Table 1 lists hazards of concern associated with classes of consumer products identified by Health Canada. In deciding to publish a hazard of concern on Table 1, Health Canada uses a variety of information sources, including: Incident reports and trends in Canada or other jurisdictions; Development and adoption of safety standards; Actions taken in other jurisdictions, and; Other information on hazards associated with consumer products. Hazards associated with classes of consumer products that are listed on Table 1 have not yet undergone an assessment to determine whether they pose a danger to human health or safety. However, the listing of a hazard on Table 1 indicates that it may pose a danger to human health or safety. Regulated parties are encouraged to take steps to mitigate the identified hazards if they have not already. Health Canada will monitor and collect information on the hazard. A hazard may remain on Table 1 for an extended period due to a number of reasons. These reasons include a lack of sufficient information to further assess the possible danger to human health or safety, or Health Canada's concerns about the hazard even if some regulated parties have taken hazard mitigation measures. Once Health Canada completes a danger to human health or safety assessment for an identified hazard of concern and considers that it may pose a danger to human health or safety, the hazard of concern associated with a class of consumer products is moved from Table 1 to Table 2 for stakeholder feedback. If, following stakeholder input, there is insufficient information to conclude that a hazard associated with a class of consumer products posted on Table 2 poses a danger to human health or safety and Health Canada still has concerns, then it may be moved back to Table 1 for continued monitoring. Hazards of concern may be removed from Table 1 if Health Canada later concludes that they do not pose a danger to human health or safety or the hazard no longer exists. What is included on Table 1? Identified hazards of concern associated with a class of consumer products. Entries on Table 1 include those that have not yet undergone a danger to human health or safety assessment. Performance criteria (i.e., existing voluntary standards, international rules or regulatory requirements) known to Health Canada that may mitigate the hazard. What should a regulated party do about classes of consumer products listed on Table 1? Take measures necessary to mitigate the hazards identified. Provide Health Canada (ccpsa-lcspc@hc-sc.gc.ca) with information they have on the hazards or any mitigation measures. Table 1: Identification of hazards of concern (Last updated 2024-07-10) Class of Consumer Products Date added to Table Hazard(s) of Concern Performance Criteria being EvaluatedFootnote b Pacifier holders Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Choking, laceration, strangulation, finger entrapment, or suffocation EN 12586:2007+A1:2011 – Child use and case articles – Soother holder – Safety requirements and test methods, or the equivalent. Liquid laundry detergent packets Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Poisoning after ingestion or eye irritation after ocular exposure ASTM F3159-15e1 – Standard Safety Specification for Liquid Laundry Packets, or the equivalent. Products containing button batteries Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Internal injury after ingestion IEC 62115:2017 – Electric toys - Safety, UL 4200A – Standard for Safety of Products Incorporating Button or Coin Cell Batteries of Lithium Technologies, or the equivalent. Toys with lasers Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Eye injury IEC 62115:2017 – Electric toys - Safety, or the equivalent. Vaping devices and cannabis accessories used for vaping Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Burn, fire, or explosion ANSI/CAN/UL 8139 – Electrical Systems of Electronic Cigarettes and Vaping Devices, or the equivalent. Direct plug-in nightlights Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Burn or fire CSA C22.2 NO. 256:14 (R2019) – Direct Plug-in Nightlights (Bi-national standard, with UL 1786), or the equivalent. Power banks (portable battery chargers) Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Burn, fire, or explosion UL 2054 – Standard for Household and Commercial Batteries, UL 2056 – Outline of Investigation for Safety of Power Banks, ANSI/CAN/UL 2743 – Standard for Portable Power Packs, or the equivalent. Fuel-burning portable generators Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Carbon monoxide poisoning Carbon monoxide detector with automatic shutoff. Metal bristle barbecue grill brushes Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Internal injury after ingestion CSA Z630:19 – Barbecue grill brushes, or the equivalent. Disposable flammable liquid fuel containers Upon initial posting of the table Footnote a Burn or fire after flame jetting ASTM F3429 / F3429M – 20 - Standard Specification for Performance of Flame Mitigation Devices Installed in Disposable and Pre-Filled Flammable Liquid Containers, or the equivalent. Infant bath seats (products that support an infant in a seated position during bathing, excluding products that retain water for bathing) July 10, 2024 Drowning Health Canada has reviewed the performance criteria in the following voluntary safety standards and determined neither standard can sufficiently mitigate the drowning hazard inherent to infant bath seats: ASTM F1967-19 Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Infant Bath Seats EN 17022:2018 Child care articles. Bathing aids. Safety requirements and test methods. Health Canada continues to investigate whether there are other measures that can sufficiently mitigate the drowning hazard. Water Beads (superabsorbent polymer balls, water-absorbing beads) July 10, 2024 Ingestion leading to obstruction of the gastrointestinal tract; insertion into ear or nose; aspiration Health Canada is monitoring the development of new performance criteria for this class of products, including developments of the ASTM F963 Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Toy Safety. Health Canada is also evaluating other potential requirements, such as prohibiting water beads that fit within a small parts cylinder in their dry state. Lithium-ion batteries, and consumer products that contain lithium-ion batteries July 10, 2024 Burn, fire, or explosion CSA C22.2 No.62133-2:20 - Secondary cells and batteries containing alkaline or other non-acid electrolytes — Safety requirements for portable sealed secondary cells, and for batteries made from them, for use in portable applications — Part 2: Lithium systems (Bi-national standard with UL 62133-2, harmonized with IEC 62133-2); or UL 1642, 6th edition - Lithium Batteries; or UL 2054, 3rd edition - Household and Commercial Batteries; or the equivalent; and any requirements for the Battery Management System (BMS) that may be specified within a consumer product's associated safety standard; or the equivalent. a Table 1 was first published in 2020-07 to consolidate information for regulated parties in an effort to increase openness and transparency regarding Health Canada's evaluation of products where a hazard concern has been identified. Prior to posting of the table, Health Canada has been communicating these concerns in a variety of ways, as appropriate, including direct messages to stakeholders or during standard development work. Return to footnote a referrer b In addition to considering these performance criteria for the purposes of paragraphs 7(a) and 8(a) of the CCPSA, regulated parties must ensure they comply with other product-specific requirements under the CCPSA and its regulations as well as requirements under any other applicable legislation, such as requirements mandated by Canadian provinces and territories. Return to footnote b referrer Table 2: Comment period for danger to human health or safety assessments Table 2 lists hazards associated with classes of consumer products for which Health Canada has conducted a danger to human health or safety assessment. In deciding to move a hazard of concern from Table 1 to Table 2, Health Canada takes into account a number of factors, including: the severity of the hazard; the risk level; number of incidents; whether disproportionately impacted populationsFootnote 1 are affected by the hazard; number of units sold; and, effectiveness of existing hazard mitigation tools. Once an entry is added to Table 2, Health Canada invites stakeholders to provide comments on the danger to human health or safety assessment by a set date. Health Canada will consider these comments when making a determination on whether there is a danger to human health or safety. Upon completion of this determination, Health Canada may conclude the hazard of concern is a danger to human health or safety and add the class of consumer products to Table 3. If there is insufficient information to conclude that there is a danger to human health or safety, the assessment documents will remain in the Closed for Comment section of Table 2 and it will be labelled as not currently being considered for Table 3. Health Canada will continue monitoring the hazard. What is included on Table 2? Danger to human health or safety assessments that are open for comment, including the due date to submit comments to Health Canada. Danger to human health or safety assessments for which the comment period has closed and Health Canada is reviewing the comments received before making its determination. Both listings will include: Hazards associated with a class of consumer products for which Health Canada has completed a danger to human health or safety assessment. Hazards associated with a class of consumer products that Health Canada is evaluating to determine if they are dangers to human health or safety. Performance criteria (i.e., existing voluntary standards, international rules or regulatory requirements) that may be sufficient to mitigate the hazard. What should a regulated party do about classes of consumer products listed on Table 2? Take measures necessary to mitigate the hazards identified. Provide Health Canada (ccpsa-lcspc@hc-sc.gc.ca) with any information or comments they may have relevant to Health Canada's danger to human health or safety assessment or identified performance criteria. Be aware that Health Canada will consider all information received by the due dates set out on Table 2 in reviewing its assessment and identified performance criteria. There is no coming into force or transition period when a class of consumer products moves from Table 2 to Table 3 because paragraphs 7(a) and 8(a) of the CCPSA are already in force. Once the class of consumer products is added to Table 3, Health Canada can take immediate enforcement actions such as seizure, orders to take measures, orders to recall, or prosecution for the manufacture, import, advertisement, or sale of consumer products that do not comply with the CCPSA. Table 2: Comment period for danger to human health or safety assessments (Last updated 2024-11-28) Class of Consumer Products Hazard(s) Assessed Identified Performance Criteria Comment Due Date Danger to Human Health or Safety (DHHS) Assessment Danger to Human Health or Safety Assessments – Open for CommentFootnote a None at this time - - - - Danger to Human Health or Safety Assessments – Closed for Comment None at this time - - - - a Health Canada will be seeking comments from stakeholders and this table will be updated as the process moves forward. Once a class of consumer products is moved to table 3, it will no longer appear in the closed for comment section on table 2. Return to footnote a referrer Table 3: Determination of dangers to human health or safety Table 3 displays hazards associated with classes of consumer products that Health Canada has determined to be dangers to human health or safety. The manufacture, import, advertisement or sale of consumer products that are a danger to human health or safety is prohibited under the CCPSA and may be subject to compliance and enforcement actions. What is included on Table 3? Classes of consumer products that Health Canada has determined to have hazards that pose a danger to human health or safety. Performance criteria (i.e., existing voluntary standards, international rules or regulatory requirements) that Health Canada has identified to be sufficient to mitigate the danger to human health or safety. Note - performance criteria that are equivalent in addressing the danger but are not listed on the table may also be acceptable. Final danger to human health or safety assessments (may contain updates to address comments received while open for comment), notices of dangers to human health or safety, and descriptions of the danger to human health or safety and the assessed performance criteria. What should a regulated party do about classes of consumer products listed on Table 3? Do not manufacture, import, advertise, or sell products listed on Table 3 that do not meet the performance criteria set out on Table 3, or their equivalent. Take measures necessary to mitigate the danger to human health or safety identified. Review Health Canada's danger to human health or safety assessment for additional information about the scope of affected consumer products. Be aware Health Canada can take enforcement actions such as seizure, orders to take measures, orders to recall, administrative monetary penalties, or prosecution for the manufacture, import, advertisement, or sale of consumer products that do not comply with the CCPSA. There is no coming into force or transition period when a class of consumer products is added to Table 3 because paragraphs 7(a) and 8(a) of the CCPSA are already in force. Table 3: Determination of notice of danger to human health or safety (Last updated 2024-11-28) Class of consumer product Added to table Danger to human health or safety Performance criteria assessed Final danger to human health or safety (DHHS) assessment Notice of danger to human health or safety Certain products containing small powerful magnets Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Internal injury after ingestion Magnet strength and size limits outlined in one of these 4 documents, or the equivalent: The Toys Regulations under the CCPSA; ASTM F963-17 – Standard Consumer Safety Specification for Toy Safety; EN 71-1:2014+A1 – Safety of toys. Mechanical and physical properties; or ISO 8124-1:2018 – Safety of toys - Part 1: Safety aspects related to mechanical and physical properties. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Children's upper outerwear with drawstrings Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Strangulation or vehicular dragging ASTM F1816-18 – Standard Safety Specification for Drawstrings on Children's Upper Outerwear with modifications, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Decorative lighting strings Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Electric shock, burn, or fire CSA C22.2 NO. 37-17 – Decorative Lighting Products, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Ski and snowboard helmets Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Impact Address impact absorption, helmet stability, and retention strap strength using one of these 4 standards, or the equivalent: CSA Z263.1-14 – Recreational alpine skiing and snowboarding helmets; ASTM F2040-11 – Standard Specification for Helmets Used for Recreational Snow Sports; SNELL RS-98 – Recreational Snow Ski and Snow Board Helmets; or EN 1077:2007 – Helmets for alpine skiers and snowboarders. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS High chairs Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Entrapment or fall Address entrapment, tray detachment, structural integrity, and stability using one or a combination of these 4 standards, or the equivalent: ASTM F404-14a – Standard Consumer Safety Specifications for High Chairs; AS 4684-2009 – High Chairs – Safety Requirements; EN 14988:2006 – Children's High Chairs; or ISO 9221:1992 – Furniture – Children's High Chairs combined with the entrapment hazard mitigation criteria from one of the above 3 standards. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Free-standing clothing storage units Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Tip-over ASTM F2057-19 – Standard Safety Specification for Clothing Storage Units, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Class 3B and Class 4 handheld portable lasers Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Burn or eye injury IEC Standard IEC 60825-1:2014 Ed.3 – Safety of laser products - Part 1: Equipment classification and requirements, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS USB chargers Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Electric shock, burn or fire CAN/CSA C22.2 NO. 60950-1-07 (R2016) – Information Technology Equipment – Safety – Part 1: General Requirements, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Containers of pourable alcohol-based fuels Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Burn or fire ASTM F3429 / F3429M – 20 - Standard Specification for Performance of Flame Mitigation Devices Installed in Disposable and Pre-Filled Flammable Liquid Containers, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Portable firepots that use pourable fuels Upon initial posting of the tableFootnote a Burn or fire Address flame jetting using ASTM F3363-19 – Standard Specification for Unvented Liquid/Gel Fuel-Burning Portable Devices, or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS Portable electric heaters November 28, 2024 Burn or fire CSA C22.2 NO. 46-13 (R2018) – Standard for Electric Air-Heaters, CAN/CSA E60335-2-30:13 (R2018) – Household and similar electrical appliances - Safety - Part 2-30: Particular requirements for room heaters (Adopted IEC/CEI 60335-2-30:2009, fifth edition, 2009-11, with Canadian deviations), or the equivalent. DHHS Assessment Notice of DHHS a Table 3 was first published in 2020-07 to consolidate information for regulated parties in an effort to increase openness and transparency regarding Health Canada's evaluation of products that pose a DHHS. While these entries were added to Table 3 upon initial posting of the table in 2020-07, the DHHS were previously communicated by Health Canada to regulated parties in a variety of ways, including direct messages to stakeholders. Health Canada publishes information on compliance and enforcement activities, including those related to DHHS, in the consumer product safety enforcement summary reports and recalls page. Summary reports Recalls page Return to footnote a referrer Industry responsibilities Manufacturers, importers, advertisers and sellers of consumer products in Canada are responsible for ensuring their products are safe and comply with the CCPSA and its regulations. These regulated parties are expected to: regularly assess their products for potential dangers; review and apply relevant performance criteria, including requirements under laws enacted in other countries for a similar class of products, credible safety standards and world class best practices; mitigate any dangers in a timely fashion; report health or safety incidents to Health Canada; provide Health Canada with relevant information related to the dangers identified in the tables described above, along with any relevant performance criteria to mitigate them, and; regularly consult the tables linked to in this approach. This document aims to describe the process by which Health Canada identifies, assesses, consults and determines that a hazard poses a danger to human health or safety. It also aims to describe the enforcement of the GPs under the CCPSA after identifying a danger to human health or safety. Transparency, openness and communication of information are key elements in achieving the objectives sought by this approach. To ask questions about this approach please feel free to contact Health Canada Consumer Product Safety at ccpsa-lcspc@hc-sc.gc.ca or by telephone at 1-866-662-0666 (toll-free within Canada and the United States). Useful links Subscribe for email updates about the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act Canada Consumer Product Safety Act Quick Reference Guide Industry Guidance – "Danger to Human Health or Safety" Posed by Consumer Products Industry Guide on Mandatory Reporting under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act - Section 14 "Duties in the Event of an Incident" Report an Incident Involving a Consumer Product Disclaimer: This document is an unofficial summary of, and general information on, the enforcement of the GPs under the CCPSA. It is not intended to substitute for, supersede or limit the requirements under the applicable legislation. In case of any discrepancy between this document and the legislation, the legislation will prevail. For further information, contact Health Canada Consumer Product Safety at ccpsa-lcspc@hc-sc.gc.ca or by telephone at 1-866-662-0666 (toll-free within Canada and the United States). Footnotes Footnote 1 Disproportionately impacted populations in regards to consumer products are those who would generally have: Reduced access to consumer products (including availability and affordability), Reduced access to safety information about consumer products that is easily read and understood (including on the product itself, via predominant communications channels—internet), More likelihood of overlooking or minimizing the hazards associated with consumer products for various reasons, More likelihood of engaging in risky behaviours for various reasons, and Reduced ability to recognize hazards associated with consumer products. Return to footnote 1 referrer Page details Date modified: 2025-01-30 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy