Created: 2024-05-30T14:12:03.706896
Name: Indoor_air_quality_resources_for_professionals
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/air-quality/residential-indoor-air-quality-guidelines.html
Package ID: 15307874-a132-4646-9758-576a762934ed
Keywords: ['Indoor air quality', 'resources for professionals', 'health risks', 'indoor air contaminants', 'reduce exposure', 'residential spaces', 'non-residential spaces']
Notes: Access documents on the health risks of indoor air contaminants. Learn how to reduce exposure to these contaminants in residential and non-residential spaces.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Indoor air quality resources for professionals - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Healthy living Health and the environment Air quality and health Indoor air quality resources for professionals Access documents on the health risks of indoor air contaminants. Learn how to reduce exposure to these contaminants in residential and non-residential spaces. On this page Residential indoor air quality guidelines Guidance documents for specific indoor air contaminants Guidance for non-residential (public) indoor spaces Residential indoor air quality guidelines The Residential Indoor Air Quality Guidelines present recommended exposure limits (also called guideline values) for contaminants. The exposure limits represent the concentration of indoor air contaminants below which health effects are unlikely to occur. The guidelines include: long-term exposure limits for health problems that can occur from continuous or repeated exposure over several months or years short-term exposure limits for health problems that can occur immediately after a brief exposure We have developed guidelines for specific indoor air contaminants. This list shows the recommended exposure limit for the sampling time (in brackets): acetaldehyde long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 280 µg/m3 (157 ppb) short-term exposure limit (1 hour): 1420 µg/m3 (795 ppb) acrolein long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 0.44 µg/m3 short-term exposure limit (1 hour): 38 µg/m3 carbon dioxide long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 1800 mg/m3 (1000 ppm) carbon monoxide long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 11.5 mg/m3 (10 ppm) short-term exposure limit (1 hour): 28.6 mg/m3 (25 ppm) formaldehyde long-term exposure limit (8 hours): 50 µg/m3 (40 ppb) short-term exposure limit (1 hour): 123 µg/m3 (100 ppb) naphthalene long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 10 µg/m3 (1.9 ppb) nitrogen dioxide long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 20 µg/m3 (11 ppb) short-term exposure limit (1 hour): 170 µg/m3 (90 ppb) ozone long-term exposure limit (8 hours): 40 µg/m3 (20 ppb) radon exposure limit 200 Bq/m3 toluene long-term exposure limit (24 hours): 2.3 mg/m3 (0.6 ppm) short-term exposure limit (8 hours): 15 mg/m3 (4.0 ppm) xylenes long-term exposure limit: (24 hours): 150 µg/m3 (36 ppb) short-term exposure limit: (1 hour): 7 200 µg/m3 (1 700 ppb) *You can request the science assessments on which these exposure limits are based. Guidance documents for specific indoor air contaminants In some cases, we can't determine an exposure limit from the available scientific evidence. When this happens, we develop a guidance document that focuses on actions to reduce indoor exposure. For example, we have developed guidance documents for indoor air contaminants, including: mould benzene fine particulate matter (PM2.5) Indoor air reference levels (IARLS) We have also identified indoor air reference levels (IARLs) for 25 different volatile organic compounds (VOCs) commonly found in indoor air. Risk assessment prioritization We have developed a process to prioritize contaminants for assessment based on their potential to pose a health risk at levels found in Canadian homes. We conduct this prioritization process approximately every 3 years. Guidance for non-residential (public) indoor spaces We have developed guidance on maintaining and improving air quality in non-residential (public) indoor spaces. Local jurisdictions, public officials, managers, employees and anyone who has a role to play in indoor air quality can use these documents. The documents include: Guidance for cleaner air spaces during wildfire smoke events This document provides advice on how to create and manage community-based cleaner air spaces for wildfire smoke events. It includes both detailed guidance and a simplified checklist. Best practices for improving air quality in ice arenas This guidance provides recommendations to public officials, managers and employees to help them maintain and improve air quality in ice arenas. It also provides an overview of the potential health effects of poor air quality in ice arenas as well as detailed guidance to develop a monitoring and response framework. Additional Resources Ventilation and the indoor environment Using ventilation and filtration to reduce aerosol transmission of COVID-19 in long-term care homes Using a portable air cleaner to improve indoor air Flood clean up and indoor air quality Protecting your indoor air Contact us for more information. Page details Date modified: 2024-11-05 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy