Created: 2024-07-19T16:20:27.725520
Name: HESA_Appearance_Minister_Holland_Supplementary_Estimates_(C)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/17ce0928-471b-4b8f-9c1c-9b83f4c0b9c6/resource/c3d5003f-8f42-48d7-8c30-2ff446f4bdbb/download/supps-c-min-holland-proactive-disclosure-eng.pdf
Package ID: 17ce0928-471b-4b8f-9c1c-9b83f4c0b9c6
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'health', 'budget']
Notes: HESA Appearance Minister Holland Supplementary Estimates (C)
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Minister Holland
Supplementary Estimates (C)
March 21, 2024
HESA – Supps C Appearance - Main Binder
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Minister Holland
March 2024
A – HOT ISSUES
1. Pharmacare and the Canadian Drug Agency
2. Dental Care
3. Healthcare Funding Agreements and Transfers
(b) Quebec Issues Sheet
4. ArriveCAN
5. MAID - Mental Illness and Advance Requests
6. Primary Care
7. Health Workforce Challenges
8. Rapid Tests (BTNX)
9. Security at the National Microbiology Laboratory
10. Abortion Access
11. Commonwealth Release
12. Pandemic Agreement (formally named Pandemic Instrument)
13. Nicotine Replacement Therapy
B – OTHER ISSUES
14. Breast Implants Registry
15. Canada Health Act – Privatization and Compliance Issues
16. Cannabis
17. Climate Change and Health
18. Diabetes
19. Drug and Health Product Shortages
20. Drugs for Rare Diseases
21. COVID Preparedness Posture
22. Health Data
23. Health Research
24. Marketing to Kids
25. Measles and Vaccine Hesitancy
26. Natural Health Products
27. PFAS
28. PMPRB
29. Recalls of Health and Consumer Products
30. Safe Long-Term Care Act/Aging with Dignity
31. Sexual and Reproductive Health
32. Smoking and Tobacco Use
C – Supplemental Material
33. Scenario Note
PHARMACARE & CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
The Government has introduced Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare (Pharmacare Act), which
proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal pharmacare in Canada.
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced its plan to advance with the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency), built from the Canadian Agency for Drugs
and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories, featuring an
investment of $89.5 million over five years, starting in 2024-25. The CDA will provide the dedicated
leadership and coordination needed to modernize the Canadian pharmaceutical system, laying a strong
foundation to support ongoing growth. The CDA is also featured in Bill C-64, an Act respecting
pharmacare.
KEY FACTS
On February 29, 2023, the federal government introduced Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare
(Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal
pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and
territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes
medications.
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years,
to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug Agency
(CDA). The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
(CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs). The Government of Canada is investing
$89.5 million over five years to establish the CDA.
KEY MESSAGES
Canadians should have access to the right medicines, regardless of where they live or their ability to pay.
People should not have to choose between paying for their medications and putting food on the table.
Unfortunately, many are still forced to make this impossible decision.
The Government of Canada introduced foundational legislation that will lay a path forward towards the
first phase of national universal pharmacare in Canada.
Provinces and territories play a critical role as our partners in ensuring Canada will move forward
towards national universal pharmacare.
Our government is already working successfully with provinces and territories on other initiatives to help
ensure Canadians can access the medicines they need, including the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases and the Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs Initiative with Prince Edward Island.
We are advancing with plans to establish the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), built from the Canadian
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), in partnership with PTs and stakeholders.
The Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) is featured in Bill C-64, an Act respecting pharmacare; the
establishment of the CDA will lay a strong foundation to support ongoing pharmacare priorities, such as
formulary development and bulk purchasing.
IF PRESSED ON CONTRACEPTIVES
Contraceptive drugs were chosen as part of this next step of universal pharmacare specifically because
improved access to contraception improves equality.
Cost has consistently been identified as the single most important barrier to access to these medications
and the cost is unevenly borne by women and gender diverse Canadians.
Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a comprehensive suite of contraceptive drugs and
devices.
IF PRESSED ON DIABETES MEDICATIONS
Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases affecting people living in Canada, affecting more
than 3.7 million Canadians.
In 2015, 25% of Canadians with diabetes reported they had difficulty following their treatment due to
cost, in some cases rationing medications to save money.
Improving the affordability of these medications will improve the health of Canadians living with
diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or
amputations.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with provinces and territories on providing
universal, single-payer coverage of diabetes drugs.
The Government of Canada also plans to establish a fund to support Canadians’ access to diabetic
supplies, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
IF PRESSED ON PHARMACARE LEGISLATION AND CDA
The Government of Canada is committed to working with stakeholders to advance the implementation
of pharmacare. The creation of the CDA will address key system gaps and lay a strong foundation upon
which future pharmacare work can be built, including formulary development and bulk purchasing.
We will continue to engage with stakeholders and key partners to establish the CDA so that it is well-
positioned to advance work related to the pharmacare legislation, as required.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN
Bill C-64 sets out next steps with the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) on the development of a national
formulary and a national bulk purchasing strategy.
This advice would be a starting point for partners to consider which pharmaceutical products should be
included under national universal pharmacare.
The CDA is ideally placed with its expertise to develop this starting point, in collaboration with provinces,
territories, Indigenous Peoples and other partners and stakeholders.
The Canadian Drug Agency will be expected to develop this advice no later than the first anniversary of
the day on which the Act receives royal assent.
In the meantime, we will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs
and improve access to the safe, high-quality medications Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON THE PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND INITIATIVE
Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed prescription
drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
As of 2023, PEI expanded formulary access to a total of 100 new medications to treat a variety of
conditions including cancer and heart disease.
Effective June 1, 2023, PEI expanded its provincial drug coverage to reduce co-pays to $5 for almost 60%
of medications regularly used by Islanders. As of December, 2023, Islanders have saved over $2 million in
out-of-pocket costs on more than 230,000 prescriptions under the $5 co-pay program.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management, including
the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
The CDA will focus on the system as a whole to address gaps, remove duplication, improve system
coordination and enhance access and equity.
More specifically, the CDA’s core functions will include:
Data and Analytics
Appropriate Prescribing and Use
System Coordination
Through these functions, the CDA will provide the dedicated leadership and capacity that is needed to
implement national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS TO DATE
The Government of Canada has been working closely with PTs and key stakeholders to develop a plan to
create a CDA.
The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) was established in 2021 to lead this work, and has
since undertaken significant engagement – over 400 meetings and roundtables – with patients,
pharmaceutical companies, insurers, prescribers and academics on a future CDA.
The CDATO has advanced work with key partners to support development of CDA functions.
The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with CADTH and key partners to advance the
establishment of the CDA.
IF PRESSED ON RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Provincial and territorial healthcare systems, including public drug plans, are facing mounting pressure,
exacerbated by the pandemic.
Our approach will focus on filling gaps, improving access, and system sustainability.
The CDA will respect provincial and territorial jurisdiction and will not duplicate well-performing
functions and organizations.
Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration is the cornerstone of our approach for establishing the CDA,
and we will continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward its launch.
BACKGROUND
Bill C-64: An Act respecting pharmacare
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, was introduced on February 29, 2024. The Bill proposes
foundational principles for national universal pharmacare and describes the Government’s intent to
work with provinces and territories to provide Canadians with universal single-payer first dollar coverage
for a range of contraception and diabetes products. The Bill also sets out next steps with the Canadian
Drugs Agency on the development of a national formulary, a national bulk purchasing strategy and a
pan-Canadian appropriate use strategy. In addition, it requires the Minister to establish an expert
committee to provide advice on the financing and operation of universal single payer pharmacare. The
substantive provisions of the Bill, including those related to the national formulary and the bulk
purchasing strategies, expressly require that PTs be consulted.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian introduced Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada, which was defeated. On March 13, 2020, the
House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies that called on the
government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer,
public pharmacare. On June 13, 2023, NDP MP Don Davies introduced Private Member’s Bill C-340, An
Act to Enact the Canada Pharmacare Act. This bill is similar in text to the previously defeated Bill C-213.
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over seven years, starting in 2020 and achieving a comprehensive national formulary under
pharmacare by 2027. This report recommended universal, single-payer, public pharmacare in Canada
through step-by-step progress including the establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA),
implementing a National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, and the development of a national
formulary funded by pharmacare.
Under these recommendations, this formulary, developed by the CDA, will start with an initial list of
essential medicines that provinces would cover with incremental federal funding. Hoskins’ estimated
that the initial net incremental public cost to cover essential medicines in 2022 would be about $3.5
billion. In addition, the council recommends out of pocket costs for all products listed on the national
formulary not exceed $5 per prescription, with a copayment of $2 for essential medicines, and an annual
maximum of $100 per household per year to ensure that patients face few barriers to access.
Over the subsequent five years, additional prescription drugs would be added to the national formulary
as prices and supply arrangements are negotiated with manufacturers leading to a comprehensive
national formulary available under pharmacare. Hoskins’ estimated that the incremental public cost
once national pharmacare is fully implemented in 2027 would be $15.3B.
Parliamentary Budget Officer: Cost Estimate of a Single-payer Universal Drug Plan
In response to parliamentary interest in implementing a single-payer universal drug plan, on October 12,
2023, the Parliamentary Budget Office (PBO) released a report entitled Cost Estimate of a Single-payer
Universal Drug Plan. The report estimates that the incremental public cost to implement single-payer
universal drug plan based on Quebec’s Régie de l’assurance maladie du Québec (RAMQ) formulary to be
$11.2B in 2024-25, increasing to $13.4B in 2027-28. The RAMQ formulary was used given that the drugs
it lists represent the largest share of system-wide spending of any PT formulary. The PBO costing is based
on the framework proposed by the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) in 2016
and used by the PBO to prepare pharmacare costing in 2017 (Federal Cost of a National Pharmacare
Program). In its 2017 report, the PBO estimated full implementation of national pharmacare in 2015-16
would have required $7.3B in incremental public spending.
Budget Commitments (CDA)
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements of
national pharmacare:
Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing effectiveness and
negotiating drug prices;
As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more consistent
coverage across the country; and,
Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to the
effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office to
support this initiative. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in
2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs
they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, Budget 2021 and Budget
2022.
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced approved funding of $89.5 million over 5
years, beginning in 2024-25, to establish a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA).
The Canadian Drug Agency will be established as a not-for-profit pan-Canadian health organization, built
with, and from, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in partnership
with provinces and territories.
CADTH
CADTH was established in 1989 as an independent pan-Canadian health organization, governed by a
Board of Directors with representation from 7 jurisdictions and non-governmental entities. CADTH
reports directly to the 13 PT Deputy Ministers of Health.
CADTH provides Canada’s health care decision-makers with objective evidence, including health
technology assessments and post-market safety and effectiveness work, support informed decisions
about the optimal use of drugs and medical devices.
CADTH’s 2022-2025 Strategic Plan has supported growth and innovation, promoting innovative
approaches and positioning the organization as a catalyst for system change. Growing capacity
underscored by the recent successful integration of the Post-Market Drug Evaluation (PMDE), formerly
situated with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Prince Edward Island Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million in federal funding. The Government of Canada will
use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its ongoing work to advance national universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI has increased
formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide to residents at no cost
through its Substance Use Harm Reduction Program. In addition, PEI is strengthening community mental
health services with second generation long-acting antipsychotic medications to the Community Mental
Health program. Other improvements include changes to special authorization requirements for 23
medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking to
provide medications to Islanders. As of 2023, PEI expanded formulary access to a total of 100 new
medications to treat a variety of conditions. Effective June 1, 2023, PEI expanded its provincial drug
coverage to reduce copays to $5 for residents covered in the Seniors Drug Program, the Family Health
Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program. The medications identified
in this list represent about 60% of prescriptions that Islanders use on a regular basis. PEI also increased
access to the provincial High-Cost Drug Program as of June 1, 2023, making it available to all income
levels, and PEI also made adjustments to the Catastrophic Drug Program as of July 1, 2023, by lowering
the annual cap on the amount of money a household needs to spend out of pocket on eligible
medications.
External Perspectives
Media and Public Opinion
Canadians are generally supportive of improving affordable access to prescription drugs but are also
sensitive to cost considerations as government health-related expenses continue to grow, particularly in
the context of COVID-19.
Mainstream media coverage of the pharmaceuticals system focuses primarily on approval of new
treatments, science-based innovation, clinical trail breakthroughs, and accessibility / affordability of
treatments from a human interest perspective.
Media reports are generally factual and link the mandate letter and related federal Budget
announcements. Select media emphasize Quebec’s unique approach to health.
A May 2022 Fraser Institute poll following the federal budget, found that 79% of Canadians support
universal national pharmacare with no costs attached. Support fell by almost half, to 40%, if the program
was to be financed by an increase in the GST.
An October 2020 Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians had to pay for half or
more of their prescription drug costs in the past year. Nearly nine-in-ten Canadians supported the idea
(86%) of an affordable drugs program and more than seven-in-ten (77%) said increasing coverage should
be a high priority for government.
Stakeholders
The stakeholder ecosystem for the pharmaceuticals management system is very large and diverse,
including patients, patient organizations, Indigenous representatives, healthcare professionals,
prescribers, dispensers, scientists and researchers, employers and employees, and innovative and
generic manufacturers. Stakeholder engagement has been neutral to positive, with many signalling
willingness to discuss further collaboration.
Some stakeholders, including brand name manufacturers and unions, have developed written input to
share their perspectives on the mandate and role of a CDA.
Industry emphasizes priorities such as accelerating approvals processes, support for innovation, a data-
driven approach to technology assessment, value analysis, and assessing treatment outcomes.
Provinces and territories
Through the Council of the Federation, provincial and territorial Premiers publicly and persistently call on
the federal government to increase funding for healthcare through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT),
Premiers sometimes note pharmaceuticals among the priority areas, including in July 2022.
Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
In recent years, decisions related to system management have been driven by rapidly evolving system
demands, new technologies, and evolving international market factors that have been challenging to
reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and the provisions of the Canada Health Act.
This has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug
Data, real-world evidence, and analytical capacity
Health outcomes and appropriate use
Negotiations, pricing mechanisms and sustainability
DENTAL CARE
ISSUE
Government of Canada launch of the Canadian Dental Care Plan.
KEY FACTS
The interim Canada Dental Benefit (CDB), launched on December 1, 2022, was the first step toward
fulfilling the Government’s Budget 2022 dental care commitment. The CDB provides direct, tax-free
payments up to $650 per child under 12 years of age, and up to a maximum of $1,300 over two years.
There are 2 benefit periods for the CDB. The first interim benefit period, which ran from December 1,
2022, to June 30, 2023, helped approximately 323,000 children get brighter smiles and healthier teeth.
Applications are currently being received for the second interim benefit period, which will run from July
1, 2023 to June 30, 2024. As of March 1, 2024, nearly 316,000 children have been helped during this
period.
The Canadian Dental Care Plan (CDCP) was formally launched in December 2023. To meet anticipated
demand and ensure a smooth process, the CDCP is being rolled out using a phased approach, starting
with seniors. Applications opened for those aged 87 and above in December 2023. Automated phone
applications will remain open to seniors aged 70 and above, and who received an invitation to apply
letter with instructions on how to validate their eligibility and apply by telephone, until April 2024.
As of February 29, 2024, over 3.4M invitation to apply letters had been sent to seniors, resulting in the
receipt of over 1.1M successful applications.
In May 2024, applications will open for eligible seniors 65 and older through an online portal.
Adults between 18 and 64 with a valid Disability Tax Credit certificate and children under the age of 18
will be able to apply online as of June 2024. Finally, all remaining eligible Canadian residents between
the ages of 18 and 64 will be able to apply online in 2025.
Digital claims to Sun Life are expected to begin as early as May 2024 as members begin accessing oral
health care under the CDCP.
KEY MESSAGES
Seeing an oral health professional is important for our health but can be expensive.
One third of the people living in Canada do not have dental insurance. In 2022, one in four Canadians
reported avoiding visiting an oral health care professional because of the cost. Delaying care can have
wide-reaching impacts, including more expensive treatments and worsening health outcomes.
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is a historic new investment. CDCP will help ease financial barriers to
accessing oral health care for up to 9 million Canadian residents who fall below the $90,000 adjusted
family net income range and who are uninsured.
We are enrolling eligible individuals into the plan gradually to make sure they can have a smooth
application and enrolment process. By starting with seniors, and then moving to adults with disabilities
who have a valid Disability Tax Credit Certificate and children, we are starting with those who have the
highest unmet oral health needs. By 2025, applications will be open for all eligible Canadian residents.
IF PRESSED ON PLAN ROLL OUT
Canadians who are enrolled in the CDCP will be able to start seeing an oral health provider as early as
May 2024 using a phased approach. The start date to access oral health care covered under the CDCP
will vary based on when the application is received and when enrolment is completed.
To ensure that is no gap in coverage between the interim Canada Dental Benefit (which expires June 30,
2024) and the CDCP, children under 18 will be able to apply to the CDCP starting in June 2024 to get care
starting in July 2024.
IF PRESSED ON SERVICE VOLUMES
Throughout the application process, Canadian residents will be able to count on client service from
Service Canada through a dedicated call centre and/or by visiting a Service Canada Centre. Service
Canada is also working through its established community outreach network to raise awareness and
facilitate access to the CDCP with eligible populations.
As of February 29, 2024, approximately 75% of applicants chose to self-serve using the automated
Integrated Voice Recognition system, and there was an average wait time of one (1) minute for those
requiring assistance from a Service Canada call centre agent.
Oral health providers will be invited to confirm their participation in the CDCP by registering with Sun
Life, starting on March 11, 2024.
IF PRESSED ON SERVICES COVERED
The CDCP will help cover a wide range of oral health care services to improve oral health outcomes, as
recommended by an oral health provider, with flexibility to meet broad needs.
Services that will be covered under the CDCP include
preventive services,
diagnostic services,
restorative services,
endodontic services,
prosthodontic services,
periodontal services, and
oral surgery services.
IF PRESSED ON F-P/T ENGAGEMENT
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is a national program that will be implemented simultaneously across all
thirteen provinces and territories. The Government of Canada has been and will continue to engage and
collaborate with all provinces and territories, and other key partners, to guarantee a successful launch of
the Plan.
The CDCP will complement existing federal, provincial and territorial oral health programs by filling
existing gaps in coverage.
Coordination of benefits will ensure no duplication of coverage.
CDCP will be last payer in relation to federal social oral health programs.
CDCP will be first payer in relation to most provincial and territorial oral health programs. However,
discussions are ongoing to finalize payer order for Saskatchewan and Quebec programs.
IF PRESSED ON THIRD PARTY CONTRACTOR
Public Services and Procurement Canada ran an open, multi-stage, competitive procurement process to
select a third-party benefits administrator. As a result, a contract was awarded to Sun Life to act as the
benefits administrator for the CDCP.
PSPC engaged the services of a third-party firm to act as an independent Fairness Monitor. The Fairness
Monitor’s duties included, but were not limited to, observing all the procurement process; providing
feedback to the Government of Canada on any potential fairness issues; and attesting to the fairness,
openness, and transparency of the entire procurement process.
IF PRESSED ON DISPLACEMENT
The Canadian Dental Care Plan is intended to help those who currently have no access to dental
coverage, not to replace current employer responsibilities toward their employees and the benefits they
offer as part of their competitive compensation packages.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2023
Budget 2023 announced $13.1 billion over five years and $4.4 billion ongoing for the Canadian Dental
Care Plan. It also allocated $250 million over three years, starting in 2025-26, and $75 million ongoing to
Health Canada to establish an Oral Health Access Fund. The fund will complement the Canadian Dental
Care Plan by investing in targeted measures to address oral health gaps among vulnerable populations
and reduce barriers to accessing care, including in rural and remote communities. Lastly, Budget 2023
provided $23.1 million over two years, starting in 2023-24, to Statistics Canada to collect data on oral
health and access to dental care in Canada, which will inform the rollout of the Canadian Dental Care
Plan.
Budget 2022 previously announced $5.3 billion over five years and $1.7 billion ongoing. A portion of
these funds were allocated to launch the Canada Dental Benefit, a direct payment totalling up to $650
per year per child under 12 years of age. Applications for the first benefit period became available on
December 1, 2022, and the second-year applications launched on July 1, 2023.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, approximately $17.6 billion was spent on
dental services in 2021: 94% from private sector or out-of-pocket spending and 6% from public sector
spending through existing federal and provincial plans.
Results released by Statistics Canada show that, in 2022, more than one third of Canadians reported that
they had not visited a dental professional in the past 22 months. The findings also show that just under
half (49%) of Canadians in the lowest income quintile reported having seen a dental professional in the
past 12 months compared with 73% of those in the highest income quintile.
Private dental insurance plans and government social dental programs help reduce out-of-pocket dental
expenses. However, over one third (35%) of Canadians reported not having had any dental care expenses
covered by a private or public dental insurance plan.
Provinces and territories provide coverage for medically necessary oral health services. In addition, all
provinces and territories offer some form of public dental coverage, although these programs are
generally targeted at a particular group (e.g., people with low incomes, children, or seniors) and vary
widely in coverage across the country.
The Government of Canada also provides dental coverage for public servants, members of the Armed
Forces and veterans, people incarcerated in federal correctional facilities, some newcomers, registered
First Nations people and recognized Inuit.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
The Government of Canada is investing close to $200 billion to support provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Canada’s universal public health care system, which includes $25 billion over 10 years
through tailored bilateral agreements.
Agreements must be signed by the end of March 2024. Announced agreements and action plans are
available online from the Government of Canada and PTs will provide annual progress updates to their
residents.
KEY FACTS
Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan, “Working Together to Improve Health Care for
Canadians” to provide close to $200 billion in additional funding over ten years to provinces and
territories.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is investing close to $200 billion over 10 years to support this plan, including Working
Together agreements that include $25 billion to enable provinces and territories accelerate health
system improvements in four shared priorities:
access to family health services;
supporting health workers and reducing backlogs;
access to mental health and substance use services; and
modernizing health systems.
These agreements also include the remaining $2.4 billion over 4 years from the Government’s ten-year
commitment made in 2017 to improve access to mental health and addictions services.
To date [March 14, 2024], Working Together bilateral agreements have been announced with British
Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Northwest Territories, Ontario, Nunavut, Prince Edward Island, Nova Scotia
and Yukon. Negotiations are progressing well to finalize agreements with the remaining PTs by March 31,
2024.
IF PRESSED ON COMMITMENT TO SUPPORT THE SHARED PRIORITY OF AGING WITH DIGNITY
In addition to the Working Together agreements, the Government of Canada is collaborating with
provinces and territories to implement a second bilateral agreement focused on the shared priority of
helping Canadians age with dignity close to home.
These agreements include:
$2.4 billion over four years to improve access to home and community care from Budget 2017; and
$3 billion over five years from Budget 2021 to apply standards of care in long-term care facilities and
help support workforce stability.
To date [March 14, 2024], Aging with Dignity bilateral agreements have been announced with British
Columbia, Manitoba, Northwest Territories, Nunavut and Yukon. Negotiations are progressing well to
finalize agreements with the remaining PTs by March 31, 2024.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS
As part of the Working Together plan, there is a federal, provincial and territorial commitment to collect,
use and share health information and to inform Canadians of progress.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is leading a process, in collaboration with provinces
and territories, to refine and expand upon common indicators on shared health priorities.
Through the bilateral agreements, provinces and territories are outlining how federal funding will
support improvements, including targets, timelines and commitments for annual reporting on progress
to their residents.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC NEGOTIATIONS
Our Government remains open to working collaboratively with Quebec to finalize agreements that meet
Quebec’s unique health needs and priorities, while ensuring accountability to the public.
All provinces and territories, including Quebec, expressed a preference for a flexible approach to health
agreements.
That is why we are committed to tailored bilateral agreements, so that provinces and territories,
including Quebec, can address the unique needs of their populations and geography, and report on
progress to their residents.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR QUEBEC
Through the investments announced as part of the plan, Quebec is eligible to receive $38.5 billion in
federal funding over 10 years, including:
Approximately $6.7 billion for bilateral agreements: focused on the four shared health care priorities,
and home and community care, and long-term care; and
$31.8 billion through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), including $447 million through the immediate,
one-time CHT top-up.
As discussions continue, our Government is committed to providing flexibility through tailored bilateral
agreements that deliver real results and promote greater transparency to Canadians, including Quebec
residents.
IF PRESSED ON THE TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND
The Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported the territories in delivering health care in the
North, where each faces high costs to provide necessary care for their residents.
Territories have used funding delivered through the Territorial Health Investment Fund to develop and
implement key health system improvement projects in area such as collaborative care, primary care, and
health human resources and capacity building.
Budget 2023 announced $350 million over ten years to renew the Territorial Health Investment Fund,
beginning in 2023-24. This funding will be delivered through five-year grant agreements.
This renewal will provide stable and predictable funding for territories to support necessary costs they
incur, including medical travel, and projects that can address the innovative delivery of health care in a
northern and remote context.
The Territorial Health Investment Fund will supplement other Government of Canada funding to
territories, including the new health funding package announced on February 7, 2023.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan to provide close to $200 billion (2023 Fall Economic
Statement estimate is now over $200 billion) over ten years in health transfers to provinces and
territories, including $46 billion in new funding through new Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored
bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each province and territory, funding for personal support
workers, and an increase to the Territorial Health Investment Fund. In addition, Budget 2023 announced
$2 billion over 10 years to address Indigenous health priorities and $505 million over five years, starting
in 2023-24, to the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and other
federal data partners.
GDP-Driven Growth: As the Canada Health Transfer’s escalator is based on GDP growth, an additional
$146.3 billion is projected to be provided over the next ten years through the Canada Health Transfer,
over and above the $45.2 billion provided in 2022-23.
Canada Health Transfer Top-Up: The $2 billion CHT top-up to address urgent pressures in emergency
rooms, operating rooms, and pediatric hospitals was transferred to PTs in June 2023. It builds on $6.5
billion in top-ups provided throughout the pandemic.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up payments to
achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next five years. The last
top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of the five-year period,
resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.5 billion over ten years in
additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years through a
new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health system needs, such
as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and reducing backlogs,
increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health systems.
The Working Together bilateral agreements include the initial three-year allocation of the $25 billion in
new bilateral funding to provinces and territories, as well as the next three years of funding from the
remaining $2.4 billion for mental health and addictions from Budget 2017 supported by the 2017
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
In addition to the Working Together agreements, the Government of Canada is collaborating with
provinces and territories to implement a second Aging with Dignity bilateral agreement focused on the
shared priority of helping Canadians closer to home, with access to home care or care in a safe long-term
care facility.
This agreement will include the remaining $2.4 billion over four years to improve access to home and
community care from Budget 2017, and the $3 billion over five years from Budget 2021 to apply
standards of care in long-term care facilities and help support workforce stability.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible and provinces and territories have options to tailor their
respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
The Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians Plan identifies an initial set of 8 common
indicators. On August 2, 2023, CIHI released an initial snapshot of these indicators on their website.
CIHI is leading a collaborative process to review and report annual progress on these common indicators.
In addition, CIHI is working with federal, provincial and territorial governments and data partners to
identify a broader list of new indicators, including new Indigenous health indicators. This work will also
seek to improve the availability of indicator data that can be sorted by population characteristics.
Personal Support Worker Wage Support: The federal government will provide $1.7 billion over five years
to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related professions.
Territorial Health Investment Fund: The federal government will provide $350 million over ten years in
recognition of medical travel and the higher cost of delivering health care in the territories. This
represents $35 million per year, an increase from the previous $27 million.
Indigenous Health Equity Fund: The federal government will also work with Indigenous partners to
provide additional support for Indigenous health priorities by providing $2 billion over ten years, which
will be distributed on a distinctions basis through the Indigenous Health Equity Fund.
ISSUE SHEET – QUEBEC-RELATED ISSUES
BILATERAL HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENT
Issue and Current Status
Provinces and territories must sign their bilateral agreements by March 31, 2024 in order to access their
bilateral funding under the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan. Agreements
have been announced with several jurisdictions already, and it is expected that all 26 agreements (two
per jurisdiction – Working Together and Aging with Dignity) will be finalized before the end of the fiscal
year.
Background
QC is eligible to receive an estimated $6.7 billion over 10 years through the Working Together and Aging
with Dignity agreements.
The Government of Canada committed to flexible and tailored bilateral agreements, so that PTs,
including QC, can address the unique needs of their populations, and report on progress to their
residents.
Responsive Lines
The Government of Canada is working collaboratively with QC to conclude agreements that meet QC’s
unique health needs and priorities while ensuring public accountability. Discussions are progressing well
and we are confident that we will be able to finalize both agreements by the end of March.
PHARMACARE AND DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Issue and Current Status
On March 22, 2023, the federal government announced the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases (the National Strategy). On February 29, 2024, the federal government introduced Bill C-64, An
Act respecting pharmacare (Pharmacare Act).
QC has publicly stated its position that it will seek to opt out from any national strategy related to
pharmacare with full compensation and without conditions.
Background
The National Strategy was announced on March 22, 2023. It aims to increase access to, and affordability
of, effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada, including children.
As part of the overall investment under the National Strategy, the Government of Canada will make
available up to $1.4 billion to PTs over the next three years through bilateral agreements. This funding
will help PTs improve access to new and emerging drugs and support enhanced access to existing drugs,
early diagnosis, and rare diseases screening.
Health Canada and PT officials (QC as an observer) have been making progress in discussions to finalize a
framework for bilateral agreements.
QC announced a policy on rare diseases in 2022, and a four-year action plan and associated funding of
$17.2 million in spring 2023.
The Pharmacare Act proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal
pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with PTs to provide
universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
QC has indicated its desire to opt out unconditionally, with full financial compensation, from the National
Strategy as well as any national pharmacare plan.
Responsive Lines
The federal government understands QC has its own public drug plan and the integral role that the
Institut national d'excellence en santé et services sociaux (INESSS) plays in the appropriate use and
evaluation of the cost-effectiveness of medicines.
The Government of Canada welcomes future conversations with QC, and all provinces and territories, on
the topic of national pharmacare.
The Government of Canada also welcomes discussions with QC, and all provinces and territories, about
building on existing efforts and delivering the benefits of the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases for all patients with rare diseases, including those living in QC.
When it comes to affordable access to medications, all patients, including those residing in QC, can
benefit from collaboration.
DENTAL CARE
Issue and Current Status
The Canadian Dental Care Plan (CDCP) was launched in December 2023 and further details were
announced in February 2024 regarding coverage for oral health care services, fees, and provider
participation.
QC has requested to opt out of the CDCP.
Discussions are ongoing with QC.
Background
The CDCP aims to help ease financial barriers to accessing oral health care services and provide coverage
for eligible Canadian residents without access to dental insurance. It is intended to complement existing
PT dental programs and fill gaps in coverage for those programs.
The CDCP continues to be rolled out across Canada, including in QC, and is administered with the
support of the contracted service provider, Sun Life.
As of March 11, 2024, oral health providers (including in QC) can register with Sun Life to participate in
the CDCP. Over 450,000 eligible seniors have applied for coverage and will be seeking care from QC
providers starting on May 1, 2024.
Redacted
Redacted
Responsive Lines
The CDCP is being rolled out in all thirteen jurisdictions simultaneously and we are committed to working
with PTs and oral health care professionals to ensure that Canadians continue to have access to
affordable, accessible, and essential oral health care.
The Government of Canada wants to ensure that Quebecers, like other Canadians, are able to benefit
from increased access to oral health care to the greatest extent possible, starting with seniors in May
2024.
Health Canada continues its dialogue with QC to ensure equal access to dental care for Quebecers aimed
not only at improving their oral health, but their overall health too.
CANADA HEALTH ACT
Issue and Current Status
QC historically has not recognized the CHA or the federal government’s authority under the Act. QC
remains committed to its position that health care falls exclusively under provincial jurisdiction.
Deductions from QC’s Canada Health Transfer were authorized in March 2023 ($41,867,224) and in
March 2024 ($36,014,132) for patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic services at private
clinics, which are not permitted under the CHA’s Diagnostic Services Policy.
Recognizing the province has taken some action to improve access to publicly insured diagnostic
services, a partial reimbursement to QC was also recently authorized (March 2024) for these deductions
($46,728,814). QC could be eligible for additional reimbursement if it takes further action to eliminate
patient charges. Health Canada continues to engage with the province to encourage them to do so.
Background
Following Health Canada engagement with QC, the province provided the Department with information
on how Bill 15 and contracting out with private clinics, including diagnostic clinics, will help improve
access to publicly insured health services. This information fulfilled the requirement for a
Reimbursement Action Plan under the CHA’s Reimbursement Policy. The province was informed that, in
light of progress made to eliminate patient charges, they were eligible for a partial reimbursement (60%)
of their March 2023 and March 2024 deductions.
On March 11, QC officials were notified by Finance Canada of upcoming deduction ($36,014,132) and
reimbursement ($46,728,814) amounts, to be applied to the March 18 and March 20 Canada Health
Transfers to the province. QC was also informed further reimbursement could be possible if it took
additional actions to eliminate patient charges.
Responsive Lines
I am pleased that QC has made strides to increase public access to needed care, including diagnostic
services, which helps protect patients from being charged for these services.
Due to the efforts made by QC to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health Canada
authorized a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024 deductions under the
CHA’s Reimbursement Policy, totalling more than $46 million.
The objective of the CHA is not to levy penalties but to ensure patients do not have pay to access
medically required care. Health Canada continues to work with QC to encourage them to eliminate
patient charges for medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be reimbursed for
the remainder of its March 2023 and 2024 deductions.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
Issue and Current Status
In June 2023, the QC National Assembly passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-of-life
care and other legislative provisions which created a provincial regime to permit advance requests for
MAID (to come into force on a date set by the provincial government that can be no later than June 7,
2025).
QC has requested the federal government explore options to remove legal barriers and permit
implementation of its advance request regime – most recently through a QC National Assembly motion
passed in February 2024 requesting the federal Parliament amend the Criminal Code.
Background
The Criminal Code does not permit MAID based on an advance request because it requires that a person
be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be able to provide consent immediately before
MAID is provided, with limited exception. With an advance request, a person would make a request for
MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and receive MAID after they have
lost capacity to consent.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) reviewed advance requests as one of several topics
addressed in its report tabled in February 2023. AMAD recommended that the Government of Canada
amend the Criminal Code to allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious and incurable
medical condition, disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal government’s response to the
report notes further consultation and study is required; no commitments are made to expanding federal
legislation.
Responsive Lines
We are aware there is strong support among the public for advance requests, particularly for persons
diagnosed with capacity-limiting diseases like Alzheimer’s. However, we have also heard that
practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as confirmation of a person’s
wishes.
Amending the Criminal Code to permit advance requests would be a complex undertaking and first
require a great deal of consultation and study with provinces and territories, experts, and health care
stakeholders.
The Government of Canada remains open to discussing the issue of advance requests with provinces and
territories.
ARRIVECAN
ISSUE
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 to support the digital submission of mandatory public health
information required from travellers coming into Canada. ArriveCAN repeatedly evolved in lockstep with
the Emergency Orders in Council implementing public health measures at the border to protect
Canadians, limit importation and spread of COVID, limit pressures on the Canadian health care system
and to eventually support resumption of commercial travel.
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled an audit report on February 12, 2024, which examined
the management of procurement and expected deliverables of the ArriveCAN application with due
regard for value for money. The OAG concluded that overall, the Canada Border Services Agency, the
Public Health Agency of Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada repeatedly failed to follow
good management practices in the contracting, development, and implementation of the ArriveCAN
application. One recommendation implicated the Public Health Agency of Canada.
KEY FACTS
Using the information that was available, the OAG estimated the cost of the application to be
approximately $59.5 million.
Overall, there were a total of 83 different Emergency Orders in Council issued to respond to the evolving
pandemic. From the time ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 until the health requirements were
lifted in October 2022, a total of 177 versions of the application were released, of which 25 were
considered major releases.
ArriveCAN was used for more than 60 million digital submissions.
In her December 2021 Report 15, Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders—Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the report tabled on February 12, 2024, the Auditor General highlighted
the utility of ArriveCAN with respect to improving the timeliness and quality of data received at the
borders.
ArriveCAN facilitated the safe resumption of international travel, which saw an increase of approximately
1,000 air arrivals per day in April 2020 to 50,000 air arrivals per day in April 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took a comprehensive, layered
approach to border management informed by available data, operational considerations, scientific
evidence, and monitoring of the epidemiological situation and pandemic response capacity.
ArriveCAN was the tool that enabled the Government of Canada to implement, adjust and remove
important public health measures at the border, as the pandemic evolved.
Reliable, timely and relevant data was crucial at the time to inform policy and decision-making in public
health emergencies.
The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the Auditor General’s recommendation.
IF PRESSED ON THE FINDINGS OF THE AUDITOR GENERAL’S REPORT
The Agency is strengthening existing guidance, supporting tools and training to address the
recommendation to document interactions and the reasons for decisions made during non-competitive
procurement processes.
The recommendation also calls for a process to ensure compliance with contracting policies. PHAC is
updating its quality assurance protocols to ensure that these requirements are met.
The findings also point to the importance of formally documenting roles and responsibilities at the
outset of a project, rather than at a later stage. This is being incorporated into the Agency’s
preparedness and contingency plans for future emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON THE FINDINGS IN THE PRIVACY COMMISSIONER’S SPECIAL REPORT
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada’s investigation on ArriveCAN, found that the Public
Health Agency of Canada and the Canada Border Services Agency acted in accordance with the Privacy
Act with regard to the collection, use, disclosure, and retention of personal information.
Throughout the pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada consulted its internal privacy experts to
ensure that the Government of Canada’s use of data followed best practices.
Overall, the collection of personal information under the Emergency Orders by both agencies was
determined to be necessary and proportional.
IF PRESSED ABOUT TRAVELLERS ERRONEOUSLY SENT TO QUARANTINE DUE TO A GLITCH WITH
ARRIVECAN
At the time of the event, PHAC worked closely with CBSA to make sure all affected travellers were
contacted and informed of the error and advised that they were not required to quarantine.
PHAC also worked with Service Canada, who managed the ArriveCAN help line for travellers, to inform
any travellers who called with questions.
No traveller was sent to a Designated Quarantine Facilities because of this system error.
BACKGROUND
Background
To support the administration and enforcement of the Quarantine Act and Emergency Orders made
under it, CBSA and PHAC developed ArriveCAN, an integrated digital solution that enables real-time
collection of information at Canadian Ports of Entry (POE) for all incoming travellers. ArriveCAN enabled
travellers to provide their information digitally as required by the Emergency Orders made under the
Quarantine Act, to support compliance,enforcement and public health measures.
ArriveCAN first launched in April 2020 and is available as a mobile app on the Apple App and Google Play
stores or by signing in online at Canada.ca/ArriveCAN.
Implementation of ArriveCAN
In February 2020, Canada began collecting mandatory information from travellers who had been in
specific geographical locations in the previous two weeks, such as Hubei province in China, Italy and Iran.
Travellers submitted this information via the Coronavirus Form.
The Coronavirus Form was modified to become the Traveller Contact Information Form to support the
first Mandatory Isolation Order in late March 2020. The form was made available digitally via a website
in March 2020.
Due to the volume of travellers entering Canada, the paper forms quickly became operationally
inefficient and resulted in inaccurate or incomplete submissions and lengthy digitization processing that
led to delays in sharing the information with the provinces and territories. It also resulted in traveller
line-ups at airports and border crossings -- raising concerns about increasing the risk for spreading the
virus in those areas -- and made it difficult to fully administer the border measures and ensure essential
travel and transit of people and goods.
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 as a joint initiative between the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) and the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) to allow travellers to voluntarily provide their
public health information. Later, to further support the implementation of the emergency border
measures, the use of ArriveCAN became mandatory for air travellers in November 2020, and later for
travellers by land and marine. The app and sign-in online platform reduced points of contact at POEs,
improved processing times at the border and reduced crowding, and allowed for faster sharing of
information with provinces and territories.
Mandatory Digital Submission
ArriveCAN stopped being mandatory as of October 1, 2022.
Submission of traveller information using ArriveCAN was initially voluntary. However, on November 21,
2020, it became mandatory for air travellers to submit their information digitally in advance of arriving in
Canada (i.e., before boarding the aircraft to Canada). At the time, travellers entering Canada by air
accounted for approximately 20% of all travel. As of February 22, 2021, it became mandatory for
travellers entering via land to submit their information through ArriveCAN prior to arriving at the border
crossing. Travellers entering Canada by land accounted for approximately 78% of total travel.
Travellers were not denied boarding their aircraft for failing to comply with the digital requirements;
however, they faced potential enforcement actions upon entry ranging from a verbal warning to a $5,000
fine.
Once in Canada, it was mandatory for non-exempt travellers from all modes (air, land, marine) to provide
information digitally, including daily symptom self-assessments, throughout their 14-day quarantine, and
confirm that they have reached their place of quarantine through ArriveCAN or the toll-free number.
Although exempt travellers were mandated to provide contact information in advance if travelling by air
or land, they were exempt from post-border reporting as they were exempt from the mandatory
isolation order. Approximately 75% of travellers were exempt from the mandatory requirement to
quarantine, including travellers who entered Canada for the purpose of performing cross-border work,
medical support, essential services, or trade or transport.
During the period when the mandatory requirements were in effect, usage of ArriveCAN for air travellers
was consistently at or above 85% and above 80% for land travellers since January 2022. Information
provided through ArriveCAN was shared with provinces and territories and law enforcement agencies for
public health follow-up and to verify compliance with the Quarantine Act. ArriveCAN was part of a
broader suite of activities and tools supporting Canada’s evolving border policies throughout the COVID-
19 pandemic.
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore how digital tools can further support Canada’s
public health data needs.
Privacy Commissioner’s Report
In the first months of 2022, the Office of the Privacy Commissioner (OPC) received several privacy
complaints about the collection and use of traveller data via the ArriveCAN app and website. The Privacy
Commissioner’s Special Report, tabled in Parliament on May 30, 2023, indicates that these complaints
were not well-founded.
In particular, the collection, use, disclosure, retention, and disposal of information by CBSA and PHAC for
the purposes of administering and enforcing the Emergency Orders was compliant with the Privacy Act.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
ISSUE
The Federal Government’s position on amending the Criminal Code to permit advance requests for
MAID.
The temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a
mental illness has been extended by three years, to March 17, 2027.
KEY FACTS
Advance Requests
An advance request refers to situations where a person requests MAID before they are eligible (and
before they want) to receive it. A person outlines the circumstances under which they would want to
receive MAID, in the future, if such circumstances arise after they lose decision making capacity
The provision of MAID based on an advance request is not permitted under the Criminal Code because
the provisions require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be able
to provide consent immediately before MAID is provided, with limited exception. With an advance
request, a person would make a request for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable
suffering, and receive MAID after they have lost capacity to consent.
The Criminal Code does allow for a waiver of final consent in specific situations in which people have
already been assessed as eligible for MAID under Track 1 (natural death reasonably foreseeable).
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) reviewed advance requests as one of several topics
addressed in its report tabled in February 2023. AMAD recommended that the Government of Canada
amend the Criminal Code to allow for advance requests following a diagnosis of a serious and incurable
medical condition disease, or disorder leading to incapacity. The federal government’s response to the
report does not make commitments to expanding federal legislation, noting that further consultation
and study is required.
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Québec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-
of-life care and other legislative provisions. This legislation created a provincial regime to permit advance
requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the government that can be no later than June 7,
2025).
During the recent parliamentary debate on former Bill C-62, which extended the temporary exclusion of
MAID eligibility where mental illness is the sole underlying condition, the question of allowing advance
requests for MAID was frequently raised, even though it was not connected to the content of the Bill.
Mental Illness
Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause excluding
persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID until March 17,
2023. The date was deferred by one-year to March 17, 2024 with the passage of former Bill C-39.
On January 29, 2024, the Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) tabled its report examining the
degree of preparedness to safely assess MAID eligibility for persons whose sole underlying condition is a
mental illness. The Committee concluded that health care systems are not ready and that further time is
needed.
On February 29, 2024, former Bill C-62 received Royal Assent, thereby extending the exclusion for MAID
eligibility solely on the basis of a mental illness to March 17, 2027. The new law requires that a joint
Parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID of
persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent, that is by
March 1, 2026.
Over the next three years, the federal government will continue to work with the provinces and
territories and other stakeholders to enhance system preparedness such as supporting ongoing uptake
of practitioner training and other key resources, the development of necessary coordination services,
exploring models of case review and enhancing engagement with Indigenous Peoples and other key
populations.
KEY MESSAGES
Advance Requests
We are aware that there is strong support among the public for advance requests, in particular for
persons who have been diagnosed with a capacity-limiting disease such as Alzheimer’s.
We have also heard that practitioners place a great deal of value on obtaining a “final consent” as a
confirmation of a person’s wishes.
Criminal Code amendments to permit advance requests would be very complex and first require a great
deal of consultation and study with provinces/territories, experts and health care stakeholders.
Mental Illness
The Government recognizes that MAID is a deeply personal choice and remains committed to supporting
eligible individuals in having their MAID request considered in a fair, safe and consistent manner, while
supporting efforts to protect those who may be vulnerable.
A great deal of progress has been made to prepare for MAID eligibility for persons with a mental illness,
however the provinces and territories and other key stakeholders are at various levels of readiness and
have requested more time.
In addition, the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying has concluded that more time is
needed as the health care system is not yet prepared to safely assess MAID eligibility for requests based
on mental illness as the sole underlying condition.
The three-year extension provided through the passing of former Bill C-62 will allow the necessary
preparations within our health care systems, including training more clinicians.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT WOULD HAPPEN IF A QUEBEC PHYSICIAN WOULD PROVIDE MAID IN ACCORDANCE
WITH PROVINCIAL LAW, BUT WITHOUT CHANGES TO THE CRIMINAL CODE
A practitioner who provided MAID in compliance with Québec’s advance request scheme, even once it is
in force, would commit a criminal offence. This is because they would not satisfy all of the Criminal Code
requirements and therefore could not avail themselves of the exemptions in the Code.
IF PRESSED ON WHY A THREE YEAR DELAY AND NOT AN INDEFINITE PAUSE
The Government of Canada recognizes that mental illness can cause suffering on par with that of
physical illnesses.
The question is about “when” and not “if”. It was important to establish a firm timeline, otherwise we
risked losing momentum based on the excellent progress and study completed to date.
A three-year extension will provide provinces and territories and partners sufficient time to have
structures and mechanisms in place to safely assess MAID requests where mental illness is the sole
underlying condition.
•The extension also provides practitioners with time to become trained and gain confidence in applying
the guidelines and safeguards.
IF PRESSED ON THE WORK UNDERTAKEN TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS
Our Government has been collaborating with provinces and territories, medical and mental health
communities to support system preparedness for MAID eligibility on the basis of a mental illness alone.
We have supported important initiatives including development of a model Practice Standard and Advice
to the Profession, the launch of an accredited bilingual curriculum for MAID clinicians, two Knowledge
Exchange Workshops for MAID assessors and providers, and launched ongoing engagement with
Indigenous Peoples to understand their diverse perspectives on MAID.
We are committed to continuing to work with provinces and territories to advance health system
preparedness in the coming years.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AS THE SOLE UNDERLYING
CONDITION
The Government recognizes that mental disorders can cause suffering on par with that of physical
illnesses.
Resources such as the Model MAID Practice Standard, Advice to the Profession, and the MAID training
curriculum, and additional resources developed by provinces and territories will support the medical and
psychiatric communities in being prepared for changes to the law.
The Government is committed to furthering our engagement with persons with lived experience,
including experts in the mental health community, to help inform next steps and to prepare for March
2027.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
The legislation sets a high bar with stringent eligibility criteria including having a grievous and
irremediable medical condition. No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of a lack of social supports,
such as housing and mental health services.
Improving access to social and health services remains a priority and governments are working to
address disparities.
On June 22, 2023, the Government passed the Canada Disability Benefit Act to reduce poverty and
support financial security of persons with disabilities.
BACKGROUND
ADVANCE REQUESTS
Studies on Advance Requests
When former Bill C-14 passed in June 2016 permitting MAID in Canada, it required the Ministers of
Health and Justice to undertake reviews on issues relating to complex types of MAID requests that were
not included in the Bill. These included advance requests; requests by mature minors, and requests
where mental illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
The Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) was selected to undertake the reviews, for which the objective
was to gather and analyze relevant information and evidence to support further discussion on the
implications of extending or not extending eligibility in the three circumstances. A report on each topic
was tabled in Parliament in December 2018.
The CCA reports did not include recommendations, but summarized the findings and available evidence.
The report on advance requests identified many ethical, legal and process challenges associated with
implementing advance requests.
International Experience
International experiences with advance requests is limited. Although permitted in the Netherlands and
Belgium, advance requests represented just 1 - 4% of all assisted deaths over a 15-year period in the
Netherlands, and only 1% of Belgium’s euthanasia cases since 2018-2019. In many other jurisdictions
where MAID is permitted (e.g., several US states), a person must self-administer the lethal medication,
so advance requests would, by definition, not be feasible.
Varied levels of support
There is public support for advance requests. According to a Leger poll in February 2024, two-thirds of
Canadians (65%) believe that people suffering from an illness that can affect their cognitive ability should
be able to make a request in advance for MAID. This proportion is higher among Quebecers (77%) and
people aged 55 and over (69%). However, there are some communities who do not support advance
requests, such as organizations representing persons with disabilities.
Some practitioners and experts have raised significant concerns about advance requests for MAID. For
example, there may be difficulties interpreting the document setting out the advance request, apparent
resistance by the person at the time MAID is to be administered, or hesitation among MAID providers to
act on an advance request should they be permitted by law.
Current legislation
Advance requests for MAID are not permitted in Canada under the Criminal Code because the provisions
require that a person must be experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering and be able to provide
consent immediately before MAID is provided. With an advance request, a person would make a request
for MAID before they are experiencing enduring and intolerable suffering, and receive MAID after they
have lost capacity to consent.
The Criminal Code does allow for a waiver of final consent in specific situations in which people have
already been assessed as eligible for MAID under Track 1 (natural death reasonably foreseeable). In this
situation, they have specified a date for receiving MAID and they are concerned about losing capacity
before the provision of MAID and not being able to provide final consent. An advance request, in
contrast, involves a person making a request for MAID before they wish to have it, and before they are
eligible, to receive it.
A person with dementia may be eligible to receive MAID if the person meets all the eligibility criteria and
the MAID provider can ensure the safeguards are met. This means that the person must be in an
advanced state of decline in capability, but still has the capacity to make health care decisions. It can
present a challenge for the MAID assessor/provider to find the right time when both these criteria can
be met.
Bill proposing expansion
On June 2, 2022, Bill S-248, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying), was
introduced in the Senate by Senator Pamela Wallin. The aim of the Bill is to create a federal advance
request regime for MAID in the Criminal Code for persons who have received a diagnosis that will lead to
incapacity. On June 8, 2023, the Bill passed second reading and was referred to the Standing Senate
Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs (LCJC) for review just prior to summer adjournment. This
review has not yet started. The Government has not yet indicated its position on this Bill.
Quebec
In June 2023, the National Assembly of Québec passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-
of-life care and other legislative provisions, which created a provincial regime to permit advance
requests for MAID (to come into force on a date set by the government that can be no later than June 7,
2025).
Quebec’s legislative amendments on advance requests are based on several Quebec reports produced
over the past few years exploring MAID-related issues. At least three reports have made
recommendations to permit advance requests [Expert Group on the Issue of Incapacity and Medical Aid
in Dying (2019); 2020-21 Annual Report of the Quebec Commission on End-of-Life Care; Select
Committee on the Evolution of the Act respecting end-of-life care (December 2021)].
Given the Criminal Code does not permit the provision of MAID based on an advance request, a
practitioner who provides MAID in compliance with Québec’s advance request scheme would commit a
criminal offence. In recent months, Quebec has been asking the Federal Government to explore options
that would remove legal barriers and permit Quebec to implement an advance request regime. Most
recently in February 2024, the Québec National Assembly passed a motion requesting the federal
Parliament to amend the Criminal Code so that Québec can legally allow advance requests for medical
aid in dying according to its provincial legislation.
MENTAL ILLNESS
MAID LEGISLATION AND MENTAL ILLNESS
In the original 2016 legislation (former Bill C-14), which legalized MAID for persons whose natural death
was reasonably foreseeable, the Act required the Ministers of Health and Justice to initiate independent
reviews on three particularly complex issues, including requests where the sole underlying medical
condition was mental illness.
In 2016, the Government asked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) to conduct these independent
studies. Following a comprehensive study of this matter, experts in this field could not come to a
consensus on this very complicated issue.
Four years later, the Government introduced former Bill C-7, which proposed to expand MAID eligibility
to persons whose death was not reasonably foreseeable. As introduced, former Bill C-7 contained a
provision stating that mental illness was not considered to be a disease, illness or disability. In other
words, requests for MAID based solely on mental illness would not be permitted. As such, no provision
for a temporary exclusion was included in the former Bill.
During its study of former Bill C-7, the Senate concluded that MAID requests based solely on mental
illness should be permitted, and amended the former Bill to include a temporary, 18 month exclusion of
eligibility. The Government responded by tabling a motion in the House extending the temporary
exclusion to two years and adding the requirement for an expert independent review. These
amendments were passed in the final Bill.
In March 2023, former Bill C-39 extended for one year the temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for
persons suffering solely from a mental illness.
On February 29, 2024, former Bill C-62 received Royal Assent, thereby extending the exclusion for MAID
eligibility solely on the basis of a mental illness to March 17, 2027.The new law requires that a joint
parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID of
persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent, that is by
March 1, 2026.
MAID AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability; be in
an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and intolerable
suffering. All three of these criteria must be met for a person to be deemed eligible. Furthermore, the
legislation includes enhanced safeguards, which make it a responsibility of the medical practitioner to
ensure that an individual seeking MAID is made aware of the supports available to them. The person
seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable and available means to relieve the
person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously considered those means. These safeguards
for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help practitioners identify and potentially address the
sources of suffering and vulnerability that could lead the person to ask for MAID.
Clinician resources, such as a MAID practice standard and a training curriculum, have been developed to
assist clinicians in their assessments of complex MAID requests, such as those that involve a mental
disorder. These resources point to the need to assess the person over a period of time and not during a
time of crisis to ascertain the durability of the condition and proper capacity to consent. The MAID
curriculum includes a module on MAID and mental illness which includes information on substance use
disorder.
No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and mental health
services. All jurisdictions in Canada have a broad range of policies, programs and initiatives aimed at
providing health and social service supports to individuals.
Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing $45 million to develop national standards for mental
health and substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders. National standards will help to ensure that Canadians receive high quality, (e.g.,
safe, effective, patient-centred, equitable, and culturally sensitive) evidence-based mental health and
substance use services. The Government of Canada is also currently investing $5 billion over ten years to
improve Canadians’ access to mental health and substance use services. The investment is being
provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand
access to community-based mental health and addiction services.
THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
As a requirement of former Bill C-7, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to
conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental
Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It included 19 recommendations that provide guidance
on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated safeguards, and the
assessment process, as well as advice on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime
more broadly.
The Expert Panel found that the challenges people tend to associate with MAID eligibility for persons
with mental disorder (e.g., irremediability, decision-making capacity, suicidality and structural
vulnerability) are neither unique to requests for MAID from persons with a mental disorder, nor
applicable to every requester who has a mental disorder.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that new legal safeguards are not required to ensure that requests for
MAID from individuals with a mental disorder are handled safely and appropriately. They noted that the
legal framework for MAID already sets a very high bar for eligibility – that existing MAID eligibility criteria
and safeguards, when interpreted appropriately and buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices
in related areas of healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex
(track two) MAID requests, including where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition.
The key consideration for the Panel was ensuring that practitioners have additional guidance on how to
operationalize the existing eligibility criteria and safeguards in the context of mental disorder and other
complex MAID requests.
The central recommendation of the Panel was for federal, provincial and territorial governments to
facilitate collaboration among regulatory bodies on the development of MAID practice standards. This
process was completed in March 2023.
In addition to the collaborative work towards the development of MAID practice standards, provinces
and territories, in collaboration with healthcare regulators and MAID communities, have also been
working towards preparedness – some creating specific teams, adding resources, updating their practice
standards and encouraging training to help clinicians in addressing requests for those more complex
MAID cases, and where mental illness is a sole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations to help prepare the
MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress included: developing
a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID curriculum; enhancements
to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID; plans for Indigenous
engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The 2021 legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following its
Royal Assent. It stipulated that the Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be limited to)
the topics of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and
the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The committee
reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report, specifically focused on
MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The interim report made no
formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the timely implementation of the
recommendations of the Expert Panel.
AMAD’s second report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics under its remit, was tabled on
February 15, 2023. On June 15, 2023, the Government tabled its Response to AMAD’s report and
recommendations in the House of Commons.
AMAD reconvened in October 2023 to follow up on Recommendation 13 of its second report which was
to examine the degree of preparedness attained for the safe application of MAID for persons whose sole
underlying condition is a mental illness. AMAD tabled its recommendation to Parliament on January 29,
2024. It concluded that health care systems are not ready and that further time is needed, and
recommended an additional delay until the Minister of Health and the Minister of Justice are satisfied, in
consultation with provincial and territorial counterparts and Indigenous Peoples, that it can be safely and
adequately provided. It also recommended that a joint parliamentary committee be re-established to
assess preparedness one year prior to expanding MAID eligibility for mental illness as the sole condition.
The report included two dissenting opinions (by Committee Senators) and two supplementary opinions
(Conservative Party and the Bloc Québecois).
The new law, which delays expansion of the current MAID regime to March 2027, requires that a joint
Parliamentary committee undertake a comprehensive review relating to the eligibility for MAID of
persons suffering solely from a mental illness within two years of the Bill receiving royal assent, that is by
March 1, 2026.
FAMILY HEALTH TEAMS / ÉQUIPES DE SANTÉ FAMILIALE
ISSUE
While far too many Canadians are still struggling to secure timely access to family health service,
whether from a doctor, nurse, or team of providers, this issue disproportionality impacts those living in
rural communities.
Recently, media reports and experts have been framing the lack of timely access to family health services
as a crisis, with repercussions for the broader health care system.
KEY FACTS
In 2022, 14% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care provider.
In 2021, 18% of Canadians lived in rural communities, but they were served by 8% of physicians
practicing in Canada.
In 2017-2020, 20.3% of First Nations people living off reserve, 17.9% of Métis, and 56.5% of Inuit across
Canada reported being without a regular health care provider.
Access to family health services is a shared health priority identified in the Government’s plan for
Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes that far too many Canadians lack timely access to a regular family
health services provider.
Budget 2023’s historic announcement includes over $200 billion over 10 years for health care, including
$25 billion over ten years to support provinces and territories through bilateral agreements.
Improving access to family health services is at the core of these bilateral agreements.
Transforming the delivery of those services, including through team-based care, will help Canadians get
care when and where they need it, from a team, doctor or nurse practitioner.
IF PRESSED ON HOW FEDERAL INVESTMENTS ARE ENHANCING ACCESS TO FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES
Transforming how family health services are delivered will improve access to care, better support our
health workers and better support the health system as it adapts to the changing needs of Canadians.
Team-based care can play a key role in expanding access to family health services in that it is centred on
the patient, who can get the services they need from a range of health providers, when and where they
need them.
The historic investments announced in Budget 2023 support the provinces and territories in their efforts
to transform family health services.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF CANADIANS WITHOUT A FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES PROVIDER
Our government recognizes that Canadians continue to face challenges in accessing a regular health care
provider, be that a doctor, nurse practitioner, or team of health care professionals.
According to Statistics Canada, in 2021, approximately 14.5% of Canadians did not have access to a
regular health care provider.
As part of the Working Together plan, there is a federal, provincial and territorial commitment to collect,
use and share health information and to inform Canadians of progress with key common indicators.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is leading a process to review and refine eight initial
common indicators, including one related to measuring access to family health services.
CIHI released an initial snapshot of indicators for the four shared health priorities in August 2023
drawing from available data. CIHI relied on the 2021 Statistics Canada data for the family health services
indicator, but due to differences in calculations, the CIHI report indicates that approximately 12% of
Canadians do not have a regular health care provider.
CIHI and Statistics Canada are currently working together to refine these indicators.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS IN FAMILY HEALTH SERVICES WITHIN PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL
ACTION PLANS
Bilateral agreements under the Working Together plan are flexible, and provinces and territories may
tailor these agreements to address the unique needs of their populations and geography.
Through these agreements federal funds are being used to strengthen family health services, for
example :
Alberta is expanding team-based care and enhancing virtual care to increase access to family health
services.
We are encouraged by the shared urgency for driving progress through these bilateral agreements.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE CHALLENGES, INCLUDING SHORTAGES BEING FELT ACROSS
THE COUNTRY
Our government recognizes that health human resource shortages are creating challenges for Canadians
to get timely access to family health services and that rural and remote communities are
disproportionately impacted.
We are working with all interested partners to find solutions. The Coalition for Action for Health Workers
provides practical input and ideas on concrete actions that all levels of government can implement for
the health workforce.
Federal-provincial-territorial Health Ministers agreed to work together on a study of education and
training supply and demand of key health professionals to support better planning for the health
workforce.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
In response to the pandemic, the Government worked with provinces and territories to accelerate
uptake and use of virtual care, supported by $200M in funding in 2020.
Since then, virtual care has become an important way for Canadians, including those in rural and remote
communities, to get the care they need, when they need it.
The historic investments announced in Budget 2023 will enable provinces and territories to transform
the way family health services are delivered, including through virtual care, in ways that make sense in
their respective contexts.
BACKGROUND
Family Health Services
Family health services are the backbone of high-performing health care systems. They serve a dual
function in the health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination
function to ensure continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians continue to struggle to
access family health services. In 2022, 14% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care
provider, with gaps felt particularly acutely by Indigenous populations. In 2021, while 18% of Canadians
lived in rural communities, they were served by 8% of physicians practicing in Canada. In 2017-2020,
20.3% of First Nations people living off-reserve, 17.9% of Métis, and 56.5% of Inuit across Canada
reported being without a regular health care provider. Recently, media reports and experts have been
framing the lack of timely access to family health services as a crisis, with repercussions for the broader
health care system.
It is well recognized that multidisciplinary team-based care is critical to increasing timely access to care
for patients. Team-based approaches, with optimized scope of practice, create efficiencies that can allow
primary care providers to add new patients to their panel thereby increasing provider-patient
attachment, and improving timely access to care. Team-based models of care can improve quality of life,
well-being and satisfaction for providers resulting in improvements to retention and recruitment. Team-
based models also offer the potential to enhance access to services that have traditionally not been well
integrated with primary care, such as mental health and substance use and addiction services, as well as
with the broader social services sector.
Virtual Care
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to family health services, particularly in northern, rural and remote communities. The
adoption of virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic. In 2020, in
response to the pandemic, the Government collaborated with provinces and territories to accelerate
uptake and use of virtual care, supported by $200M in funding in 2020. $150M of this funding was
provided to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual services and $50
million went to Canada Health Infoway to support provinces and territories to implement virtual care.
Federal Investments
Budget 2023 outlines the federal government’s plan to provide over $200 billion over ten years in health
transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new funding through new Canada Health
Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs of each province and territory,
funding for personal support workers, and an increase to the Territorial Health Investment Fund. In
addition, Budget 2023 announced $2 billion over 10 years to address Indigenous health priorities and
$505 million over five years, starting in 2023-24, to the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI),
Canada Health Infoway, and other federal data partners.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up payments to
achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next five years. The last
top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of the five-year period,
resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.1 billion over ten years in
additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government will provide $25 billion over ten years through a
new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health system needs, such
as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and reducing backlogs,
increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health systems through
standardized health data and digital tools.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible and provinces and territories have options to tailor their
respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
HHR and FPT Collaboration
On October 12, 2023, FPT Ministers of Health issued a public statement reaffirming their commitment to
supporting Canada’s health workforce so our health workers are able to provide high-quality, accessible,
and effective health services for people living in Canada. In particular, FPT governments committed to
concrete actions focusing on:
Retention, reducing rates of stress and burnout and improving workplace culture, flexibility, and wellness
so health workers can stay in their jobs;
Domestic education supply and demand, enhancing Canada’s capacity to produce a domestic supply of
key health professionals, including more training opportunities for Indigenous Peoples that meets
national demand for care and keeps pace with a growing and aging population;
Foreign credential recognition and ethical recruitment, making Canada a country of choice for health
care providers by reducing the time it takes for internationally educated health professionals (IEHPs) to
join our workforce;
Labour mobility, supporting an agile and flexible workforce to support access to care; and
Health workforce data and planning, improving the availability, sharing and standardization of health
workforce data to support health workforce planning.
On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health Workers.
The Coalition’s efforts are focused on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian action and progress
on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives. The Coalition is comprised of
representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal support workers, colleges and
universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities, and reports to the Deputy Minister of Health.
Digital Health and Health Data
Digital health tools and health data play an important role in facilitating integrated care, enabling team-
based care, and providing patient access to personal health information. Yet, digital systems across the
country are highly fragmented leading to a poor ability to collect, share, and use health data. The
implications for primary care are significant, given its central role in enabling the coordination and
integration of care across the entire health care continuum.
For example, according to CIHI’s snapshot report published in August 2023, in 2021, less than 2 out of 5
(37%) Canadian doctors (not including Quebec) reported sending patient information electronically to
other doctors involved in their patients’ care. Recent Canadian research shows that Canadians want
digital access to their entire health record and want their primary care provider to have this complete
access as well.
Through the federal Government’s Working Together plan, provinces and territories will be able to invest
in and build a world-class health data system, which will help:
Canadians access their own electronic health information and make sure it can be shared between
health professionals and across health settings, allowing patients and health care providers to work
together more effectively;
Clinicians have the information they need to make the right decisions with their patients; and,
Governments make informed decisions for the overall improvement of Canada’s health care system and
better prepare and manage for public health events, ultimately benefitting all Canadians.
HEALTH WORKFORCE CHALLENGES
ISSUE
Canada’s health workforce continues to face challenging workplace conditions. High patient workloads,
lack of resources, mandatory overtime and fear for personal safety have led to high levels of burnout,
absences, and turnover.
KEY FACTS
There are not enough health care workers to meet the current demand for services.
Statistics Canada has reported that job vacancies reached 95,200 in the first quarter of 2023, more than
double than in the first quarter of 2020 (43,000).
Health care workers are working more overtime (OT) than ever before. Since 2019, the proportion of
health care workers who reported working OT increased each year. By 2022, 31.7% of full-time nurses
and 18.2% of personal support workers (PSWs)/care aides put in additional hours over scheduled paid
hours (includes both paid and unpaid OT).
14.5% of Canadians do not have a primary health care provider. Without a primary health care provider,
emergency rooms become the only accessible option for seeking health care.
Lacking in both staff and physical space for the increasing patient load, hospital emergency rooms across
the country have had to temporarily close their doors, particularly in rural areas.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes the immense contributions health professionals make every day
and we share their concerns about the challenges they are facing, and their collective impacts.
Budget 2023 confirms the Government of Canada’s plan to provide close to $200 billion over 10 years to
provinces and territories, including an immediate, unconditional $2 billion Canada Health Transfer top-
up to address immediate pressures on the health care system, especially in pediatric hospitals and
emergency rooms, and long wait times for surgeries.
$25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements as
well as an annual increase to the Canada Health Transfer for the next 5 years was confirmed.
These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to support the
retention and recruitment of health workers; support streamlined foreign credential recognition for
internationally educated health professionals and increase labour mobility starting with multi-
jurisdictional recognition of health professional licenses.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY
New funding of $1.7 billion will support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related
professions, as federal, provincial and territorial governments work together on how to best support the
recruitment and retention of these workers.
In addition, $25 billion over 10 years will advance shared health priorities, including supporting our
health workers and reducing backlogs, through tailored bilateral agreements with provinces and
territories.
These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to support the
recruitment and retention of health workers within the public health care system.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SUPPORT FOR HEALTH WORKERS
The Government is very concerned about the mental health and well-being of Canadians, and of
frontline workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
In the previous 2 years the federal government has invested more than $290 million in funding to
support the mental health of Canadians.
New health investments confirmed in Budget 2023 include $25 billion over 10 years for bilateral
agreements that will focus on four shared priorities, including mental health and substance use.
As there is no health without mental health, provinces and territories are asked to take an integrated,
inclusive approach to investments in health service teams, the health workforce and data and digital
tools required to meet the health and mental health needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO PROTECT HEALTH WORKERS AGAINST HARASSMENT
We have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have been
threatened and intimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely unacceptable.
New healthcare funding confirmed in Budget 2023 prioritizes the health workforce and will allow
provincial and territorial governments to address challenges faced by health workers such as violence,
discrimination, and racism.
All Canadians, and especially health workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe working
environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s health workers are facing serious challenges. These challenges require transformative and
innovative solutions to address problems that have existed for years, with new and different levels of
collaboration required across governments and stakeholders.
FPT Collaboration
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
territorial jurisdictions and their regulators. Health Canada will continue to work collaboratively with
provinces and territories to drive concrete steps necessary to address health workforce situation.
On October 12, 2023 FPT Ministers of Health issued a public statement reaffirming their commitment to
supporting Canada’s health workforce so our health workers are able to provide high-quality, accessible,
and effective health services for people living in Canada. In particular, FPT governments committed to
concrete actions focusing on:
Retention, reducing rates of stress and burnout and improving workplace culture, flexibility, and wellness
so health workers can stay in their jobs;
Domestic education supply and demand, enhancing Canada’s capacity to produce a domestic supply of
key health professionals, including more training opportunities for Indigenous Peoples that meets
national demand for care and keeps pace with a growing and aging population;
Foreign credential recognition and ethical recruitment, making Canada a country of choice for health
care providers by reducing the time it takes for internationally educated health professionals (IEHPs) to
join our workforce;
Labour mobility, supporting an agile and flexible workforce to support access to care; and
Health workforce data and planning, improving the availability, sharing and standardization of health
workforce data to support health workforce planning.
Recent Federal Investments
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT) continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories in
the delivery of health care. In Budget 2023, the Government of Canada confirmed new federal
investments in healthcare that includes several initiatives that can support the health workforce:
An immediate and unconditional $2 billion CHT top-up to address immediate pressures on the health
care system, especially in pediatric hospitals and emergency rooms, and long wait times for surgeries.
$25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements that
will support the needs of people in each province and territory in four areas of shared priority: family
health services; health workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a modernized health
system. These additional federal investments will be contingent on continued health care investments by
provinces and territories. This funding builds on the $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to
provinces and territories for mental health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term
care.
$1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and related
professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments work together on how best to support
recruitment and retention.
$2 billion over 10 years to address the unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes to fair
and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services.
$505 million over 5 years to Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway and
federal data partners to work with provinces and territories on developing new health data indicators, to
support the creation of a Centre of Excellence on health worker data, to advance digital health tools and
an interoperability roadmap, and to underpin efforts to use data to improve safety and quality of care.
In addition to this funding, in the previous two years, the federal government has provided provinces
and territories with $6 billion in top up funding through the CHT, distributed equally per capita, to help
provinces and territories address immediate health care system pressures, including reducing medical
backlogs caused by COVID-19.
Other Federal Government Actions
The federal government is supporting provinces and territories to strengthen their health systems,
including sustainably increasing the supply of health workers and helping create healthier workplaces to
support retention and the mental health of health workers. Other recent federal actions and investments
include:
On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health Workers.
The Coalition’s efforts are focused on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian action and progress
on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives.
The Coalition is comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities, and reports to the
Deputy Minister of Health.
On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced Dr. Leigh Chapman as the federal Chief Nursing Officer
(CNO). Dr. Chapman has brought nursing issues in focus federally, while working closely with provinces
and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
In August 2023, Health Canada appointed Dr. Geneviève Moineau as Chief Medical Workforce Advisor
(CMWA) to help support the federal response to current health workforce challenges.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments, provinces and
territories and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce challenges.
Mental Health
In September 2022, a Report from the Mental Health Commission noted that it remains critical to break
down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in health care organizations and prioritize psychological
health and safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and territorial
health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes $25 billion over 10 years
to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements that will support the needs of
people in each province and territory in four areas of shared priority: family health services; health
workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a modernized health system. This builds on
investments through Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion over 10 years ($3 billion remains until 2027) to
improve Canadians’ access to mental health services.
RAPID TESTS
ISSUE
Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada procured and distributed millions of
rapid tests to support rapid testing programs across the country with the aim to limit the spread of the
virus.
The Government of Canada built substantial federal reserves of rapid tests in the event of a potential
resurgence and, given diminishing demand, has been divesting of the surplus tests to minimize volumes
going unused prior to their expiration in 2024.
KEY FACTS
Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 811 million rapid
tests, at a total cost of $5B.
During this period, the Government shipped 685 million rapid tests to provinces and territories (PTs)
based on PT demand projections.
More than 8 million rapid tests were shipped to registered charities, non-profit organizations, and
Northern, remote and isolated communities.
The federal role in procurement of rapid tests as part of pandemic support to PTs concluded in
December 2022. Activities relating to this role, such as managing test stocks, continue but are winding
down following conclusion of procurement.
There are currently about 82 million rapid tests in the federal inventory for emergency support, if
needed.
Since spring 2023, approximately 1 million tests have been divested of through the GCDonate platform
to charities, non-profits, public institutions, and others.
The majority of tests in the federal inventory do not expire until late 2024.
KEY MESSAGES
Since 2020, the Government of Canada has provided provinces and territories with a free supply of rapid
tests to sustain testing programming and to foster provincial and territorial reserves, while also building
a federal inventory for emergency response.
Demand for tests from the federal inventory will likely remain low.
The Government of Canada continues to distribute and facilitate access to rapid tests to minimize the
risk that they will go unused prior to expiry.
IF PRESSED ON THE SIZE OF THE FEDERAL RAPID TEST INVENTORY
In response to the Omicron wave, provincial and territorial demand for rapid tests increased
dramatically.
Canada used its buying power to secure extremely limited global supply and proactively built reserves, in
close collaboration with the provinces and territories, in the event of future Omicron-like waves.
As public health measures and requirements for testing diminished, Canada finds itself with substantial
inventories to manage.
IF PRESSED ON PLANS FOR THE INVENTORY
Despite divestment efforts, it is possible that a significant number of rapid tests will not be deployed
before expiring.
Canada has been strategically managing the supply of rapid tests by:
working with manufacturers for direct delivery where appropriate;
reviewing and validating expiry dates periodically and as required;
working with manufacturers to extend shelf life; and
shipping inventory with the shortest shelf life first.
Canada does not plan to replenish the federal inventory as product expires.
IF PRESSED ON PROCUREMENT
With a commitment to openness, fairness, and transparency, Canada secured rapid tests when global
supply was very limited, leveraging Public Services and Procurement Canada’s standard procurement
mechanisms such as Request for Standing Offers.
As the pandemic evolved, procurement decisions were made, reviewed, and updated based on demand
projections in consultation with provinces and territories, stakeholders, and partners, as well as
established selection criteria such as price/overall cost, departmental priorities, test types, delivery
needs/availability, longer shelf life, test familiarity, and test performance.
IF PRESSED ON BTNX
PSPC established standing offers with qualified companies for the supply and delivery of COVID-19 rapid
tests on an as-needed basis.
COVID-19 tests authorized by Health Canada are supported by evidence demonstrating that they meet
applicable safety, effectiveness and quality requirements.
BTNX, a Toronto-based supplier (importer) of tests, responded to the Request for Standing Offer (RFSO)
for rapid tests and met the requirements under these Standing Offers. They remain in good regulatory
standing with Health Canada.
BTNX was issued a Standing Offer for Rapid Tests on May 20, 2021 for a 1 year agreement, and optional
6-month extension was exercised, ending November 19, 2022
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has been a leader in funding, procuring, and distributing rapid tests through
multiple channels across Canada, and has been providing rapid tests to provinces and territories since
October 2020. In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered
over 811 million rapid tests, at a total cost of $5B. Of this total, the federal government has shipped 685
million rapid tests to provinces and territories (PTs). These rapid tests have supported the broader
testing strategies that PTs have implemented including for screening in hospitals and other health care
settings, as well as for expanded school based testing, workplace screening, and community and general
population testing.
As a result of federal action in procurement and distribution of rapid tests, in working with PTs, Canada
has been well positioned to address potential resurgence. Demand for rapid tests has since fallen and
there is a risk remaining tests will go unused prior to their expiration in 2024. The Government of
Canada has made surplus tests available via Public Services and Procurement Canada’s GCSurplus
platform through GCTransfer, allowing federal organizations to access rapid tests for their employee
testing programs, through GCDonate providing access to charities, non-profits and public institutions to
access rapid tests for their staff and the communities they serve, and internationally.
SECURITY AT NML / SÉCURITÉ AU LNM
ISSUE
Concerns have been raised regarding security at the National Microbiology Lab (NML) in Winnipeg
following the tabling of documents related to the investigation of activities on February 28, 2024 and
employment termination of two NML scientists.
KEY FACTS
The Canadian Science Centre for Human and Animal Health, the only facility in Canada operating
Containment Level 4 laboratories, is home to both the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) National
Microbiology Laboratory (NML) as well as the Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s National Centre for
Foreign Animal Disease. The facility incorporates stringent security protocols and procedures for its
operations.
Due to the nature of the facility, we have implemented – and continue to review and modify as required
– rigorous security protocols to ensure the protection of employees and assets.
Corporate policies and procedures to vet access to the facility have been reviewed to strengthen the
security posture. Furthermore, the facility physical security assessment has been renewed, and proposed
changes will further enhance various aspects of the facility’s security.
KEY MESSAGES
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) continues to invest significant time and attention to ensure
research and science are conducted across the organization with a firm security mindset.
PHAC continues to place a strong emphasis on respecting and enforcing all policies and procedures, both
new and existing, that secure the National Microbiology Laboratory’s (NML) work and safeguard against
a continually evolving threat environment, including threats to IT security. This is consistent with efforts
across the Government of Canada to support innovation and research while also protecting national
security.
As a federally regulated institution, PHAC’s NML complies with biosecurity regulations, the Human
Pathogens and Toxins Act, and the Transportation of Dangerous Goods Program, and works closely with
regulatory bodies to ensure ongoing compliance.
The processes and procedures that are in place will continue to be evaluated and enhanced with a view
to continuously protect the confidence and trust of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH SECURITY
PHAC has established clear governance in regard to collaborations and regular training and
communication on employee accountabilities. This includes putting in place the mandatory use of
Materials Transfer Agreements and appropriate agreements to structure collaborations, such as
Collaborative Research Agreements.
Existing international collaborations were reviewed from a security perspective and new collaborations
are reviewed by a Science Security Committee.
The Government has also recently introduced a series of measures to safeguard Canadian Research,
including implementing the new Policy on Sensitive Technology Research and Affiliations of Concern,
launching Canada’s new Research Security Centre, as announced in Budget 2022, and supporting post-
secondary institutions with a total investment of close to $50 million through the Research Support
Fund.
This means any new collaborations with any country or organization would be assessed on a case-by-
case basis, and vetted for scientific value and security considerations prior to approval.
The NML is not currently engaged in any bilateral research collaboration with the People’s Republic of
China (PRC). Any new research collaborations would be assessed on a case-by-case basis and vetted for
both scientific value and security considerations prior to approval.
IF PRESSED ON SECURITY CHANGES
PHAC has invested significant time and attention to ensure research and science are conducted with
strict security compliance. Specific physical, personnel, and operational security measures have been
employed and a strong emphasis has been placed on respecting and enforcing policies and procedures
that secure the current work and safeguard against a continually evolving threat environment.
These processes and procedures are regularly re-evaluated to ensure the security of the NML.
Examples of some the security changes include, but are not limited to:
Implementing new X-ray protocols at the entry to the facility;
Enhancing vetting of visitors to the lab by PHAC Security;
Strengthening protocols for deliveries/shipping and receiving biological materials, including controls to
ensure all documentation is in place and verified;
Instituting additional controls around IT access; and,
Modernizing IT security infrastructure in collaboration with the Communications Security Establishment.
BACKGROUND
Ad Hoc Committee process
In May 2023, the Government announced the membership of an Ad hoc Committee of Parliamentarians
and a Panel of Arbiters to set out a process for the review and tabling in Parliament of classified
documents related to the investigation into activities and ultimate termination of employment of two
National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) scientists.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) worked closely with the independent Panel of Arbiters,
through the Ad-Hoc Committee process, to support the Panel in its recommendations to the Committee
on what information should be released in the public interest. The information was vetted for release by
the independent Panel of Arbiters, which was entrusted to determine which information could be
released in the public interest and which information had to remain protected. The Panel determined
that the documents could be disclosed with fewer redactions, in favour of more transparency.
PHAC has consistently sought to protect information disclosure of which it considered would be injurious
to national security and has consistently applied the requirements of the Privacy Act to protect private
employee information and to respect ongoing labour relations proceedings.
PHAC disclosed personal information to the Ad Hoc Committee of Parliamentarians and the Panel of
Arbiters on public interest grounds as described in the Privacy Act.
Improvements to lab security
The National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) has always operated as a secured facility, though the
administrative investigation initiated in 2019 highlighted that policies and procedures in place at the
time needed to be updated to mitigate the risks posed by the current threat environment. In response,
the Agency has invested significant time and attention to ensure research and science policies have a
renewed focus on security. Specific physical, personnel, and operational security measures have been
updated, while also galvanizing an institutional culture that recognizes the ever shifting threat landscape
and the need of public servants to stay abreast of the policies and procedures that secure the important
work and assets at the NML.
These improvements include:
Enhanced overall physical and security screening measures for all staff and external visitors. The
requirement to escort visitors at all times is mandatory and additional monitoring has been put in place
to ensure compliance;
Strengthened access management and monitoring with a new access control system.
Enhanced physical security including additional, and continual training and review of guard services;
Strengthened protocols for deliveries/shipping and receiving, including controls to ensure all
documentation is in place and verified for infectious materials;
Improved management of intellectual property (IP) and materials through specific requirements for
Materials Transfer Agreements and Collaborative Research Agreements and enforcement of their use;
Implemented mandatory training to raise awareness and provide guidance on security responsibilities
and accountabilities for all staff and security guards;
Updated training for new staff so they have a full understanding of their accountabilities and
management expectations with respect to security are clear;
Established clear and consistent communication to emphasize employee responsibilities in regards to
security and conflict of interest;
Comprehensive threat-risk assessments for physical and IT environments to ensure security measures
are complete and up to date;
Reinforced information management and document classification requirements, including the use of
corporate document repositories, messaging and training on acceptable use of devices, and compliance
with Treasury Board Secretariat requirements related to information categorization, transmittal and
destruction;
Updated policy on affiliations and collaboration with academic, research and health care organizations.
All collaborations both in Canada or abroad must be documented and reviewed by a Science Security
Committee; and
Implementation of additional controls on student hiring.
In recognition of the ever evolving threat environment, processes and procedures will be regularly re-
evaluated to ensure the security of the NML as threats are identified or anticipated.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
The availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces and territories and nationally. Health
Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for surgical abortion services in a limited
number of private clinics in Ontario (5). The one private clinic that had been charging patients in New
Brunswick closed in February 2024. These patient charges are considered user charges under the Canada
Health Act.
KEY FACTS
Abortion services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories.
Patient charges for medically necessary surgical abortion services in private clinics have resulted in
mandatory Canada Health Transfer (CHT) deductions to Ontario ($86,065 since March 2021) and to New
Brunswick ($444,041 since March 2020).
In recognition of actions taken to eliminate these patient charges, such as the introduction of new
legislation in 2023, Ontario has received partial reimbursement of its CHT deductions under the CHA
Reimbursement Policy totaling $43,296 to date.
Though the one private clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, the retrospective nature of
reporting under the Canada Health Act means New Brunswick will still face deductions for patient
charges levied in fiscal 2022-2023 and 2023-2024.
KEY MESSAGES
This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that no one
should be forced to carry an unwanted or unsafe pregnancy.
Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for access to
insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and to New Brunswick’s Canada
Health Transfers.
In recognition of actions taken to eliminate these patient charges, Ontario has also received partial
reimbursement of its Canada Health Transfer deductions under the CHA Reimbursement Policy.
In addition, this Government has invested $8 million to date under the Sexual and Reproductive Health
Fund to support access to abortion.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done to
improve access in many areas of the country.
Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan, which is
expected to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Though the one private clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, New Brunswick will still face
deductions for patient charges levied through 2023-2024 for refusing to provide coverage for these
services.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND
This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health (SRH) care, information, and
services more accessible for populations facing the highest risks and greatest barriers to SRH.
Through Budget 2021 and 2023, $81 million has been committed to the Sexual and Reproductive Health
Fund over 6 years.
The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund supports community-based organizations that help make
access to abortion, and other sexual and reproductive health care information and services more
accessible for Indigenous, racialized and 2SLGBTQI+ populations, as well as women and youth from
underserved populations.
IF PRESSED ON THE MARCH 21 RELEASE OF THE SURVEY ENTITLED INDUCED ABORTIONS REPORTED IN
CANADA IN 2022 BY THE CANADIAN INSTITUTE FOR HEALTH INFORMATION
CIHI released 2022 data on abortions in Canada on March 21, 2024.
Access to abortion appears to be improving in Canada. There were an estimated 97,211 reported
induced abortions in Canada in 2022. This is a 11% increase from the 87,485 induced abortions reported
in 2021.
The data also indicates a 3% increase in medical abortions, and an increased proportion occurring
outside of hospitals. This points towards increased access to abortion earlier in gestation, and less need
for travel for people living in underserved communities.
HC uses this data to inform CHA deductions to NB, due to the province’s refusal to cover these medically
necessary services when provided outside the hospital setting, or to report on them when they occur.
BACKGROUND
The aim of the Canada Health Act is to ensure that all eligible residents of Canadian provinces and
territories have reasonable access to medically necessary hospital, physician, and surgical-dental services
that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis, without charges related to the provision of insured
health care services.
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including those who
choose to end their pregnancy. Abortion services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all
provinces and territories. Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services,
regardless of where the services are provided.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario confirmed that some private abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services. Since March 2021, deductions totaling $86,065 have been
levied against the ON’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical
abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy provinces and territories that face mandatory
deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with Health Canada to develop a plan to
eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the circumstances that led to them
within a specified timeframe. Ontario is in the process of implementing its Reimbursement Action Plan,
including the introduction of regulations under legislation that was passed in 2023, which is expected to
eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services. In recognition of actions taken by Ontario to
eliminate these patient charges, per the Reimbursement Policy, partial reimbursements of its 2022, 2023
and 2024 deductions totaling $43,296 have been authorized to date.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who receive these services at the
private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a
private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. In
December 2022, the Government of NB passed legislation allowing for some insured surgeries to occur
in private clinics (including cataracts) as a means of reducing surgical waitlists. However, this new
legislation does not extend to surgical abortion services in private clinics. Since March 2020, deductions
totaling $444,041 have been levied against the NB’s CHT payments in respect of patient charges for
surgical abortion services. Though Clinic 554 closed in February 2024, given the retrospective nature of
reporting patient charges under the Canada Health Act, New Brunswick will face additional deductions
for patient charges levied in fiscal 2022-2023 and 2023-2024.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20 and was granted standing
on June 2, 2021. The group argues that the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada
Health Act. The case is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is awaiting information from the
province, which was requested in January 2022. A trial date has yet to be set.
NOTE TO FOLLOW
PANDEMIC AGREEMENT
ISSUE
Through an Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB), Member States of the World Health Organization
(WHO) are developing a new WHO instrument (i.e., a convention, treaty, accord, agreement or other
international instrument) on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
KEY FACTS
In December 2021, Canada and other WHO Member States agreed to launch the INB, a Member State-
led process to develop a Pandemic Agreement.
INB Negotiations began in February 2023 following the release of the Zero Draft. The text has
subsequently gone through a number of iterations; a revised negotiating text was shared with Member
States on March 8, 2024.
A progress report was presented at the 76th World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2023, and a final
outcome (i.e., a finalized agreement) is expected to be presented for consideration at the 77th WHA in
May 2024.
KEY MESSAGES
COVID-19 has demonstrated the need to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for the next
pandemic.
Canada is working closely with international partners, including the World Health Organization and the
Pan American Health Organization, and the broader global community to strengthen global health
security.
With respect to global health threats that cross borders, we can best advance and protect Canadian
interests through effective rules-based international systems.
Canada supports the development and negotiation of a WHO international agreement to improve
multilateral cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S POSITION ON THE PANDEMIC INSTRUMENT OR SOVEREIGNTY
CONSIDERATIONS
When negotiating a new international agreement, the Government of Canada will always carefully
consider:
its potential impact on our existing domestic laws and policies; and
if there is a need for domestic legislation to implement our international obligations.
If Canada decides to ratify the Pandemic Agreement, the Government of Canada will remain responsible
for and in control of any future domestic decisions about national restrictions or other measures related
to pandemics. The WHO is an international organization that does not have jurisdiction in Canada.
IF PRESSED – ENGAGEMENT WITH PROVINCES, TERRITORIES, INDIGENOUS ORGANIZATIONS AND OTHER
PARTNERS AND STAKEHOLDERS ON THE INSTRUMENT
Canada is taking a whole-of-government, whole-of-society approach in the development of the
Pandemic Agreement to ensure that Canadian priorities and values are reflected.
The Government of Canada hosted a Pandemic Instrument (Agreement) Partner and Stakeholder
Engagement Forum in March 2023 to discuss key thematic issues with Canadian academia; federal,
provincial and territorial representatives; Indigenous partners; youth; private sector; and non-
governmental organizations. A follow up Pandemic Agreement Regional Engagement Series was
undertaken in January and February 2024 to gather feedback on the draft negotiating text.
IF PRESSED – HEALTH, SOCIAL AND ECONOMIC IMPACTS OF THE INSTRUMENT
Global efforts to enhance pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery are expected to
yield significant health, social and economic benefits for Canadians and the broader global community.
BACKGROUND
In December 2021, at the World Health Assembly (WHA), the 194 WHO Member States, including
Canada, agreed to develop a new WHO instrument (i.e., a convention, treaty, accord, agreement, or
other international instrument) on pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response through an
Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB).The first INB meetings established a process to develop the
Pandemic Agreement, including timelines, milestones and modalities for stakeholder engagement.
Member States identified that a finalized instrument will be considered as a legally binding treaty,
convention or agreement, without excluding the option to adopt the instrument as binding regulations.
Member States themselves are fully leading the process to develop a Pandemic Agreement and will
decide on its content, with the WHO supporting the INB by offering technical, scientific and legal
guidance. Member States submitted a progress report to the 76th WHA in May 2023, and a final
outcome is targeting the 77th WHA in May 2024.
Potential substantive elements of the Pandemic Agreement could include:
improving health equity as a core objective;
strengthening prevention and surveillance measures, including through a One Health approach and
addressing antimicrobial resistance;
leadership and governance issues;
pathogen access and benefit sharing;
health system and workforce strengthening;
improving access to medical countermeasures, including through research and development, sustainable
production, tech transfer, supply chain and logistics, procurement and distribution, and regulatory
strengthening; and,
enhancing communication and public awareness and addressing misinformation/ disinformation.
Canada is actively engaged in the Pandemic Agreement process and is committed to a whole-of-
government and whole-of society approach. Canada’s stakeholder engagement strategy is based on
principles of transparency, accountability, and inclusivity, and outlines Canada’s guiding principles in the
development of the instrument. These guiding principles include evidence informed decision making and
respect for national contexts, as well as key multi-sectoral issues such as One Health and health equity.
The Health Portfolio is working with Global Affairs Canada to engage relevant federal government
departments, provincial and territorial governments, National Indigenous Organizations, and other
partners and stakeholders in the development of the Agreement. Negotiations began on February 27,
2023, based on a principles and objectives-based negotiating mandate.
NICOTINE BUCCAL POUCH
ISSUE
Following the authorization of the Zonnic nicotine pouches, there have been serious concerns raised
around the availability, use and advertising of the product.
The Department received correspondence from several health organizations, Canadian Chief Medical
Officers of Health, and citizens requesting to take immediate actions to mitigate youth access and
appeal.
This issue has also been the subject of sustained media attention.
KEY FACTS
In Canada, nicotine pouches are regulated under the Food and Drugs Act (FDA). They are classified either
as a natural health product (NHP) or a prescription drug based on the quantity of nicotine. More
specifically, if a nicotine pouch delivers 4 mg of nicotine or less per dose, it is regulated as a NHP under
the Natural Health Products Regulations (NHPR).
The Zonnic nicotine pouch was authorized by Health Canada on July 18, 2023, as a smoking cessation aid
for adults 18 years and older, similar to other nicotine replacement therapy products (NRTs) such as
gums or lozenges.
While NRTs are approved federally for use by adults 18 years and older, the place-of-sale and age-related
restrictions for sale fall under provincial and territorial regulatory authority.
Advertising rules under the FDA stipulate that advertisements may not be false or misleading and must
comply with the conditions of the authorization. As such, any product authorized for sale in Canada
cannot make false and misleading claims that target youth.
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada shares the concerns expressed by health care professionals about reports of growing
popularity and recreational use of nicotine replacement therapies among youth, including access to
Zonnic and other nicotine pouches.
Health Canada authorized Zonnic as a smoking cessation tool for adults only, which is why the
department has expressed concerns and expectations to the manufacturer regarding the labeling and
advertising of their product in an effort to limit youth appeal.
Health Canada has taken steps to ensure that current advertising and product labelling of Zonnic are
compliant with the Food and Drugs Act, but we need stronger measures to help ensure that these
products are not being aggressively marketed or sold to youth.
In addition, Health Canada is implementing both short- and medium-term actions. The Department
plans to take action to strengthen government controls to prevent youth access and to protect public
health.
Health Canada continues to work with federal partners, such as the Canadian Border Services Agency
and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to monitor regulatory compliance and take enforcement action
as needed, including the removal of unauthorized products from the market.
IF PRESSED ON What is Health Canada doing to address the concerns of the health community?
The Department has communicated its strong concerns to the manufacturer to underscore the
importance of preventing youth access to the product and the expectations regarding labeling and
advertising of their products, making it clear that these products are only for use by adults over 18 years
who want to quit smoking.
Health Canada has confirmed that contracts are in place with retailers, with the exception of pharmacies,
to place the product behind the counter, with age verification required prior to sale. Health Canada has
also received confirmation from an association representing some convenience stores and gas stations
that it requires its members to age verify the product
The Department is taking the concerns very seriously and is identifying regulatory and policy options to
prevent youth access and to consider potential new nicotine product forms.
The Department is also engaging with international counterparts who are seeing similar issues with
nicotine products in their own jurisdictions, including products that haven’t been seen yet in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON Why did Health Canada authorize these products if there is a concern for youth access?
Health Canada authorizes health products based on the evidence supporting their safety, efficacy and
quality when used as directed.
Health Canada’s current regulations require that labelling for nicotine replacement products state they
are only for use by adults over 18 years of age who are trying to quit smoking, but we need stronger
measures to help ensure that these products are not being aggressively marketed or sold to youth.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of non-compliance, actions are taken based on the risk they
may pose to the public. A number of compliance and enforcement actions are available, including
seizures, recalls, and public communications.
IF PRESSED ON why Health Canada is not banning flavours?
The Department is reviewing its approach to regulating nicotine products and will consult with
stakeholders on potential regulatory changes to reduce the risk of youth appeal and access to these
products, while maintaining the smoking cessation objective of these products.
IF PRESSED ON Why Health Canada licensed a product that is owned by the tobacco industry?
Health Canada is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians by reviewing the safety,
efficacy and quality of all health products before they enter the Canadian market.
If a company can successfully demonstrate that their health product is safe, efficacious when used
according to the recommended conditions for use, and of high quality and that they meet all the
requirements in the applicable laws and regulations, they can obtain a licence to sell their health product
in Canada.
Zonnic nicotine pouches were authorized by Health Canada for smoking cessation only for adults 18
years and older, and any advertising deemed deceptive will trigger post-market compliance actions.
IF PRESSED ON lack of engagement with P/Ts and health organization
Health Canada has been engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, as well as several non-
governmental organizations including health advocacy groups on possible options for restricting place-
of-sale of this product and ensuring age verification is conducted.
I commend the positive steps taken by the Minister of Health in British Columbia to reduce youth access
to these products by keeping them behind the counters at pharmacies, and by the province of Quebec
which already had regulations in place for nicotine replacement therapy products for sale in pharmacies
only but further encouraged pharmacists to also put these products behind the counter.
IF PRESSED ON what is Health Canada doing about other nicotine replacement therapies
Health Canada has written to all licence holders who sell nicotine replacement therapies to remind them
of the terms of their licencing and that products should not be advertised to youth and should be
labelled according to the terms of the authorization.
Additional requests on advertising and labelling for nicotine replacement therapies were included in the
letter, including clear age restrictions, no lifestyle advertising, and less bright colours.
IF PRESSED ON what is Health Canada doing about unauthorized nicotine replacement therapies
Health Canada does not hesitate to take action when it identifies or is notified of the sale of
unauthorized nicotine replacement therapies.
Health Canada continues to work on identifying and seizing unauthorized products in retail locations
across Canada, and disrupting the supply of these products into the country by working closely with the
Canada Border Services Agency.
The Department also issued a public advisory reminding Canadians the risks of nicotine, especially for
youth, as well as stressing the importance of only using authorized nicotine pouches as directed, and not
buy or use unauthorized pouches
BACKGROUND
The Zonnic nicotine pouch was authorized by Health Canada on July 18, 2023, as a smoking cessation aid
for adults 18 years and older, similar to other nicotine replacement therapy products (NRTs) such as
gums or lozenges.
Health Canada has authorized close to 100 NRT products for sale in Canada, including lozenges, gums,
patches, liquids, sprays, and vaporizers. The health claims approved for the Zonnic pouch, the rules
around access to these products, and the flavours are similar to those approved for other licensed NRTs.
Nicotine pouches are subject to a variety of regulatory approaches around the world, from outright bans
to partial or selective regulation, depending on how they are defined and classified by governments to
no regulation. For example, in Belgium these products were freely available on the market and
unregulated prior to being banned. In United States, nicotine pouches without health claims are
regulated as Tobacco products.
In November and December 2023, the Department received correspondence from a coalition of six
health organizations, which was also published online, the Canadian Chief Medical Officers of Health
from across Canada, and citizens regarding concerns about youth access and appeal of nicotine pouches.
Since then, other public health leaders have continued to raised similar concerns.
The coalition of health organizations (Action on Smoking and Health, Canadian Cancer Society, Canadian
Lung Association, Coalition québécoise pour le contrôle du tabac, Heart & Stroke, and Physicians for a
Smoke-Free Canada) has met with Health Canada to share its concerns about the risks of youth using
nicotine pouches.
The Department recognizes that nicotine is a powerfully addictive substance, and children and teenagers
are especially susceptible to its addictive properties as brain development continues throughout
adolescence and into early adulthood. Given this, Health Canada has taken immediate action regarding
concerns about youth access and appeal of nicotine pouches.
As part of the proactive surveillance of nicotine pouches, Health Canada has requested the manufacturer
of Zonnic nicotine pouch to submit annual safety reports in order to proactively monitor for adverse
reactions and other post-market data on benefits and risks. In addition, Health Canada is also proactively
investigating other data sources for surveillance (i.e., Canadian Poison Centres) related to all nicotine
replacement therapies, with a focus on intentional and unintentional use in individuals under 18 years of
age. Should there be new safety issues identified, Health Canada will take action, as appropriate.
Furthermore, Health Canada has written to all NRT licence holders to remind them of the terms of their
licence and that products should not be advertised to youth and should be labelled according to
requirements under the NHPR. Additional specific guidelines for NRTs were included in the letter,
including clear age restrictions, no lifestyle advertising, and less bright colours. These guidelines will be
posted online.
Health Canada is holding ongoing engagement with P/Ts to remind them that they have the authority to
restrict place of sale or require age verification, if they deem appropriate. Federal and P/T officials have
agreed to work together to prevent youth access to these products. Outreach will continue between the
Health Canada and P/T officials and detailed information on the regulations available in each PT will be
collected to better inform the discussion.
On February 7, 2024, BC announced that it amended its Drug Schedules Regulation to require buccal
nicotine pouch products, like the ones sold under the brand name Zonnic, to be kept behind the counter
at pharmacies. Individuals wishing to purchase these products will need to consult a pharmacist, who
can inform those purchasing the pouches about the health risks associated with nicotine dependency.
In Quebec, regulations already existed for nicotine replacement therapy products to be sold only in
pharmacies. However, the Quebec Order of Pharmacists further encouraged pharmacists to keep these
products behind the counter to ensure that use is safe and consistent with the intended use of these
products.
BREAST IMPLANT REGISTRY
ISSUE
What is the Government doing to establish a national breast implant registry?
KEY FACTS
Breast implant registries are typically used to record the details of individuals who have undergone
breast implant surgery, so that they can be traced in the event of safety concerns relating to a specific
type of implant.
On November 30, 2023, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) tabled a report in
the House of Commons titled “Strengthening the Oversight of Breast Implants”.
The Report made 10 recommendations to improve the oversight of breast implants, which primarily
focus on the creation of a national breast implant registry.
The Government is currently assessing HESA’s recommendations and will provide a response within the
prescribed 120 day timeframe.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada thanks the Standing Committee on Health for its report and
recommendations on the creation of a breast implant registry for Canada.
The Government is currently assessing the recommendations and will provide a response to HESA within
the prescribed 120 day timeframe.
IF PRESSED ON ESTABLISHING A BREAST IMPLANT REGISTRY
HESA published its report on the oversight of breast implants on November 30, 2023.
The Government is currently assessing the recommendations and will provide a response to HESA within
the prescribed 120 day timeframe.
Health Canada has undertaken a number of actions regarding the safety of breast implants, including the
suspension of higher risk breast implants, improved labelling to support informed decision-making; and
increased communication to help keep Canadians up to date with safety information on breast implants.
IF PRESSED ON BREAST IMPLANT ILLNESS
• Health Canada is performing a scientific, evidence-based review of breast implant illness, which
is a term used to describe a variety of symptoms associated with breast implants. Once finalized, the
Department will publish its findings.
BACKGROUND
The House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) report on the oversight of breast implants
was published on November 30, 2023. The Report, which includes 10 recommendations, states that
breast implant recipients are insufficiently protected from adverse outcomes and that significant gaps
remain in the oversight of these devices. The Report’s primary recommendation was to establish a
national breast implant registry. A government response has to be tabled within 120 calendar days after
the committee report is presented to the House. The response was ratified by Cabinet on February 26,
2024 and is planned to be tabled by March 28, 2024.
The concept of a breast implant registry has been discussed for many years: in the media; previously at
HESA; by physician and patient advocates, including people with lived/living experience; and at the
Health Canada Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women. Breast implant registries
would typically be used to record the details of individuals who have undergone breast implant surgery,
so that they can be traced in the event of safety concerns relating to a specific type of implant.
Several OECD countries have breast implant registries, including the United States, the United Kingdom,
Germany, France, Australia, Sweden, and the Netherlands. Currently there is only one known medical
device registry in Canada (the Canadian Joint Replacement Registry, or CJRR) managed by the Canadian
Institute for Health Information, which collects information on hip and knee replacement surgeries and is
used for research purposes to inform clinical practice. The CJRR is not a safety-recall registry.
In collaboration with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), a Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
meeting was held on March 7, 2023, with researchers, decision-makers, patient partners, and industry
with respect to the implementation of health registries and patient notification. International and
domestic stakeholders from across the health care ecosystem also participated in the discussion, which
highlighted the complexity of a breast implant registry with participants outlining numerous challenges
and complexities. The discussions at the BBE meeting highlighted key operational considerations, such as
establishing clear objectives for the registry and which organization would be best placed to manage or
implement the registry, as well as considerations about data collection and privacy.
In addition, Health Canada continues to publish information for Canadians and health professionals to
support decision making. Health Canada’s website for breast implants is a comprehensive page with
clear information about the risks available. A July 2023 update addressed some of the feedback on
information communicated about breast implants raised by HESA in spring 2023, and now includes a fact
sheet on breast implants to support discussions between people seeking breast implants and their
physicians. This is in addition to comprehensive information already available, including: a subscription
service to inform interested Canadians about new government publications on breast implants; Health
Canada’s safety reviews of implants; information to consider before getting implants; and a link to report
problems or adverse effects with implants to Health Canada.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
Mandatory Canada Health Transfer deductions, totaling over $79M in respect of deductions for
medically-necessary services, were authorized in March 2024.
Mandatory deductions are eligible for reimbursement provided the implicated province takes steps to
eliminate patient charges and the circumstances that led to them, within two years after the deduction
was taken. In March 2024, Health Canada authorized over $90 million in reimbursements to provinces
which had taken action to address the patient charges for which they were previously deducted.
For provinces that received partial reimbursement of their deductions, additional reimbursement can
occur as actions are taken to fully eliminate patient charges.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is firmly committed to Canada’s publicly funded health care system and the principle
that everyone deserves access to quality, accessible and universal health care.
The Government of Canada will work with provinces and territories to ensure that its significant ten-year
investment of over $200 billion in health care funding to provinces and territories is used in ways that
respect the principles of the Canada Health Act.
The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care services
based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
This Government has demonstrated that it will uphold the Canada Health Act to ensure that patients do
not face barriers when accessing medically necessary care. Toward that end, Health Canada continues to
work with provinces and territories to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services. As a
result of provincial and territorial action to address these patient charges, Health Canada has authorized
over $90 million in reimbursements.\
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES USING PRIVATE FACILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF INSURED
SERVICES
The Canada Health Act does not preclude private facilities from providing medically necessary services,
so long as patients are not charged to access these services.
When provinces have not covered medically necessary services in private clinics, or have permitted
clinics to charge patients, this Government has acted and levied deductions to provincial Canada Health
Transfer Payments.
FEES AT PRIVATE PRIMARY CARE CLINICS
The Government of Canada does not support a two-tiered health care system where patients may
choose, or be required, to pay membership fees to access insured primary care services at clinics, or to
gain preferential access to those services. These fees are considered patient charges under the Canada
Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility criterion of the Act.
Whenever Health Canada becomes aware of clinics charging such fees, the Department engages with
their provincial or territorial counterparts, and works with them to eliminate these charges.
Most recently, Health Canada officials reached out to their counterparts in Alberta after media reports
suggested a clinic was charging membership fees as a condition of accessing insured services and
confirmed the province would be auditing these clinics.
IF PRESSED CANADA HEALTH TRANSFER DEDUCTIONS LEVIED TO QUEBEC IN MARCH 2024
In January 2024, Quebec acknowledged Health Canada’s estimate of patient charges for medically
necessary diagnostic services which occurred in fiscal year 2021-2022. As such, in March 2024, Health
Canada authorized a Canada Health Transfer deduction in the same amount.
Due to efforts made by Quebec to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health Canada
authorized a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024, deductions. Health
Canada continues to work with the province to encourage them to eliminate patient charges for
medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be fully reimbursed for this deduction.
BACKGROUND
Diagnostic Services Policy
The Diagnostic Services Policy confirmed the federal position that all medically necessary services,
including diagnostic MRI (Magnetic resonance imaging) and CT (computerized tomography scan)
services, are insured services, regardless of the venue where the services are delivered. Six provinces
currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services.
Provinces and territories were required to report on patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic
services in December 2023. As a result of patient charges for these services, in March 2024,Health
Canada authorized $72,408,956 in mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health
Transfer payments of the implicated jurisdictions. As a result of provincial action to address these patient
charges, Health Canada has authorized reimbursements to several of these jurisdiction, including full
reimbursement to Manitoba which has eliminated patient charges. Breakdowns by province are as
follows:
British Columbia - $11,270,216 ($15,587,542 to be reimbursed);
Alberta - $20,450,175 ($20,538,796 to be reimbursed);
Saskatchewan - $1,084,513;
Manitoba - $650 ($354,477 to be reimbursed);
Quebec - $36,014,132 ($46,728,814 to be reimbursed);
New Brunswick - $1,794,635; and
Nova Scotia - $1,794,635.
Membership/enrollment fees and private primary care clinicsHealth Canada is aware of private primary
care clinics in several provinces and territories (PTs) that charge enrollment and annual membership fees
of up to $7,200. These clinics offer members access to insured primary care services, uninsured services
(e.g., massage therapy and nutritional services), as well as comprehensive health assessments, which
combine insured and uninsured services. Enrollment and membership fees at clinics staffed by enrolled
physicians are considered patient charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the
accessibility criterion of the Act, if access to insured services is contingent or preferential on payment of
these fees.
In December 2023, Health Canada reached out to Alberta officials after media reports flagged a clinic
charging membership fees in relation to accessing insured health services. Alberta has confirmed that
the province will be auditing all private clinics that have a membership component to their services.
Patient Charges for Medically Necessary Services Delivered Virtually and/or by Non-Physician Health
Care Providers
On March 9, 2023, former Minister of Health, Jean-Yves Duclos wrote to his PT counterparts to express
concerns about reports of patient charges for medically necessary services delivered virtually and/or by
non-physician health care providers that would be insured if delivered in-person by a physician. Health
Canada continues to engage with PTs on these issues.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario confirmed that some private abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services. Since March 2021, deductions totaling $86,065 have been
authorized against ON’s CHT payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy provinces and territories that face mandatory
deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with Health Canada to develop a plan to
eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the circumstances that led to them
within a specified timeframe. Ontario is in the process of implementing its Reimbursement Action Plan
to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services. Due to the province’s progress to date,
including new legislation that prohibits patient charges for these services, in March 2024, Health Canada
authorized a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2022, 2023, and 2024 deductions totalling
$43,296.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who received these services at the
private clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick was the only province
with a private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province did not provide coverage for services. Since
March 2020, deductions totaling $444,041 have been authorized against the NB’s Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. Clinic 554 closed in
February 2024, but New Brunswick remains subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions for patient
charges levied through fiscal 2023-2024, for failing to provide coverage for these services.
The Reimbursement Policy
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA) Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces
and territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
Mandatory Canada Health Transfer deductions, totaling over $79M in respect of deductions for
medically-necessary services, were authorized in March 2024.
Mandatory deductions are eligible for reimbursement provided the implicated province takes steps to
eliminate patient charges and the circumstances that led to them, within two years after the deduction
was taken. In March 2024, Health Canada authorized over $90 million in reimbursements to provinces
which had taken action to address the patient charges for which they were previously deducted.
For provinces that received partial reimbursement of their deductions, additional reimbursement can
occur as actions are taken to fully eliminate patient charges.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is firmly committed to Canada’s publicly funded health care system and the principle
that everyone deserves access to quality, accessible and universal health care.
The Government of Canada will work with provinces and territories to ensure that its significant ten-year
investment of over $200 billion in health care funding to provinces and territories is used in ways that
respect the principles of the Canada Health Act.
The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care services
based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
This Government has demonstrated that it will uphold the Canada Health Act to ensure that patients do
not face barriers when accessing medically necessary care. Toward that end, Health Canada continues to
work with provinces and territories to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services. As a
result of provincial and territorial action to address these patient charges, Health Canada has authorized
over $90 million in reimbursements.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES USING PRIVATE FACILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF INSURED
SERVICES
The Canada Health Act does not preclude private facilities from providing medically necessary services,
so long as patients are not charged to access these services.
When provinces have not covered medically necessary services in private clinics, or have permitted
clinics to charge patients, this Government has acted and levied deductions to provincial Canada Health
Transfer Payments.
IF PRESSED ON MEMBERSHIP FEES AT PRIVATE PRIMARY CARE CLINICS
The Government of Canada does not support a two-tiered health care system where patients may
choose, or be required, to pay membership fees to access insured primary care services at clinics, or to
gain preferential access to those services. These fees are considered patient charges under the Canada
Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility criterion of the Act.
Whenever Health Canada becomes aware of clinics charging such fees, the Department engages with
their provincial or territorial counterparts, and works with them to eliminate these charges.
Most recently, Health Canada officials reached out to their counterparts in Alberta after media reports
suggested a clinic was charging membership fees as a condition of accessing insured services and
confirmed the province would be auditing these clinics.
IF PRESSED CANADA HEALTH TRANSFER DEDUCTIONS LEVIED TO QUEBEC IN MARCH 2024
In January 2024, Quebec acknowledged Health Canada’s estimate of patient charges for medically
necessary diagnostic services which occurred in fiscal year 2021-2022. As such, in March 2024, Health
Canada authorized a Canada Health Transfer deduction in the same amount.
Due to efforts made by Quebec to improve access to publicly funded diagnostic services, Health Canada
authorized a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2023 and March 2024, deductions. Health
Canada continues to work with the province to encourage them to eliminate patient charges for
medically necessary services, which would allow the province to be fully reimbursed for this deduction.
BACKGROUND
Diagnostic Services Policy
The Diagnostic Services Policy confirmed the federal position that all medically necessary services,
including diagnostic MRI (Magnetic resonance imaging) and CT (computerized tomography scan)
services, are insured services, regardless of the venue where the services are delivered. Six provinces
currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services.
Provinces and territories were required to report on patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic
services in December 2023. As a result of patient charges for these services, in March 2024,Health
Canada authorized $72,408,956 in mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health
Transfer payments of the implicated jurisdictions. As a result of provincial action to address these patient
charges, Health Canada has authorized reimbursements to several of these jurisdiction, including full
reimbursement to Manitoba which has eliminated patient charges. Breakdowns by province are as
follows:
British Columbia - $11,270,216 ($15,587,542 to be reimbursed);
Alberta - $20,450,175 ($20,538,796 to be reimbursed);
Saskatchewan - $1,084,513;
Manitoba - $650 ($354,477 to be reimbursed);
Quebec - $36,014,132 ($46,728,814 to be reimbursed);
New Brunswick - $1,794,635; and
Nova Scotia - $1,794,635.
Membership/enrollment fees and private primary care clinics
Health Canada is aware of private primary care clinics in several provinces and territories (PTs) that
charge enrollment and annual membership fees of up to $7,200. These clinics offer members access to
insured primary care services, uninsured services (e.g., massage therapy and nutritional services), as well
as comprehensive health assessments, which combine insured and uninsured services. Enrollment and
membership fees at clinics staffed by enrolled physicians are considered patient charges under the
Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility criterion of the Act, if access to insured
services is contingent or preferential on payment of these fees.
In December 2023, Health Canada reached out to Alberta officials after media reports flagged a clinic
charging membership fees in relation to accessing insured health services. Alberta has confirmed that
the province will be auditing all private clinics that have a membership component to their services.
Patient Charges for Medically Necessary Services Delivered Virtually and/or by Non-Physician Health
Care Providers
On March 9, 2023, former Minister of Health, Jean-Yves Duclos wrote to his PT counterparts to express
concerns about reports of patient charges for medically necessary services delivered virtually and/or by
non-physician health care providers that would be insured if delivered in-person by a physician. Health
Canada continues to engage with PTs on these issues.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario confirmed that some private abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services. Since March 2021, deductions totaling $86,065 have been
authorized against ON’s CHT payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy provinces and territories that face mandatory
deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with Health Canada to develop a plan to
eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the circumstances that led to them
within a specified timeframe. Ontario is in the process of implementing its Reimbursement Action Plan
to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services. Due to the province’s progress to date,
including new legislation that prohibits patient charges for these services, in March 2024, Health Canada
authorized a partial reimbursement of the province’s March 2022, 2023, and 2024 deductions totalling
$43,296.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who received these services at the
private clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick was the only province
with a private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province did not provide coverage for services. Since
March 2020, deductions totaling $444,041 have been authorized against the NB’s Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. Clinic 554 closed in
February 2024, but New Brunswick remains subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions for patient
charges levied through fiscal 2023-2024, for failing to provide coverage for these services.
The Reimbursement Policy
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA) Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces
and territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
CANNABIS
ISSUE
Since its coming into force on October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act has created a strict legal framework
for controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada.
The legislation is designed to keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and profits out of the pockets of
organized crime by fostering a robust legal and regulated industry.
KEY FACTS
The legal cannabis market continues to displace the illicit market. According to Statistics Canada data,
the legal share of the value of cannabis consumed has steadily increased to 74% in the third quarter of
2023, compared to just 9% prior to legalization.
KEY MESSAGES
Since 2018, our Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping cannabis out
of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and regulated supply, while
reducing the illicit market.
Since legalization, rates of use among youth have not changed significantly, and more Canadians who
consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT
On September 22, 2022, our Government launched an independent legislative review, which will assess
the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives. In October 2023, the Expert Panel released an
interim “What We Heard” report summarizing the views of Canadians on a range of issues.
We are looking forward to the tabling of the Expert Panel’s final report soon and appreciate the work of
the Expert Panel to include all perspectives, particularly those of Indigenous communities and
marginalized groups.
IF PRESSED ON INCLUDING THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW
The Government actively monitors the medical access program and has committed to evaluate the
framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
There has been significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for medical purposes
framework. This legislative review presents an opportunity to hear the views and perspectives of these
stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITH A HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION
Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse of the
program.
Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public health or
public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or activity.
As of February 29, 2024, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 3,634 registrations under the
Cannabis Regulations, including over 3026 for reasons of public health and public safety.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE IN PAEDIATRIC CANNABIS POISONINGS
Health Canada is concerned about potential harms to children who accidentally consume cannabis.
The Department issued a public advisories in December 2021, April 2022 and May 2023. The advisory
includes guidance on how to recognize and react to cannabis poisoning.
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign to help prevent accidental
poisonings in children from edible cannabis.
Looking forward, Health Canada continues to educate Canadians on this important issue.
IF PRESSED ON NON-COMPLIANT EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS THAT EXCEED THE REGULATORY LIMIT
FOR THC
The Cannabis Act and its regulations were designed first and foremost to protect public health and public
safety.
Health Canada is aware of non-compliance regarding edible cannabis products with
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) quantities that exceed the allowable 10 mg per container limit.
Health Canada is working with regulated parties to ensure that they understand and comply with the
regulatory requirements.
IF PRESSED ON ILLEGAL CANNABIS PRODUCTS TARGETED AT YOUTH
The Cannabis Act aims to protect youth from the risks of cannabis, including restricting promotion;
prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and setting THC limits.
Illegal edible cannabis often mimics common snacks and candy, and may contain harmful levels of
contaminants and dangerously high levels of THC.
The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting youth.
Health Canada continues to educate Canadians to understand the difference between legal and illegal
cannabis and the health and safety risks.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN
We invested in evidence-based campaigns to educate youth and young adults on risks and harms of
cannabis.
In 2018, Health Canada launched Pursue Your Passion, a campaign that visited high schools and
universities across the country.
The Department also launched an updated version as a virtual, ambassador-led presentation, visiting
over 500 schools between March 2023 and January 2024.
The Department continues to work on additional efforts to educate youth and young adults on cannabis,
and more broadly, polysubstance use and mental health.
IF PRESSED ON ISRAEL INTIATING AN ANTI-DUMPING INVESTIGATION ON CANNABIS FOR MEDICAL
PURPOSES IMPORTED FROM CANADA
The import and export of cannabis for medical or scientific purposes is strictly regulated and limited to
states that are party to the UN drug conventions, and that have a legal framework for the medical or
scientific use of cannabis.
Health Canada’s import and export policy is consistent with Canada’s international obligations. Health
Canada strictly limits international trade of cannabis for medical and scientific purposes.
Health Canada supports Global Affairs Canada in their engagement with implicated Canadian exporters.
BACKGROUND
The Cannabis Act
On October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act came into force, implementing a new comprehensive public
health approach that is more effective in protecting youth and keeping profits out of the pockets of
criminals and organized crime.
The Cannabis Act creates a legal and regulatory framework for controlling the production, distribution,
sale and possession of cannabis in Canada. This framework was informed by the recommendations of
the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation.
The Act restricts youth access to cannabis; prohibits promotions that are designed to encourage youth to
use cannabis; imposes serious criminal penalties on people who break the law, especially those who
import or export cannabis illegally, or provide cannabis to youth; establishes strict product safety and
quality requirements; reduces the burden on the criminal justice system; provides for the legal
production of cannabis; allows adults to possess and access regulated, quality-controlled, legal cannabis;
and, enhances public awareness of the health risks associated with cannabis.
For example, the Regulations require plain packaging and labelling for all cannabis products with
restrictions on logos, colours, and branding. Cannabis products must be in packaged in a child-resistant
container and be labelled with the standardized cannabis symbol, the mandatory health warning
message, and include specific product information (e.g., delta-9-tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD) information).
Legislative Review
The Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its administration three years
following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and that a report of the review’s
findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of the start of the review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of the
Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young persons
in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of cannabis plants
in a dwelling-house.
On September 22, 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
launched the legislative review of the Act. An Expert Panel, chaired by Morris Rosenberg, led the review.
The Expert Panel engaged broadly with governments, Indigenous peoples, youth, marginalized and
racialized communities, cannabis industry representatives and people who access cannabis for medical
purposes to gather perspectives on the implementation and administration of the Act. The Expert Panel
also met with experts in relevant fields, including, but not limited to, public health, substance use,
criminal justice, law enforcement and health care.
On October 10, 2023, the Expert Panel released their “What We Heard Report” which summarized the
perspectives shared by stakeholders as well as evidence related to each area of the review.
The department received the Expert Panel’s final report, which includes 54 recommendations and 11
observations. The department is conducting an analysis of the recommendations and observations to
understand their potential implications for the Cannabis Program.
Medical Access Framework
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers a medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
Within the current regulatory framework, individuals who have an authorization from their health care
practitioner can access cannabis for medical purposes in one of the following ways:
purchase quality-controlled cannabis from a wide variety of federally licensed sellers inspected by Health
Canada;
produce an authorized amount of cannabis for their own medical purposes; or
designate someone to produce cannabis for them.
As of September 30, 2023, 188,301 patients were registered with federally licensed sellers (Note: these
are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than one licensed seller,
provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of December 31, 2023, 13,731 individuals were registered with Health Canada for personal and
designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis products,
including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties on
cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements designed to ensure that
cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized health care
practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in excess
of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate and may not sell cannabis to any person.
Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized to
produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for them, can
tend to the plants.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure it is
abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
Accidental Paediatric Ingestion of Cannabis and Poisonings
Various sources of evidence indicate significant associations between cannabis legalization and increases
in cannabis-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations, intensive care unit admissions and
poison center calls, both in Canada and across many U.S. states.
These increases have been attributed to accidental ingestion of edible cannabis in those under 12 years
old, and primarily by children younger than 5 ingesting cannabis whose source is unknown or illegal.
Illegal edible products – often referred to as ‘copycat’ products – resemble popular confectionary
products (e.g., Starbursts, Skittles) that come in colorful packaging and are appealing to children. Further,
illegal edible products can contain 100 mg of THC or more per package, whereas legal cannabis products
cannot exceed more than 10 mg of THC per package. The 10 mg THC limit on legal edible cannabis
products exists to protect against accidental consumption, overconsumption and poisoning.
Since the coming into force of the Cannabis Act and its regulations, Health Canada monitors, assesses
and reports on adverse reactions associated with cannabis through the Canada Vigilance Database. The
findings are used to inform evidence-based information on health and safety risks with cannabis,
including risk communications and educational resources.
The Department issued a public advisory in December 2021, and updated the advisory in April 2022 and
May 2023. The advisory reminds Canadians of the risk of serious harm should children accidentally
consume edible cannabis, particularly products that are illegal and unregulated. It also helps to identify
illegal ‘copycat’ edible cannabis products..
In Spring 2023, Health Canada also launched a public education campaign on the risks of accidental
cannabis poisonings in children and to provide information on how to help prevent cannabis poisonings,
what a poisoning looks like, and what to do if a cannabis poisoning is suspected. In 2024, this campaign
is expanding, reaching out to healthcare providers and early childhood educators to effectively
disseminate public education materials and enhance awareness.
Israel Initiates an Anti-Dumping Investigation on Cannabis for Medical Purposes Imported from Canada
On January 17, Israel initiated an anti-dumping investigation into cannabis for medical purposes
imported from Canada. The trade of cannabis for medical purposes is highly regulated and is done in
accordance with international obligations. Canada accounts for a large majority of Israel’s imports,
approximately 80% according to the Government of Israel. In 2023, 34 unique Canadian licence holders
obtained Health Canada export permits and exported 79 shipments to Israel. After Australia, Israel is the
second largest export market for Canadian cannabis (based on Canadian cannabis exports in 2021, 2022
and 2023).
The Government of Canada’s engagement in an anti-dumping investigation is generally limited to
ensuring companies are informed and understand how to engage in the process, since the matters
involve the commercial practices of private entities.
The World Trade Organization Anti-Dumping Agreement allows members to impose an anti-dumping
duty in response to dumped imports that are found to be injuring or threatening to injure their domestic
industry. The Agreement also sets out the rules and procedures for conducting investigations and
applying anti-dumping duties (e.g., evidentiary standards, notification and transparency requirements,
timelines, rules for calculating dumping margins and applying duties, and basis for determining injury).
An anti-dumping duty is meant to offset the price advantage caused by dumping.
CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH
ISSUE
The Government of Canada is working to build resiliency to the impacts of climate change on health and
the health system.
Health Canada is using the 2023-24 Supplementary Estimates C (Supps C) budget transfer process to
transfer contributions funding to the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
Health Canada is providing $750,000 to the International Health Grants Program administered by Public
Health Agency of Canada to issue a grant to the World Health Organization to support work on building
climate-resilient and low-carbon health systems.
Health Canada is providing $800,000 to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research
activities related to climate change and health.
KEY FACTS
Climate change is already negatively impacting the health of people in Canada and the health systems
they rely on.
In June 2023, the Government of Canada released the National Adaptation Strategy. The Strategy is
supported by the Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan.
REDACTED
Contributions funding will expand Health Canada’s Climate Change and Health Capacity Building
Program’s efforts to support partners across Canada in advancing knowledge, building capacity, and
harnessing innovation in adapting to the health risks associated with climate change.
From this contributions funding, Health Canada is transferring $750,000 to the Public Health Agency of
Canada to issue a grant through the International Health Grants Program to the World Health
Organization to support work on building climate resilient and low-carbon health systems.
Health Canada is also transferring $800,000 to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support
research activities related to health and climate change.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to taking action to protect the health of people in Canada from
the impacts of climate change.
The Government of Canada is working with partners to address the health impacts of climate change
through the National Adaptation Strategy and Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan, which
includes $43 million in new federal funding to advance efforts to protect health from extreme heat and
build climate resilient and low-carbon health systems.
Transfers of contributions funding to the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research through the 2023-24 Supplementary Estimates C process will support Health Canada in
achieving its mandate to advance knowledge and build capacity to advance efforts to adapt to the health
impacts of climate change.
IF PRESSED ON THE BENEFITS OF THESE TRANSFERS FOR CANADIANS
Funds transferred to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research will help fill critical research gaps and
strengthen the evidence to inform climate change and health actions and interventions that will
effectively protect people in Canada from climate impacts.
Funds transferred to the Public Health Agency of Canada will support the World Health Organization
advance climate resilient and low-carbon health systems through international scientific evidence
gathering, best practice sharing, and development of evidence-based tools. This work will develop
knowledge that will benefit Canada. Health Canada has previously provided funding and expertise
toward the development of guidance documents developed by the World Health Organization, which
continue to benefit health authorities in Canada from local to national levels.
IF PRESSED ON THE REASONS WHY HEALTH CANADA IS TRANSFERRING THE FUNDS TO CIHR AND PHAC
AS OPPOSED TO USING/DELIVERING THE FUNDS ITSELF
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research, as the recognized federal agency overseeing health research
funding, possesses the requisite expertise, systems, and infrastructure for managing and disbursing
funds to highly qualified researchers. This enables the acceleration and enhancement of research
progress in a more efficient manner compared to potential administration by Health Canada.
The International Health Grants Program is managed by the Public Health Agency of Canada on behalf of
the Health Portfolio and is a well-established mechanism to provide funding to international
organizations for initiatives with global health implications, including climate change. The Program
enables Canada to support work with a global reach and to access international expertise for Canada’s
benefit.
IF PRESSED ON THE REASONS WHY A GRANT IS ISSUED TO AN INTERNATIONAL ENTITY INSTEAD OF A
NATIONAL ENTITY
Transferring funds to the World Health Organization will enable Health Canada to leverage the World
Health Organization's global convening power to bring leading global experts together and benefit from
the scientific expertise that the international community brings. This is something that Health Canada
could not do on its own or at the same cost. This will ultimately result in high quality evidence and tools
that Canada will benefit from.
In addition, Canadian experts are often involved in international scientific and evidence gathering and
consensus building processes, which benefits Canadian researchers and partners.
Health Canada has a long-standing relationship with the World Health Organization and past
collaborations have strongly supported efforts in achieving Health Canada’s mandate to support
national-level progress to advance health sector climate action.
IF PRESSED ON PAST EXPERIENCES WITH SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES
Health Canada has previously used supplementary estimates processes to provide funding to the World
Health Organization through the Public Health Agency of Canada in support of the Climate Change and
Health Capacity Building Program.
This funding is used to maximize climate change adaptation activities that have positive health
outcomes.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER WE WILL DO THIS IN THE FUTURE
Presently, these are one-time transfers.
Health Canada is continuing discussions with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Public
Health Agency of Canada on future opportunities for collaboration on climate change and health.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ARE WE DOING ABOUT WILDFIRES
Last year, the Health Portfolio worked effectively with federal partners to support provincial/territorial
(PT) and local responses during the wildfire season.
The Portfolio is preparing early for the upcoming wildfire season, holding portfolio-wide planning
meetings to prepare for the wildfire season, updating public health guidance documents, and providing
support to PTs and Indigenous Services Canada on wildfire smoke health effects and ways to reduce
exposure.
Health Canada is equipped to respond to emergency requests for air quality monitoring assistance and
can provide guidance to PTs on the use of small sensors, data interpretation and health messaging during
wildfire smoke events.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ARE THE RESPONSIBILITIES OF THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO ON WILDFIRES
The Health Portfolio is responsible for developing public health guidance, conducting surveillance,
providing public health surge capacity, and, through the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile,
responding to requests for assistance for surge assets such as cots, blankets, and masks.
Through its Air Quality Program, the Health Portfolio provides air quality monitoring surge capacity and
leads the development of messaging related to the impacts of wildfire smoke on air quality and health,
including the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI).
BACKGROUND
People in Canada are already feeling the effects of climate change on their health, including from severe
events like heatwaves, wildfires, floods and droughts and the expansion of infectious diseases including
vector-borne diseases, like Lyme disease, into Canada.
In June 2023, the Government of Canada released the final National Adaptation Strategy (NAS) and
supporting Government of Canada Adaptation Action Plan (GOCAAP). REDACTED. Contributions funding
will renew and expand the Climate Change and Health Capacity Building Program, which works to
support actions to assess and address climate-related health risks facing people in Canada, including
extreme heat, and support efforts to build climate-resilient and low-carbon health systems. Achieving
these objectives requires collaborative action across government departments and with international
partners.
Transfer from Health Canada (HC) to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
The Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety Branch (HECSB) at HC intends to transfer $750,000 of
contributions funding to PHAC in fiscal year 2023-2024 for the purpose of issuing a grant to the World
Health Organization (WHO) as part of the International Health Grants Program. PHAC will issue a grant of
$750,000 to the WHO to support international coordination and action, such as through the Alliance for
Transformative Action on Climate and Health (ATACH), to address the health impacts of climate change
and build climate resilient and low-carbon health systems.
The Health Portfolio Office of International Affairs is located within PHAC and manages the International
Health Grants Program (IHGP), a mechanism by which international projects aligning with the priorities
of the Health Portfolio can be funded. One of this year’s IHGP themes included climate change. Providing
grants to international partners creates opportunities for the Health Portfolio to champion health issues
where Canada has expertise and can make a difference internationally, advance Canadian best practices,
and act on lessons learned.
The funds will be transferred as follows:
$750,000 in contribution funds from the Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at HC (Vote 10; Climate
Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building Contribution Program) to PHAC (Vote 10 for the class of
grants listed in the Estimates as “Grants to eligible non-profit international organizations in support of
their projects or programs on health”)
HC is responsible for providing content technical advice and direction to the WHO for this initiative and
in helping to distribute results from the project to health partners across Canada to support activities
related to building climate resilient health systems.
Transfer from Health Canada (HC) to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
The Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety Branch (HECSB) at HC intends to transfer $800,000 of
contributions funding to CIHR in fiscal year 2023-2024 to support climate change and health research.
This includes investigating critical gaps in climate-health risks and climate-sensitive health outcomes in
Canada and building the evidence base for examining current and future climate-health adaptation and
mitigation options and actions. This research is needed to strengthen the evidence to inform climate
change and health actions and interventions and will support work on building climate resilient and low-
carbon health systems. Funding transferred from HC will support up to eight one-year bridge grants, up
to $100K each as part of CIHR’s Fall 2023 Project Grant competition. Health Canada did not select the
successful applications.
The funds will be transferred as follows:
$800,000 in contribution funds from the Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at HC (Vote 10; Climate
Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building Contribution Program) to CIHR (Vote 5 for Grants).
ADDRESSING DIABETES IN CANADA
ISSUE
Diabetes is a serious chronic disease, and one of the most common chronic diseases affecting people in
Canada. Diabetes poses many challenges for those living with the disease, their families, and
communities, and has various implications for health systems. It is a major cause of blindness, kidney
failure, heart attack, stroke and lower limb amputation.
KEY FACTS
Diabetes is a serious, lifelong condition characterized by the body's inability to produce enough insulin or
when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces.
Approximately 3.7 million people in Canada are living with the disease and more than 200,000 new cases
are diagnosed each year.
There are three main types of diabetes: type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes. Other types are
uncommon. Type 2 diabetes accounts for approximately 90% of diabetes cases in adults in Canada. A
variety of factors influence the development of type 2 diabetes, including age, genetics, modifiable
lifestyle risk factors, and intersecting social, economic, and environmental determinants of health.
The onset of type 2 diabetes can be prevented or delayed by reducing the major modifiable risk factors,
such as unhealthy diets and physical inactivity, as well as addressing the determinants of health that
influence one’s ability to take action on these modifiable risk factors.
Some people in Canada, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African descent, and South
and East Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type 2
diabetes compared to the general population.
KEY MESSAGES
In October 2022, the Framework for Diabetes in Canada was released, marking an important milestone
to better support Canadians.
Through Budget 2021 we committed $20 million to research through the Juvenille Diabetes Research
Foundation and Canadian Institutes for Health Research (JDRF-CIHR) Partnership to Defeat Diabetes,
including $15 million matched by JDRF.
On February 29, 2024, the Government introduced new legislation (Bill C-64), that lays a path towards
the first phase of national universal pharmacare in Canada. This includes a fund to help Canadians
manage and monitor their diabetes and administer their medication.
IF PRESSED
Through Budget 2021, we are investing $25 million over five years in research, surveillance and
prevention.
In November 2023, we announced the Type 2 Diabetes Prevention Challenge semi-finalists.
We continue to invest $20 million annually in community-based health promotion projects that help
prevent chronic diseases, including diabetes.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare outlines the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure universal,
single-payer coverage for a range of contraception and diabetes medications.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada continues to advance work on diabetes since the release of the Framework
for Diabetes in Canada in October 2022. The Framework provides common policy direction to help align
efforts and to support improved access to prevention and treatment for all types of diabetes to ensure
better health outcomes.
PHAC supports community-based initiatives to improve healthy behaviours and address health
inequalities among priority populations at greater risk of developing chronic diseases. PHAC’s Healthy
Canadians and Communities Fund invests approximately $20 million annually to support projects that
focus on behavioural risk factors.
On November 1, 2023, the Minister of Health announced 20 semi-finalists selected to receive a $35,000
prize for proposing the most promising concept as part of the first-stage of the Type 2 Diabetes
Prevention Challenge.
In June 2023, PHAC announced $998,450 in funding over three years for Diabetes Canada to advance the
Framework for Diabetes in Canada, working with key partners to develop an inventory of successful
diabetes initiatives to support their subsequent dissemination and adoption.
An Indigenous-led engagement process that will help identify priorities and ways forward to address
diabetes among Indigenous Peoples is underway with Indigenous organizations. The process is being
coordinated by the National Indigenous Diabetes Association.
The Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is supporting diabetes research to improve primary
prevention, develop effective treatments and ultimately cure all types of diabetes. From 2018-19 to
2022-23, CIHR invested over $248 million in research related to diabetes. Through Budget 2021, CIHR
received $20M, $15M of which was matched by JDRF, to support diabetes research through CIHR’s 100
Years of Insulin: Accelerating Canadian Discoveries to Defeat Diabetes initiative.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, is an important step forward to improve health equity,
affordability, and outcomes and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
DRUGS AND HEALTH PRODUCTS SHORTAGES
ISSUE
Health product shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. Recent shortages of over-the-counter
analgesics, antibiotics, and prescription diabetes drugs are a concrete illustration of the impact shortages
can have on healthcare, people in Canada and their loved ones.
Health Canada is exploring medium- and longer-term policy options to improve access to health
products in Canada. To develop these options, the Drug Shortages Task Force has consulted with
provinces and territories, supply chain players, patient groups, Indigenous groups, and the healthcare
community. A public online consultation was also held summer 2023.
A report of what we heard during the consultations has been published. Health Canada is using the
feedback from the consultations to design tools and approaches that will be adopted by the Government
of Canada to enhance health product supply chain resilience.
KEY FACTS
Canada is a small market that relies on imported products, making it vulnerable to shortages.
As of March 2024, 10% of drugs marketed in Canada are in shortage. 26 of these are considered to be
critical, national shortages.
As of March 2024, 419 of 531 medical device shortages reported through the mandatory framework are
now resolved.
KEY MESSAGES
Ensuring that Canadians have access to health products is a top priority for our Government.
Health Canada works closely with provinces and territories, industry, the health care sector, patient
groups and international partners to monitor shortage signals, and takes immediate action to minimize
their impacts, but also to prevent them where possible.
The Department remains focused on doing everything it can to ensure Canadians have access to the
health products they need, when they need them.
IF PRESSED ON SHORTAGES OF OZEMPIC AND OTHER GLP-1 AGONISTS
We recognize the importance of Ozempic and other drugs for patients with type II diabetes and are
working with partners to ensure patient impacts are minimized.
There has been high global demand for these products, including in Canada. Companies that make these
products are making efforts to increase manufacturing capacity to be able to meet demand.
In February 2024, Novo Nordisk Canada Inc. resolved its shortages of Ozempic. Eli Lily expects to resolve
its shortage of Trulicity in March 2024. The shortage of Mounjaro is expected to be resolved later in
2024.
Health Canada is working with manufacturers, distributors and stakeholders to monitor supply. We're
also looking at how these products can be made more available.
IF PRESSED WHAT MEASURES HEALTH CANADA WILL BE TAKING IN RESPONSE TO THE CONSULTATON?
The Department is considering the input received through the consultation and engagement efforts,
which will inform the development of a plan. More information will be available once that work is
completed.
As we continue to look at regulatory and non-regulatory solutions that can be adopted to better prevent
shortages and mitigate them when they cannot be prevented, my Department will continue to engage
stakeholders and provinces and territories on the design of those solutions.
BACKGROUND
BACKGROUND
Shortages in Canada
Shortages of drugs and other health products are a growing global issue. Canada is vulnerable to
shortages due to its small market share and reliance on imported products. 68% of Canadian drugs are
imported from outside of Canada and 83% of activities related to drug production (e.g., manufacturing,
packaging, labeling) are performed outside of Canada. Similarly, the majority of medical devices on the
Canadian market are imported. Further, Canada holds only 2% of the global market share for drug sales
and 1.8% of the global market share for medical devices.
Health Canada’s role
Health product shortages can have a significant impact on patients and the healthcare system, including
health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of health product shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
federal leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
and health care professionals. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and
territories and stakeholders across the supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include
regulatory measures and access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Several factors are taken into account to determine both the potential impact of a shortage of health
products and the actions required by Health Canada. Factors such as whether the shortage is national in
scope, whether alternative supplies are available, and whether the product is considered medically
necessary are all considered in determining the potential impact.
Health Canada established the Drug Shortages Task Force in November 2022. The Task Force has
bolstered the Department’s capacity for surveillance, data collection, and analysis, and is responsible for
supporting the development and implementation of medium- to longer-term policy options to improve
access to health products in Canada.
Additional tools to address shortages
In 2021, additional authorities were added in the Food and Drug Regulations and the Medical Devices
Regulations, which allow the Minister to:
Permit the exceptional importation of drugs and medical devices to address a shortage or an anticipated
shortage. Imported products in this case do not need to fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements
but must be manufactured to comparable quality standards.
Require manufacturers and importers of specified medical devices to report shortages and
discontinuations that could lead to a shortage.
If required, request that drug establishment licence holders and medical device manufacturers,
importers, and distributors provide the information needed to assess, prevent, or alleviate a shortage.
The regulations also respond to risks posed by bulk importation frameworks, such as the one established
by the United States. A prohibition was put in place on drug establishment licence holders from
distributing certain drugs intended for the Canadian market for use outside of Canada if that distribution
could cause or exacerbate a shortage. This serves to ensure that bulk importation frameworks do not
cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
Recent public consultation and additional solutions to improve access to drugs and other health
products in Canada
The Government of Canada has laid solid foundations to respond to drug shortages. However, there is a
need for additional action to build resilience in the supply chain for Canada's drugs, medical devices and
life-sustaining foods and move towards greater prevention of shortages. The COVID-19 pandemic
highlighted weaknesses in the health product supply chain. Challenges seen during this time persist and
continue to impact Canada’s supply. There have also been shortages of products not seen before, like
pediatric analgesics and infant formula.
Health Canada held a public consultation from June 5 to August 31, 2023, to inform the development of
additional approaches to address shortages and improve the resilience of supply chains for drugs and
other health products in Canada. The Department also conducted a series of engagements with a wide
range of stakeholders including provincial and territorial governments, industry stakeholders, healthcare
system partners, patient groups, indigenous communities and academia. A What we Heard Report was
published on December 5, 2023.
Through these consultations, Health Canada gained valuable insights into challenges and potential
solutions. Stakeholders shared their insights across four key areas for action: improved communication
and transparency, an agile regulatory toolbox, greater supply chain visibility, and an enhanced response
to supply and demand.
Informed by the input received from the consultation, the experience of other trusted regulators who
have made recent progress in this space and internal analysis, Health Canada is looking to develop
additional solutions that can be adopted by the Government of Canada to move further along the
spectrum of shortage prevention and make Canada’s health product supply more resilient to shortages.
Engagement with provinces and territories in managing health product shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple
partners to identify shortage signals earlier. FPT collaboration resulted in a number of actions to ensure
effective management of limited supplies of therapies used to treat COVID-19, including the creation of a
time-limited Critical Drug Reserve, and equitable allocation of imported foreign-labelled products in
Canada.
During the pandemic and beyond, Health Canada has also worked with FPT partners to address medical
device shortages. Work continues to formalize FPT collaboration and strengthen relationships in the
medical devices sector. With the above-noted new tools in place and a strong basis of FPT and
stakeholder collaboration, Health Canada has improved its ability to help address shortages of health
products.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening. With few or
no treatment options, available treatments can be high-cost, which poses significant challenges to
patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and private drug
plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Many drugs for rare diseases are very expensive
and patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to a model for long-term funding to be primarily
provided through bilateral agreements with provinces and territories, building from the funding
provided through the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases
KEY MESSAGES
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years.
We are implementing this Strategy by working with provinces and territories towards the development
of bilateral agreements. Funding for the bilateral agreements will be available April 1, 2024 and run until
March 31, 2027.
These bilateral agreements will help increase access and improve affordability of effective drugs for rare
diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada.
Further, funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Information (CIHI) and Canadian Agency for Drugs
and Technologies in Health (CADTH) is improving the collection and use of evidence to support decision-
making.
Funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is advancing rare disease research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON PROGRESS OF BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
Discussions with provinces and territories are underway to jointly determine a small set of new and
emerging drugs, which will be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across Canada, for the benefit
of patients.
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024 and
run for three years until March 31, 2027.
Funding has also gone to support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases,
through Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
IF PRESSED ON HOW 2023-24 BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDS HAVE BEEN SPENT
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024 and
run for three years until March 31, 2027.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC’S PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
Our Government is working with all provinces and territories to help increase access to, and affordability
of, promising and effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada, while
also providing flexibility for jurisdictions to address their own unique circumstances.
All provinces and territories have been invited to engage all steps in the implementation of the Strategy,
including jointly determining a small set of new and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and
covered in a consistent way.
They have also been engaged to share in the other pillars of the Strategy: the benefits of collaborative
approaches to the collection and use of evidence and innovation and research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION ADVISORY
GROUP
An Implementation Advisory Group was launched in October 2023 to support the implementation of the
National Strategy from a patient-centered perspective and to help improve consistent access and
affordability of effective drugs for rare diseases across the country.
The Implementation Advisory Group is comprised of individuals drawn from a range of perspectives and
roles, including patients, caregivers, clinicians, and industry.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING TO HEALTH SYSTEM PARTNERS
We are working with our partners, including the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in Health
(CADTH), the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) to focus on collection and use of evidence to support decision making and to advance
rare disease research.
For example, CADTH’s new newborn screening expert panel will develop guidance to foster greater
consistency and timelier access to treatments.
CIHR is providing $20M over 5 years to the Maternal Infant Child and Youth Research Network (MICYRN)
to build a National Pediatric Rare Disease Clinical Trials and Treatment Network.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN PATIENTS WILL SEE BENEFITS FROM THE STRATEGY
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024 and
run for three years until March 31, 2027
Funding to health system partners has already begun, and is now helping to improve the collection and
use of evidence to support decision-making, and advancing rare disease research and treatment
networks.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE STRATEGY IS ALIGNED WITH THE PHARMACARE ACT
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards universal national
pharmacare and is a concrete expression of the principles set out in the pharmacare bill.
Through the National Strategy we are addressing the issue of access and universal coverage by
addressing the issue of the “postal code lottery” for DRD identified in national consultations. We are also
focusing on affordability and high costs of DRD that leave patients financially vulnerable, and addressing
appropriate use through supporting improvements in the use and generation of real world evidence.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can be high-cost. Treatments for rare diseases are often
referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with Provinces and Territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment of
rare diseases.
LAUNCH OF THE FIRST PHASE OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
The Minister of Health announced the launch of the first phase of the National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases on March 22, 2023, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years, to improve
access to treatments for people living with a rare disease.
As part of this first phase, the Government of Canada will provide up to $1.4 billion over three years to
provinces and territories through bilateral agreements. This federal investment will increase access to
safe and effective drugs for Canadians with rare diseases. Provinces and territories will be able to add
new drugs to their formularies and increase coverage of existing drugs. The new funding will also enable
provinces and territories to improve screening and diagnostics so that patients with a rare disease have a
better chance of getting access to effective treatments at the right time, which can mean significantly
better health and overall quality of life for patients and their families.
In addition, the Government of Canada is providing up to $33 million over three years to Indigenous
Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program to support eligible First Nations and Inuit clients
with rare diseases.
The Government of Canada is also making key investments of up to $68 million to support collaborative
governance, data infrastructure, and research for drugs for rare diseases. $20 million over three years is
being provided to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health and the Canadian Institute
for Health Information to improve the collection and use of evidence to support decision-making. The
Canadian Institutes of Health Research are receiving $32 million over five years to advance a rare disease
research agenda with a focus on developing better diagnostic tools and establishing a robust Canadian
rare disease clinical trials network. $16 million over three years, starting in 2023, is being invested to
support the establishment of national governance structures, such as a Health Canada secretariat and a
stakeholder Implementation Advisory Group.
The Government of Canada will continue working with provinces and territories, health system partners,
and stakeholders, including patients, families, and clinicians, to develop future actions based on lessons
learned as part of these actions included in the first phase of the Strategy.
NATIONAL PHARMACARE LEGISLATION
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on a number of foundational elements of
national pharmacare, including the creation of the National Strategy, as well as the development of a
national formulary, and the creation of the Canadian Drug Agency.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards a universal national
pharmacare program. It continues to be a crucial part of the government’s commitment to long-term
funding to improve the accessibility and affordability of drugs.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to a model for long-term funding to be primarily
provided through bilateral agreements with provinces and territories, building from the funding
provided through the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases.
CURRENT COVID POSTURE AND PREPAREDNESS
ISSUE
The SARS-CoV-2 virus will continue to circulate and evolve worldwide for the foreseeable future. PHAC
continues to work in collaboration with the WHO, international partners, provinces and territories, and
health care organizations to transition critical emergency response activities to longer-term, sustainable
COVID-19 prevention, control, and management.
KEY FACTS
As expected, SARS-CoV-2 has been co-circulating with other respiratory viruses such as seasonal
influenza (flu) and respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) this fall/winter. COVID-19 activity has not yet
demonstrated an observable seasonal trend.
Recent international reports indicate that COVID-19 activity continues to decrease in the US, Europe, and
UK.
Nationally, as of March 13, 2024, most COVID-19 indicators continue to slowly decrease or remain at low
levels and national test percent positivity has been decreasing since mid-December 2023.
Compared to the end of January/early February 2024 when wastewater levels were low-to-moderate,
wastewater signals have increased and are fluctuating between moderate and high levels in most
reporting cities. Hospitalizations and deaths remain low.
As with other health emergencies, the unpredictable nature of infectious disease pandemics
necessitates ongoing action to support prevention and preparedness. Therefore, Canada’s response,
which includes vaccination programs, the promotion of personal protective measures, and continued
efforts to expand pandemic preparedness capacity and medical countermeasures supply strategies, will
need to continue to adapt.
KEY MESSAGES
Protecting the health and safety of Canadians remains a top priority for the Government of Canada and
this includes ensuring preparedness for future pandemics and global health events.
The COVID-19 pandemic has shown that a collaborative response is crucial to address public health
threats and to keep Canadians safe.
Investments made during the pandemic have increased Canada’s ability to plan for and respond to viral
respiratory threats and other public health emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON WORK BEING DONE ON PANDEMIC PREPAREDNESS AND RESPONSE TO LESSONS
LEARNED
The Government of Canada is taking all lessons learned into account to be prepared for potential future
pandemics. These efforts will build on significant investments made in response to COVID-19. We are
committed to continue working together with the provinces and territories towards a sustainable and
integrated approach to public health that will promote health, prevent disease and better protect
Canadians against future public health threats.
In 2022, we announced the creation of a Centre for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and Health
Emergencies at the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to develop and mobilize health research for
pandemic and health emergency preparedness, prevention, response, and recovery.
During the COVID19 pandemic, to address the lack of available domestic manufacturing capacity, we
invested $1.2B to re-build Canada’s vaccine, therapeutics and biomanufacturing capacity right here at
home. In 2021, we doubled-down on progress made to provide $2.2B toward implementing the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, made up of five pillars including strong and coordinated
governance, strengthening research systems and talent pipeline, continued growth in the domestic
biomanufacturing supply chain, building public capacity including the Biologics Manufacturing Centre
(BMC), and enabling innovation by ensuring work class regulation.
On February 23, 2024, Moderna announced the completion of a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
manufacturing facility in Laval, Quebec, to strengthen the domestic biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness.
In 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada established the Centre for Integrated Risk Assessment to
bolster the Agency’s public health risk assessment capacity to anticipate, detect, and assess potential
public health risks to Canadians.
Our National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) is well stocked and we continue to engage with our
provincial and territorial partners on developing a comprehensive management plan that will provide a
roadmap for systematic and agile transformation of the NESS.
PHAC continues to monitor vaccination coverage using reports from provinces and territories and
surveys. During the COVID-19 vaccination campaign, PHAC and its provincial and territorial partners
were able to ramp up the Canadian COVID-19 Vaccination Coverage Surveillance System (CCVCSS) to
monitor and report weekly on COVID-19 vaccination coverage, so we would be able to do the same
should a new mass vaccination campaign be necessary.
The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work with federal, provincial, and territorial
partners to improve our collective governance and work on the development of shared priorities, such
as modernizing the health system with data and digital tools.
IF PRESSED ON THE GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INGELLIENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
PHAC has created a plan to respond to all 36 recommendations proposed by the GPHIN Independent
Review Panel in May 2021, aiming for full implementation by March 2025, while also addressing
recommendations outlined in the Auditor General Report concerning GPHIN.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has already achieved tangible improvements in various aspects of
GPHIN, including its online platform and products, investing in workforce development, vision, mission,
and mandate, as well as subscriber outreach efforts.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has also improved the functions of the Global Public Health
Intelligence Network (GPHIN) by improving GPHIN reporting, strengthening collaboration with provincial,
territorial and international partners, and modernizing the GPHIN platform.
IF PRESSED ON EXISTING PREPAREDNESS FRAMEWORKS AND PLANS
The Auditor General recognized that the Public Health Agency of Canada had developed plans to guide a
response to a pandemic and building on this, updated plans should incorporate lessons learned.
In October 2023, a revised Health Portfolio Emergency Response Plan (HP ERP) was published, which
incorporates learnings from COVID-19 and other public health emergencies. The Agency tested the
revised Plan and its preparedness posture to the Avian Influenza H5Nx in October 2023.
The Agency continues to test and adapt its emergency management plans and processes informed by
lessons learned, through exercises including, Exercise ‘H5Nx Vigilance 2023’ for avian influenza, the
outbreak of mpox, and the 2023 wildfire season.
Lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic response and other recent public health events are
informing Canada’s ongoing preparedness and response, including the need to revitalize and expand
pandemic preparedness planning for Canada by leveraging the Canadian Pandemic Influenza
Preparedness: Planning Guidance for the Health Sector (CPIP) and lessons learned to develop Canada’s
Pandemic Preparedness Plan (CPPP). Consultations are complete and work towards Canada’s Pandemic
Preparedness plan has been initiated.
The Agency is working with partners, including the provinces and territories, to incorporate lessons and
practical application from the COVID-19 experience, among others, to support a robust approach to
emergency management for future health emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON WASTEWATER SURVEILLANCE
The Public Health Agency of Canada worked in collaboration with other federal departments, and
provincial, territorial, and municipal governments as well as academic partners to establish a pan-
Canadian wastewater surveillance network for timely detection and monitoring of viral signals as well as
emerging COVID-19 variants of interest and concern.
Wastewater surveillance in Canada currently covers approximately 50% of the Canadian population on a
sewer system. Data from this program has successfully detected new and emerging COVID-19 variants
circulating in Canadian communities and continues to monitor COVID-19 trends, which has been critical
to informing public health responses. In addition to the COVID-19 pathogen data, the national
wastewater database now includes data for other pathogens such as Influenza, RSV, and mpox.
The Agency continues to track and compare COVID-19 levels in some large urban centers and northern,
remote, and isolated communities across Canada.
The Agency and its partners have also established a pilot project at three Canadian airports to sample
wastewater from airport terminals and pooled aircraft wastewater depots to monitor for new or
emerging COVID-19 variants coming into Canada from various regions of the world.
BACKGROUND / CONTEXTE
Globally, the COVID-19 death rate has slowed from a peak of more than 100,000 people per week in
January 2021 to around 1,200 in the week of February 25, 2024, according to WHO data. Reported
deaths are currently at a low level and potentially unreliable. These numbers reflect global efforts of
widespread vaccination and treatments available, along with population immunity from prior infections.
While the world continues to learn and apply lessons learned for the management of COVID-19,
countries are working to maintain the significant gains that have been made during the past 4 years.
De-Escalation of COVID-19 Operations within Canada
Following the Omicron-driven maximum peak in January 2022, COVID-19 activity declined and the
previous pattern of distinct waves of infection began to subside. All provinces and territories shifted
public health priorities to focus on a more sustainable response for the long-term management of
COVID-19 in Canada that includes integrating COVID-19 activities into the overall management of
respiratory viral infections and continued efforts to build pandemic preparedness capacity and resilience
for any future emergencies.
Provinces and territories have de-escalated many public health measures recommendations and
requirements and reduced surveillance and laboratory testing capacities specific to COVID-19. At the
same time, all provinces and territories are ensuring the availability of preventative measures such as
COVID-19 vaccines, and continue to monitor changes to COVID-19's epidemiology.
Canada continues to comprehensively monitor COVID-19 activity while continuing to integrate the
surveillance approach across respiratory viruses.
Access to COVID19 vaccine supply has been assured for 2024-25 through our existing Advance Purchase
Agreements (APA), with regulatory approved updated vaccines formulated to circulating strains
anticipated to be a threat this coming fall, providing continued protection for at-risk populations.
Activity on PMB C-293: An Act Respecting Pandemic Prevention and Preparedness
Bill C-293 was studied by HESA in October 2023, and reported back to the House of Commons on
October 27 without substantive discussion having taken place. The House of Commons is expected to
have an opportunity to examine the Bill on March 19, 2024 and will potentially consider amendments, in
advance of third reading.
HEALTH DATA AND DIGITAL TOOLS
ISSUE
Persistent and important gaps in data collection, sharing, and use negatively impact personal, health
professional, and system-wide health decision making in Canada.
These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for Canadians, and contribute to
health inequities.
Canadians should be able to securely access their own health information and benefit from it being
shared between health workers and across health settings – allowing for better care while respecting
their privacy.
KEY FACTS
We know that Canadians want digital access to their entire health record and want their primary care
provider to have this complete access as well.
A recent report from 2023 shows that less than 40% of Canadians have accessed their health information
online.
Less than 2 out of 5 Canadian doctors reported sending patient information electronically to other
doctors involved in their patients’ care.
A modernized health system with standardized health data and digital tools is a shared health priority
identified in the Government’s plan for Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
Canadians should be able to securely access their health information and benefit from it being shared
between health workers and across health settings.
We also need insights from health data to inform key decisions about our health system or public health
events.
The Government’s Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan provides over $200
billion over 10 years for health care, including $25 billion over ten years to support provinces and
territories through bilateral agreements.
Modernizing the health system with standardized health data and digital tools is at the core of this plan.
IF PRESSED ON DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY
As work to improve health data management advances, the Government is collaborating with partners
to improve access and sharing of health data while maintaining strong safeguards to protect Canadians’
privacy.
The Government will not create a single health data system or a national health care digital ID.
Health data is needed to assess how the health system is working, and is already being shared with
organizations such as CIHI for this purpose. This is done in accordance with jurisdictional privacy or
health information legislation and under data sharing agreements with each province and territory.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH DATA WILL HELP THE CURRENT HEALTH CARE SYSTEM CRISIS
One of the most impactful tools at our disposal to ensure improvements to the health system is data—to
provide stronger evidence, inform better decisions and ultimately see concrete outcomes for Canadians.
When data flows through digitally connected health systems, health providers can work better as a team
to deliver higher quality and more efficient care.
Likewise, when data flows back through the system to support research and decision-making, it can drive
improvements in health care services and inform public health responses.
IF PRESSED ON THE PAN-CANADIAN INTEROPERABILITY ROADMAP
In March 2023, a Pan-Canadian Interoperability Roadmap was endorsed by FPT governments (except
Quebec).
The Roadmap provides guidance to provinces, territories, health system managers and industry on
common standards to support the secure transfer of health information from different systems and to
patients themselves.
Led by Canada Health Infoway, FPT governments are collaborating on common standards needed to
improve patient access to their electronic health information and remove barriers to data sharing among
health care professionals through a secure, digitally-connected system.
Federally, we are exploring possible legislative and regulatory mechanisms to support our national
interoperability strategy.
IF PRESSED ON PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA CHARTER
In October 2023, the Pan-Canadian Health Data Charter was endorsed by FPT Health Ministers and made
public. It reaffirms a common set of principles intended to guide collective action towards a shared
vision for health data in Canada.
The Charter highlights principles related to person-centric health information, equity, public engagement
and trust. It also highlights Canada’s commitment to respecting Indigenous data sovereignty and
Indigenous-led health data governance.
As work continues to advance the Working Together plan, the Government is committed to upholding
the Pan-Canadian Health Data Charter to guide collective action.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF CANADIANS WHO HAVE ACCESSED THEIR HEALTH INFORMATION
ELECTRONICALLY
In Canada, the percentage of Canadians who access their health information electronically varies
between studies. For instance, a 2023 Statistics Canada survey states that 51% of Canadians accessed
their personal health information electronically (vs. 37% reported in CIHI’s Snapshot report).
This can likely be attributed to broader wording of Statistics Canada’s question where use of digital tools
and services is bundled with ‘access to data’, including prescription renewals and online appointments.
In comparison, the source data used by CIHI reports on these separately.
BACKGROUND
Digital Health and Health Data
Digital health systems across the country are highly fragmented leading to poor ability to collect, share
and use health data, negatively impacting personal, health professional, and system-wide health decision
making. These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for Canadians, and
contribute to health inequities.
Since the COVID-19 pandemic, federal, provincial and territorial governments have been collaborating
closely to advance a shared goal of developing a world-class health data system which will help:
Canadians better manage their own health by improving access to their own electronic health
information;
Health care providers make more informed decisions and work better together through improved flow of
health data across care settings;
Researchers and innovators access the data they need to develop new therapies and treatments; and
System administrators and decision makers use comprehensive and comparable health data to guide
improvements Canada’s health care system, transparently measure results, and better prepare and
manage for public health events.
Federal Commitments and Investments
The 2021 Speech from the Throne and the Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter commit to continued
collaboration with provinces and territories to accelerate work towards a world-class health data system
that is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected and comprehensive.
Extensive federal, provincial and territorial collaboration has occurred since the COVID-19 pandemic to
make progress on this commitment, including through the advancement of a Digital Health Action Plan
to improve access to virtual care and digital tools. Based on the advice of an Expert Advisory Group on
health data, governments worked together to develop the components necessary for a pan-Canadian
health data strategy that included focus on improved health data governance, common standards for
data sharing, modernized and aligned health data policies that meet the digital age, and enhanced public
engagement to build better trust and literacy of health data.
Building on these efforts, Budget 2023 outlined the federal government’s plan to provide over $200
billion over ten years in health transfers to provinces and territories, including $46.2 billion in new
funding through new Canada Health Transfer measures, tailored bilateral agreements to meet the needs
of each province and territory, funding for personal support workers, and an increase to the Territorial
Health Investment Fund. In addition, Budget 2023 announced $2 billion over 10 years to address
Indigenous health priorities and $505 million over five years, starting in 2023-24, to the Canadian
Institute for Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and other federal data partners.
Canada Health Transfer Five Percent Guarantee: The federal government will provide top-up payments to
achieve Canada Health Transfer increases of at least five percent per year for the next five years. The last
top-up payment will be rolled into the Canada Health Transfer base at the end of the five-year period,
resulting in a permanent funding increase. This represents an estimated $17.1 billion over ten years in
additional funding through the Canada Health Transfer.
Tailored Bilateral Agreements: The federal government is providing $25 billion over ten years through a
new set of bilateral agreements to address individual provincial and territorial health system needs, such
as expanding access to family health services, supporting health workers and reducing backlogs,
increasing mental health and substance use support, and modernizing health systems through
standardized health data and digital tools.
Bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, and provinces and territories have options to tailor their
respective Action Plans in response to the unique needs of their populations and geography.
To access their share of the federal funding, provincial and territorial governments have committed to
improving how health data is collected, shared, used and reported to Canadians to promote greater
transparency on results, to help manage public health emergencies, and to improve access to Canadians’
own health information.
Recent FPT Collaboration on Digital Health and Health Data
Building off lessons learned from the pandemic and recognizing the critical importance of timely access
to health data, FPT governments are collaborating to modernize how health data is managed in Canada.
Federal, provincial and territorial governments have been collaborating on health care priorities and
achieved key results, including the development of a Shared Pan-Canadian Interoperability Roadmap.
The Roadmap, published by Canada Health Infoway and endorsed in March 2023 by FPT Health Ministers
(except Quebec), outlines the path forward for safe and secure access to health information that can
flow easily between different parts of the health care system, allowing patients and providers to work
together more effectively.
In October 2023, Health Ministers approved a Joint FPT Action Plan and a Pan-Canadian Health Data
Charter to drive progress on the health data commitments of the Working Together plan. The five key
priorities in the Action Plan include:
Collecting and sharing high-quality and comparable depersonalized information needed to improve
health care for Canadians
Implementing aligned provincial and territorial health data policies and legislative frameworks to support
the public good
Advancing principles outlined in the Health Data Charter for the management of health data
Collecting and sharing public health data to support Canada’s preparedness and response to public
health events.
Adopting common interoperability standards guided by the Pan-Canadian Interoperability Roadmap to
better connect Canada’s healthcare system
In driving progress towards implementing the standards from the Roadmap and realizing a vision of a
modernized, connected health system, the federal government is also exploring the best mechanisms to
drive the adoption of common standards, such as possible legislative and regulatory frameworks.
The Working Together plan also includes an agreement to develop and use comparable indicators,
working with CIHI and its data partners. In addition to the eight common headline indicators, for which
data has already been made public in August 2023 through a snapshot report published by CIHI, a
broader suite of indicators for the shared health priorities, as well as for Aging with Dignity and
Indigenous Health, are being developed in collaboration with provinces and territories, experts, CIHI and
Indigenous Peoples.
HEALTH RESEARCH
ISSUE
In submissions to the Standing Committee on Finance’s pre-budget 2024 consultation, health research
stakeholders expressed support for implementation of the Advisory Panel’s report recommendation to
increase investments in base budgets of the federal research granting agencies.
KEY FACTS
The Government of Canada is making progress on the commitment to develop a plan to modernize the
federal research funding ecosystem
In Budget 2018, the federal government committed nearly $4 billion over five years for fundamental
research. This included $354.7 million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its support for fundamental research.
In October 2022, the Government launched the Advisory Panel on the Federal Research Support System
(the Advisory Panel) to provide independent, expert policy advice on the structure and governance of
the federal system supporting research and talent.
Budget 2023 indicated that the Government is carefully considering the Advisory Panel’s advice, with
more details to come in the coming months on further efforts to modernize the system.
KEY MESSAGES
Following the historic investment in Budget 2018 to support fundamental research, including $354.7
million over five years and $90.1 million per year ongoing to support health research through the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (or CIHR), our government continues to invest in health research
with potential to solve health challenges facing Canadians such as dementia and brain health, diabetes,
pediatric cancer, and women’s health.
For example, in 2022, we announced an investment of $20M to CIHR to launch the National Women’s
Health Research Initiative to drive research to improve the quality of care for women, trans women, girls,
and gender-diverse communities.
In Budget 2021 we announced a $250M investment to CIHR to support researchers across the country to
conduct all stages of clinical trials to develop new vaccines, therapeutics, and other interventions,
addressing a broad range of health conditions.
In 2021, the Government of Canada also announced the renewal of a collaboration between CIHR and
JDRF to invest a total of $30M to support research and accelerate the development of novel treatment
approaches for people with type 1 diabetes (T1D).
These are just a few examples that demonstrate our commitment to supporting a vibrant health
research community to improve the health outcomes of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE MODERNIZATION OF THE FEDERAL RESEARCH SUPPORT SYSTEM
Our government recognizes the need to support Canada’s world-class scientific community to respond
effectively to modern and future challenges.
That is why we launched the Advisory Panel on the Federal Research Support System, to seek expert
advice on how to maximize the impact of research and downstream innovation.
The Government is carefully considering the recommendations in the Advisory Panel’s March 2023
report and will provide details on further efforts to modernize the system in the coming months.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s Fundamental Science Review (2017) recommended increased government investments in
fundamental science in Canada. Budget 2018 committed nearly $4 billion over five years for Canadian
research ecosystem, including $354.7 million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing to
support fundamental research through CIHR. Budget 2021 committed funding to grow Canada’s bio-
manufacturing sector, including $250 million to create a new Clinical Trials Fund through CIHR, and $250
million through granting agencies to create a research fund to support bio-innovation-related research. It
also committed $30 million over two years for paediatric cancer research and $20 million over 5 years to
support the National Institute for Women’s Health Research, as well as $25 million over five years for
diabetes initiatives, including research. Budget 2022 committed $20 million over five years to ramp up
efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health and 20 million over five years for research on
post-COVID condition. Other commitments included $40.9 million over five years, and $9.7 million
ongoing to the federal granting agencies for scholarships and fellowships for promising Black student
researchers.
The Advisory Panel’s report was released in March 2023. Budget 2023 stated that “the government is
carefully considering the Advisory Panel’s advice, with more detail to follow in the coming months on
further efforts to modernize the system.” In submisstions to FINA’s 2024 pre-budget consultations,
health research stakeholders - including universities and student associations - call for the
implementation of the Report’s recommendations, particularly the recommendation to increase the
granting agencies’ total base budgets for their core grant programming.
RESTRICTIONS ON FOOD ADVERTISING TO CHILDREN
ISSUE
Between April and June 2023, Health Canada consulted Canadians on a policy update regarding its
proposed approach to restricting the advertising of foods to children (known as M2K). The policy will
form the basis of draft regulations that will be published in Spring 2024 for public consultation (CGI). The
proposed restrictions are more targeted than what was proposed in 2018 and will apply to TV and online
media only. Health stakeholders are supportive of federal action and the targeted restrictions given the
proposed policy’s strong nutrient criteria, its application in areas of high exposure and the commitment
to continued monitoring to inform potential future actions, however, will continue to advocate for
broader restrictions. Industry is critical of the government advancing regulations as they recently
introduced their new self-regulatory advertising Code, which was implemented on June 28, 2023.
KEY FACTS
Diet-related chronic disease is a critical issue for Canadians and the entire Canadian health care system.
There is a strong body of evidence showing that healthy eating patterns can reduce the risk of chronic
diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, certain cancers, type 2 diabetes, and associated conditions such
as obesity and high blood pressure.
Almost one in three children in Canada (two in three Indigenous children) lives with overweight or
obesity. These children are at a higher risk of developing health problems and chronic diseases now, and
later in life.
Evidence shows that food advertising influences children’s food attitudes, preferences, purchase
requests, consumption patterns, and ultimately, overall health. The more children are exposed to food
advertising, the more likely they are to request or consume advertised foods.
In Canada, children are exposed to food advertising throughout their day in a variety of settings,
including in their homes (e.g., while watching TV or browsing the internet), recreation centers, outdoors,
in restaurants, and in grocery stores.
The evolution of online media and the popularity of smart phones, tablets, computers, and other devices
have made it easier for advertisers to reach children, subjecting them to further advertising of foods that
contribute to excessive intakes of sugars, sodium and saturated fat.
Health Canada continues to advance work on restricting food advertising to children and consulted on a
policy update regarding its proposed approach to restricting the advertising of food to children.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government supports restrictions on food advertising to children, to protect them from the risks of
chronic diseases caused by an unhealthy diet.
Health Canada recently consulted on an approach, focussing restrictions on television and online media,
areas where children are highly exposed to food advertising.
The Department has reviewed the feedback, which will help inform draft regulations for public
consultation in spring 2024.
Health Canada will continue to monitor food advertising to children in Canada to ensure it has the best
available evidence.
IF PRESSED ON BILL C-252 AND REGULATORY ALIGNMENT
We continue to support MP Lattanzio’s Private Member’s Bill (C-252 – Child Health Protection Act) to
help protect children from the influence of advertising of certain foods, which is continuing through the
legislative process.
In spring 2023, in parallel to consideration of Bill C-252, Health Canada also consulted on an updated
policy approach to restrict food advertising to children, which could be implemented under existing
authorities.
Bill C-252 seeks to introduce an advertising prohibition at the level of the Food and Drugs Act and is
complementary to Health Canada’s regulatory work.
IF PRESSED ON INDUSTRY’S SELF-REGULATORY ADVERTISING CODE
We appreciate industry’s efforts in implementing their new Code for the Responsible Advertising of Food
and Beverage Products to Children.
Our proposal reinforces restrictions where children are highly exposed, on TV and online, offering
enhanced protections for children from the impacts of food advertising.
We acknowledge the Code will provide protections in media and settings beyond our proposal, such as in
schools, radio and print. We will continue monitoring food advertising to children and teens across
multiple areas to inform future actions.
BACKGROUND
Almost one in three children in Canada (two in three Indigenous children) lives with overweight or
obesity. There is an increasingly urgent public health concern associated with excess weight because
children who are overweight or obese are at an increased risk of developing chronic conditions and
illnesses such as high cholesterol, high blood pressure, type 2 diabetes, heart disease, and stroke –
conditions that were once almost exclusively seen in adults.
Research shows that unhealthy diets with excess intakes of sodium, sugars and/or saturated fat are a key
modifiable risk factor linked to obesity, high blood pressure, and diabetes, among other chronic diseases.
People with diet-related conditions and chronic diseases are also much more vulnerable to severe
COVID-19 outcomes.
Many children in Canada are consuming excess amounts of these nutrients of public health concern. For
example, 81% of children between the ages of 1 and 3 and 99% of children between the ages of 4 and 13
years exceed recommended limits of sodium intake. As for sugars, 78% of children aged 1-8 years and
86% of children aged 9-13 years exceed the WHO recommendation.
Key Evidence
Children are particularly vulnerable to advertising. Research in this area suggest that children under 8
years of age do not possess the cognitive abilities to understand the purpose of advertising. Only from
the age of 10 or 11 is a child’s level of advertising recognition comparable to an adult’s. By the age of
twelve, most children have an understanding of the selling and persuasive intent of advertising but have
still not acquired an adult-like understanding.
Evidence shows that food advertising influences children’s food attitudes, preferences, purchase
requests, consumption patterns, and ultimately, overall health.
In 2019, children aged 2 to 11 were exposed to an average of 1,733 food advertisements on television,
which translates to 33 food ads/week and close to 5 foods ads per day for the average child. The
majority of these ads were for foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium, sugars and/or saturated
fat.
A Canadian study published in 2019 estimated that children aged 7-11 are exposed to approximately 30
foods ads per week, and youth aged 13-16 an average of 189 ads per week, on social media apps alone.
More than 90% of ads were for foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium, sugars and/or
saturated fat.
Studies have shown that advertisers typically employ strategies that strongly appeal to children. For
example, they feature striking graphics and visual design, including cartoons, use child humour and fun
themes, link the promotion of their products to incentives such as free toys and feature movie and
sports celebrities popular with children. In addition, behavioural tracking and targeted advertising allows
companies to reach children with more precision in digital media.
Health Canada’s Initiatives
Restricting the advertising of certain foods to children is a foundational initiative of Health Canada’s
Healthy Eating Strategy, which was launched in 2016, and has been a Minister of Health mandate letter
commitment since 2015.
Through the Healthy Eating Strategy, the Government has undertaken a robust set of initiatives to
improve the food environment in Canada and help Canadians make healthier food choices.
Significant progress has been made by improving nutrition labelling, eliminating industrial trans fats in
the food supply, releasing a new Canada’s food guide, publishing new sodium reduction targets for
processed foods, and publishing front-of-package nutrition labelling regulations. The Government
remains committed to implement mandatory restrictions on the advertising of certain foods to children
to protect this vulnerable population.
Parliamentary Initiatives Related to Food Advertising to Children
In February 2022, Ms. Patricia Lattanzio, M.P. (Liberal) introduced a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-252 –
Child Health Protection Act) to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children. On September
28, 2022, it passed Second Reading and was referred to Committee (HESA) for further review. The Bill
was adopted by the Committee on April 18, 2023, has successfully advanced through the House of
Commons and underwent Second Reading in the Senate on November 30, 2023 with the debate
resuming on February 7, 2024.
Other legislative attempts have been made to restrict food advertising by Parliamentarians. For example,
Senate Public Bill S-228, The Child Health Protection Act, introduced by former Conservative Senator
Nancy Greene Raine in September 2016, aimed to reduce the influence of food advertising on children.
An amended version of the Bill received strong support from national health groups, including Dietitians
of Canada, Heart and Stroke Foundation, Coalition Poids, Diabetes Canada, and the Childhood Obesity
Foundation. The Bill was also strongly opposed and heavily lobbied by major industry stakeholders. This
included the Canadian Beverage Association, Food, Health & Consumer Products of Canada, Restaurants
Canada, the Retail Council of Canada and the Association of Canadian Advertisers. Bill S-228 did not
come to a final vote before the end of the Parliamentary session in the fall of 2019.
Industry Code
Industry in Canada has self-regulated food advertising to children since 2007 through its Children’s Food
and Beverage Advertising Initiative (CAI). In summer 2021, four major industry associations (Association
of Canadian Advertisers, Restaurants Canada, Food, Health & Consumer Products of Canada and
Canadian Beverage Association) developed and introduced a new Code for the Responsible Advertising
of Food and Beverage Products to Children, which Ad Standards began administering on June 28, 2023.
While industry anticipates the new Code is expected to result in some improvements compared with the
CAI, such as applying to a broader range of food and advertising companies and raising the age of
children protected from under 12 to under 13, significant gaps remain that will continue to leave
children much exposed to food advertising. These gaps are due to weaker nutrient and advertising
criteria, exemptions, and limited consequences for non-compliance given the voluntary nature of the
code (i.e., not regulatory).
Quebec experience with restrictions on advertising
Québec’s 1980 Consumer Protection Act (QCPA) restricts the commercial advertising to children of all
goods and services. The restrictions apply to most forms of advertising and media, including mascots and
logos (i.e., brand advertising) and sponsorship. Subject to conditions, the QCPA exempts advertising in
children’s magazines, advertising for children’s entertainment events and advertising via store windows,
displays, containers, packaging and labels.
The scope and policy intent of Health Canada’s approach differs from that of Québec.
Health Canada’s proposal is aimed at protecting children’s health and so it focusses uniquely on
advertising to children of certain foods. The QCPA, on the other hand, has a broader consumer
protection objective and targets the advertising of all goods and services, including food, to children.
Health Canada’s M2K proposal considered the QCPA, among other things, and aligns with it in a few
ways:
Under both frameworks, advertising restrictions apply to children under the age of 13.
Both Health Canada’s proposed policy and the QCPA take into consideration similar factors to determine
whether an ad is primarily directed at children (i.e., where the ad is communicated and design/appeal of
the ad).
However, the QCPA also considers the appeal of the good/service, which is not relevant for Health
Canada’s proposed policy given that Health Canada’s restrictions are concerned only with food
advertising.
Monitoring
As part of its comprehensive monitoring of the food advertising environment, Health Canada is
monitoring advertising of foods to children and teenagers.
Health Canada will continue to monitor and report publicly on food advertising to children and teens,
across a variety of settings, media and techniques, including in settings and media where regulations
would not apply, to help inform potential future regulatory changes.
MEASLES AND VACCINE HESITANCY
ISSUE
The COVID-19 pandemic increased anti-vaccine rhetoric, and the prevalence of mis- and disinformation
about vaccines has increased public discourse and concern about vaccine hesitancy.
Global declines in vaccine coverage, recent outbreaks of measles in the US and cases in Canada, as well
as the current social climate of distrust in governments, have further increased concerns about vaccine
hesitancy.
Beginning in late 2023 a large increase in measles has been observed worldwide, particularly in the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) European Region. The WHO reported that the number of cases of
measles worldwide increased by 18% and deaths increased by 43% globally in 2022 compared to 2021.
Currently cases of measles have been reported in several provinces in Canada. As of March 13, 2024,
PHAC is aware of at least 28 measles cases in Canada. While many are associated with international
travel, some cases appear to be sporadic, without obvious links to known cases or travel. Many cases are
in unvaccinated or undervaccinated children.
KEY FACTS
The Public Health Agency of Canada monitors the uptake of vaccines, knowledge, attitudes and beliefs
about vaccines to respond to shifting norms surrounding vaccination.
Canada’s 2021 Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey (cNICS) showed that over 97% of
parents of 2 year olds felt that vaccines were safe and effective, similar to pre-pandemic.
The reasons for vaccine hesitancy are complex, and may include several intersecting factors, such as
concerns about vaccine safety, experiences of stigma and mistrust, belief in misinformation and
disinformation, and logistical, financial and other barriers to vaccination.
Between 2017 and 2019, there was an increase in the number of confirmed measles cases reported in
Canada with 29-113 cases reported each year. This coincided with a global increase of the disease.
This declined sharply between 2020 and 2022, due to COVID-19 border measures and public health
measures reducing importations and outbreaks.
Measles began to re-emerge in Canada in 2022, with 3 cases detected by the end of the year and 12
cases reported in 2023.
As of March 13, 2024, twenty-eight (28) measles cases have been reported in Canada this calendar year.
In a typical year without large outbreaks, up to 50 measles cases are expected.
In Canada, increases in measles cases are observed every 3-5 years due to outbreaks, with the most
recent outbreak year being 2019.
KEY MESSAGES
Ensuring Canadians have reliable information on vaccination is an important part of preventing and
combating vaccine hesitancy.
Routine immunization programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect Canadians against
vaccine-preventable diseases such as measles.
The Government of Canada is aware of the recent reports of large increases in measles in Canada.
The majority of the cases in Canada are unvaccinated children and over half are travel associated.
Investigations are underway for cases that do not report international travel or a link to a known case –
sporadic cases are not unexpected, however.
Thanks to vaccination, measles is rare in Canada, but this is not the case in all countries.
Travelers should make sure they are fully protected from vaccine preventable diseases such as measles
before travelling outside of Canada.
Investments through the Immunization Partnership Fund are one way the Government is reaching
people in Canada, particularly among underserved communities and those with persisting gaps in
vaccine coverage.
We will continue to monitor the situation and provide Canadians with reliable information to protect
them from serious illnesses.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINATION
While vaccination is not mandatory in Canada, the Government of Canada is committed to vaccination as
a safe and effective public health measure that can help prevent disease and disability.
Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine public health
requirements in their jurisdictions.
If you believe you or your family may have been exposed to measles and have not received two doses of
a measles-containing vaccine, or are immunocompromised, contact your healthcare provider or local
health department immediately for guidance.
IF PRESSED ON ROUTINE VACCINATION COVERAGE IN CANADA
The most recent national data available from the 2021 Childhood National Immunization Coverage
Survey (cNICS) show that between 2019 and 2021, national vaccine coverage has remained generally
stable.
The results also show that despite some parents and guardians encountering obstacles and delays in
receiving vaccinations, the majority (80%) of parents and guardians of all age groups reported that there
was no change in their decision to vaccinate their child due to the COVID-19 pandemic and 18% were
more inclined to vaccinate their child.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine hesitancy refers to a reluctancy to receive recommended vaccines that may lead to a delay in or
refusal of one, some, or all vaccinations. Vaccine hesitancy is an ongoing threat to public health. In 2019
the World Health Organization cited vaccine hesitancy as one of the top 10 risks to global health.
The measles virus is spread very easily, primarily through the airborne route, from an infected person
who breathes, talks, coughs or sneezes into a common airspace shared with others who are susceptible.
Infectious virus can remain in the air for several hours. It is a leading cause of death among young
children globally.
Measles has been eliminated in Canada since 1998. In July 2023, the National Certification Committee
re-verified Canada’s elimination status for measles, rubella and Congenital Rubella Syndrome (CRS) for
the 2021-2023 period. There was notable measles activity in the Region of the Americas in 2021,
specifically in Brazil where over 650 cases were reported. Measles is relatively rare in Canada due to
effective vaccination programs. However, it is important that Canadians continue to be vaccinated
against measles given the travel-related risks of infection and spread to unvaccinated people.
Addressing vaccine hesitancy requires a multipronged approach at all levels of government, at the
community level, and through engagement of healthcare providers as key trusted messengers of vaccine
information. While vaccine confidence in Canada is generally high, the continued support for vaccination
cannot be taken for granted and sustained efforts are needed to improve vaccine literacy, build resilience
to mis and disinformation and to support the social norm of vaccination.
The Public Health Agency of Canda acts as the focal point for vaccine confidence policy, research and
behavioral analysis to inform development of evidence-based awareness and outreach campaigns, tools
and training to help healthcare providers communicate credible information about vaccine effectiveness
and safety to Canadians. As a core part of vaccine confidence efforts, the Immunization Partnership Fund
is a grants and contributions program that supports public health actors and communities to increase
vaccine acceptance and uptake. It supports local, regional and national organizations, and provinces and
territories develop evidence-based approaches designed to improve vaccination coverage rates and
combat mis- and dis-information.
Measles is a notifiable disease in all provinces and territories (P/Ts). When a healthcare provider
diagnoses a case of measles, notification is also made to the respective jurisdictional public health
agency. This helps P/Ts implement measles prevention and control strategies as quickly as possible.
There is no specific treatment for measles. Individuals with measles should self-isolate during the
infectious period to prevent infecting others. People should talk to their healthcare provider if they think
they have measles.
Although vaccination is the most effective prevention measure for measles, there are other measures
that can be used to help reduce the spread of the virus, such as:
Staying home when sick
Frequently cleaning your hands
Practicing proper respiratory etiquette by covering coughs and sneezes with a tissue or bend of the arm
Wearing a well-fitting respirator or mask
Cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects
Measles Outbreaks Nationally and Internationally
As of March 13, 2024, twenty-eight cases have been reported in Canada this calendar year. Last year, in
2023, twelve cases were reported in Canada, eleven of which were related to travel. This indicates an
increase in measles activity compared to the COVID-19 pandemic years during which measles activity
had declined significantly (1 case in 2020, 0 in 2021, 3 in 2022). However, it is aligned with recent pre-
pandemic years, where an average of 62 measles cases were reported each year (ranged from 29 to 113
cases between 2017 and 2019).
The United States (U.S) Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides monthly updates on the
measles situation in the U.S. As of February 29, 2024, 41 measles cases were reported by 16
jurisdictions. In 2023, 58 cases were reported by 20 jurisdictions, and in 2022, 121 cases reported by 6
jurisdictions.
In late 2023 and into 2024, a large increase in measles is being reported worldwide, particularly in the
World Health Organization European Region. According to the European Centre for Disease Prevention
and Control’s risk assessment (published in February 2024), measles cases are expected to continue
increasing in European Union countries in the coming months due to sub-optimal vaccination coverage;
the high probability of importation from areas experiencing high measles circulation; and the seasonal
peak of the virus.
Measles vaccination
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that routine immunization for
children 12 months to less than 13 years include 2 doses of measles-containing vaccine, using either
MMR or MMRV vaccine, which are highly effective at preventing infections.
Vaccination is not mandatory in Canada; however, some P/Ts, including British Columbia, Ontario, and
New Brunswick, require proof of vaccination for measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs)
in order to register in public schools.
PHAC estimates vaccine coverage through the Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey,
conducted every two years. The latest survey completed in 2021 estimated that 92% of Canadian
children had received at least one dose of measles vaccine by two years of age and 79% of seven-year-
old children have received at least two doses. This is below the 95% coverage target for measles
vaccines.
Federal Role
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) works with P/Ts in the management of outbreaks of VPDs by
providing technical advice and assisting with laboratory testing when requested by a P/T. P/Ts and local
public health are responsible for delivering public health programs, including vaccination programs and
investigation and follow-up of measles cases and outbreaks.
The federal government has a role in regulatory approval of vaccines, national surveillance for VPDs and
adverse events following vaccination, bulk purchasing of vaccines, national leadership, and coordination
in knowledge development, innovation, and sharing of best practices.
Each week, PHAC receives measles surveillance data from P/Ts and reports cases to the Pan American
Health Organization. Weekly measles surveillance reports are publicly available on the Canada.ca
website.
STRENGTHENING THE REGULATORY OVERSIGHT OF NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS
ISSUE
There has been significant stakeholder concern related to recent initiatives to strengthen the regulation
of natural health products (NHPs).
The NHP industry has been very vocal about its opposition and has launched campaigns to gain
consumer and political support.
The Official Opposition is a supporter of the campaigns and introduced a Private Member’s Bill in
December 2023 to reverse the changes made by the Budget Implementation Act, which provided the
Department with additional authorities to keep Canadians safe.
The recent Health Canada initiatives aim to improve the safety of NHPs available to Canadians.
KEY FACTS
Health Canada supports access to safe and high-quality natural health products (NHPs) for Canadians.
These products are regulated under the Natural Health Products Regulations, which is a separate
regulatory framework compared to that of prescription drugs.
While NHPs are often perceived as lower-risk, they are not without risk, especially if products are
adulterated, if used improperly or in combination with other products and without appropriate
regulatory oversight.
Since introducing the regulatory framework for NHPs in 2004, Health Canada has seen cases of safety
issues and evidence of low regulatory compliance across the NHP industry.
In 2021, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development completed an audit of the
NHP program, which found both strengths and areas for improvement. The Department committed to
undertaking a number of activities to improve the safety of these products, including introducing user
fees that take small businesses into consideration.
Health Canada’s initiatives, including the introduction of additional post-market authorities for NHPs
through the Budget Implementation Act and the proposed introduction of cost-recovery fees, will
support the access of safe and high quality NHPs. These regulatory changes are not about removing
choice or reducing access. NHPs are important to Canadians to help support and maintain their health
and Health Canada is committed to ensuring the continued availability of safe, effective and high-quality
products.
KEY MESSAGES
While natural health products are generally lower risk products, they are not without risk.
Health Canada works continuously to create a safer marketplace for people in Canada. This includes
introducing new regulatory and legislative changes to improve the safety of natural health products and
respond to a changing marketplace.
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, and
sunscreens, are in our daily routines. Yet, Health Canada has seen serious non-compliance that could
potentially be harmful to consumers, such as product contamination and the presence of ingredients not
listed on the label.
In 2021, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development completed an audit of
Health Canada's natural health product program and reported gaps in the regulatory oversight of these
products. Health Canada committed to undertaking a number of activities to improve the safety of these
products.
The Government has already introduced new labelling regulations to support consumers in making
informed choices and has been supporting stakeholders on the implementation of the regulations.
Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for the labelling
of natural health products.
Health Canada is proposing fees for industry to establish an inspection program that ensure companies
are following good manufacturing practices, and strengthen the post-market monitoring of these
products.
Our government understands the importance of small businesses to our economy and that is why the
fee proposal includes significant cost reductions for small businesses, such as reductions ranging
between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver for small businesses marketing their first product.
Health Canada is presently considering how best to adjust its fee proposal based on the thousands of
comments from stakeholders. The Department intends to engage stakeholders in March 2024 for further
discussions.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA IS PROPOSING FEES FOR NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS
Health Canada is proposing fees for industry to begin recouping a portion of the costs of services it
provides to industry and to expand its oversight to create a safer marketplace for consumers. Presently,
natural health products are the only line of health products whose regulatory activities are fully funded
by Canadian taxpayers.
The proposed fees would be accompanied by updated performance standards. This means companies
would have more predictable service delivery timelines for regulatory activities, such as the scientific
evaluation of new products and the licensing of new manufacturing sites.
Health Canada knows that many NHP companies are small businesses and is committed to supporting
them. The Department is considering measures to help alleviate the impact of fees on businesses. This
includes fee reductions for small businesses of 25% to 50% and a full waiver of pre-market evaluation
fees for small businesses marketing their first product.
Health Canada has completed the review of the thousands of comments received on the fee proposal.
The Department is revising the initial proposal and will be engaging stakeholders in March 2024 for
further discussions.
IF PRESSED ON COST TO SMALL BUSINESSES
Small- and medium-sized businesses are the backbone of our economy, and we know they care for the
wellbeing of all Canadians. Just like them, we want to support the health of Canadians by ensuring the
products sold across the country are safe and effective.
Companies have been provided with several years, until 2028, to comply with the new labelling
requirements and the new legislative changes won’t affect those companies already following the rules.
Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for the labelling
of natural health products. We acknowledge the impact this may have on implementation timelines for
the new labelling requirements, and as such, this will be an integral part of the consultations.
We understand that many small businesses worry about the additional costs new fees will bring. This is
why we have proposed significant measures to mitigate their impact, such as fee reductions for small
businesses ranging between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver of the pre-market evaluation fee for small
businesses marketing their first product.
Informed by the feedback received on its fee proposal, the Department is revising the initial proposal to
address the many concerns raised and will be engaging stakeholders further in March 2024.
IF PRESSED ON WHY CHANGES ARE NECESSARY NOW
Canadians should be able to trust that the natural health products on store shelves are safe and contain
what they say they contain, and that all safety information is available. While natural health products are
generally lower risk, that does not mean they are without risk.
These regulatory and legislative changes will create a safer marketplace and will help everyone make
more informed choices about the products that we value.
Between 2021 and 2023, there were 100 voluntary recalls of licensed natural health products for safety
issues including bacterial contamination and the presence of foreign matter such as fibreglass in a
product.
Health Canada conducted a pilot inspection program between March 2021 and March 2022 to assess
whether 36 manufacturers and importers were following regulatory requirements for good
manufacturing practices. All of the inspections identified compliance issues ranging in severity.
These findings support the need to educate industry about its regulatory obligations as well as to
increase oversight of the industry.
Right now, unlike with all other health products, natural health product manufacturing sites do not have
a regular cycle of inspections to ensure that companies adhere to quality standards. The fees will provide
Health Canada with the resources to conduct the necessary oversight and to ensure that the products
we use and trust are in fact safe, effective, and high quality.
IF PRESSED ON LIMITING ACCESS TO CANADIANS
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, and
sunscreens, are for Canadians in their daily routines. Changes to the program will support access to safe
and high-quality natural health products.
We understand that many small businesses also worry about the additional cost the proposed new fees
will bring. That’s why Health Canada is revising the initial proposal to help support them in continuing to
provide the variety of products consumers depend on.
IF PRESSED ON DRIVING CANADIANS TO PERSONAL IMPORTATION
We know how important natural health products, such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, and
sunscreens, are for Canadians in their daily routines. That is why Health Canada has been working to
introduce important improvements to ensure that the natural health products they buy and use every
day are safe and of high-quality.
All domestic or international companies that sell natural health products – whether online or at retail
outlets in Canada must comply with Canadian regulations to keep people in Canada safe.
While residents of Canada and visitors are permitted to bring into Canada a personal use quantity of a
90-day supply or single course of treatment of a natural health product, or any other health product
including a prescription drug, without requiring specific licences for the import, Canadians are
encouraged to buy licensed health products in Canada that have been assessed to be safe and of high
quality.
Health Canada works in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency to assess the compliance of
health products at the border against the Act and its Regulations.
Collecting fees for natural health products will let us support industry in complying with standards
through education and guidance and do more inspections so that consumers can use natural health
products without worry.
IF PRESSED ON DRIVING CANADIANS TO UNREGULATED (ILLEGAL) PRODUCTS
Our number one priority is to keep Canadians healthy and safe.
The Government of Canada supports access to safe and high-quality natural health products for
Canadians.
All domestic or international companies that sell natural health products in Canada – whether online or
at retail outlets – must comply with Canadian regulations.
Changes to the natural health products program will support access to safe and high quality natural
health products.
IF PRESSED ON WHY VANESSA’S LAW IS NEEDED
Extending the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act to natural health products allows Health
Canada to order a recall of a product or add warnings on labels to support safe use, if necessary, which it
couldn’t do before. These new authorities will only need to be used if a serious risk to health is identified
or if a company refuses to partake in voluntary mechanisms. The majority of natural health product
companies are not affected by these new authorities.
Health Canada will consult with stakeholders on any further regulatory changes needed to support these
authorities.
IF PRESSED ON REGULATING NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS SIMILAR TO HIGHER- RISK DRUGS
Health Canada continues to support access to safe and high-quality natural health products for the
people of Canada. Health Canada recognizes natural health products are lower-risk than prescription
drugs. That is why these products are regulated under the Natural Health Products Regulations, which is
a separate regulatory framework from that of prescription drugs.
While NHPs are generally lower risk, they are not without risk, with some issues reported before such as
contamination with foreign matter, mold, mildew, lead, arsenic, salmonella or E. coli. Health Canada will
continue to take action to protect the people of Canada.
The Government passed legislative changes in June 2023 that provide Health Canada with additional
abilities, such as to remove unsafe products from the market or require warnings on a product label
when a serious health risk is identified. Health Canada will only use these authorities if a company
refuses to take voluntary actions to address a risk.
IF PRESSED ON THE DELAY IN IMPLEMENTING THE SELF-CARE FRAMEWORK …
Health Canada is advancing initiatives under the Self-Care Framework that meet the needs of Canadians,
including having labels that are easier to read and ensuring products can be promptly recalled if a
serious risk is identified.
Health Canada will continue to advance, in consultation with stakeholders, other aspects of the Self-Care
Framework over the next several years to ensure the regulatory oversight of both natural health
products and non-prescription drugs is proportional to risk.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA INTRODUCED NEW RULES FOR LABELLING
Health Canada introduced new requirements to make natural health product labels easier for Canadians
to read and understand, to address concerns about small font sizes and missing or unclear safety
information such as relating to contraindications or allergens.
Health Canada recognizes that label changes will take time for industry to implement. This is why there is
a multi-year transition period (up to six years) to implement the new regulations by 2028.
Health Canada has consulted extensively and has designed regulations that balance the burden to
industry while improving clear labelling for Canadians.
Health Canada is further consulting with stakeholders to identify additional flexibilities for the labelling
of natural health products.
BACKGROUND
Findings from the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development's Audit of the Natural
Health Product (NHP) Program
An audit of Canada’s NHP program was conducted in 2019 by the Commissioner of the Environment and
Sustainable Development (CESD), and the findings were published in a report to Parliament in April
2021.
The focus of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensures that NHPs available for sale in
Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. The audit period covered January 2017 to
May 2020.
Overall, the audit by the Auditor General of Canada of the NHP Program identified both strengths and
areas for improvement.
The audit found that Health Canada licensed products appropriately, based on evidence of safety and
efficacy. The audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, immediate
action was taken. Additionally, the audit established that Health Canada’s approach to increase the
supply of alcohol-based hand sanitizers during the pandemic was appropriate.
The audit also identified areas for improvement:
the need for increased oversight of NHP quality,
greater monitoring of labels and advertising (including online),
improved labelling, and
proactive risk-based compliance and enforcement activities.
The recommendations validated key gaps that the Department had already identified and had started
working to address. The audit supports the direction Health Canada has been taking to strengthen
oversight of these products.
The auditors made five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted and had already
started work to address.
The findings of the audit were reinforced in 2022 by the report issued by the Standing Committee on
Public Accounts (PACP) following a study of the audit.
The Self-Care Framework:
In 2016, the Department introduced the Self-Care Framework to modernize the regulation of self-care
products, including NHPs and non-prescription drugs.
The Self-Care Framework is intended to provide oversight proportional to risk and proposes to:
Better protect Canadians against health risks and harms – given that low risk is not no risk;
Reduce unnecessary regulatory burden and costs for industry and Canadians; and,
Support Canadians’ efforts to improve their own health and make informed decisions.
This proposal introduced Health Canada’s intention to improve NHP labelling, examine a cost recovery
approach for NHPs, as well as consider post-market tools for NHPs such as fines and penalties and the
ability to order a recall.
Health Canada continued broad public consultations in 2017, and announced, in 2018, a phased
approach to implementing the Self-Care Framework:
Element 1 encompassed changes to improve NHP labelling to ensure that labels are clear, consistent,
and easy to read. This was completed with the new regulations published in July 2022.
Element 2 will introduce regulatory amendments to create a more risk-based approach to the regulatory
oversight for non-prescription drugs (OTCs).
Element 3 introduces changes to improve oversight for NHPs, including quality, post-market authorities
under Vanessa’s Law and cost recovery.
Industry associations are diverse in terms of both make-up of members and their interest in the Self-Care
Framework:
Cosmetics Alliance Canada (CAC), which represents OTCs, NHPs and cosmetics (regulated under separate
regulations), is focused on advancing all elements of the Framework to ensure a more consistent
regulatory approach for cosmetics and cosmetic-like NHPs and OTCs.
The Canadian Health Food Association (CHFA), which represents a broad range of NHP stakeholders
(including small and medium sized manufacturers and retailers), has consistently raised concern
regarding the impacts on the industry of various changes happening at the same time.
Food, Health and Consumer Products Canada (FHCP), which represents many large multinational drug
companies who manufacture both NHPs and OTCS (such as Pfizer, Johnson and Johnson, and Bayer) has
been supportive of measures to better align NHP and OTC regulatory oversight. Their principal concern is
a lack of progress on Element 2 of the Framework.
Currently, industry associations are advocating for the Framework to be completed as initially outlinedby
Health Canada in 2018, prior to advancing initiatives such as NHP cost recovery, which was expedited in
part due to the results of the 2021 program audit and the related action plan to respond to the findings.
Key associations representing consumer and patient safety, such as the Institute for Safe Medication
Practices Canada, are supportive of stronger oversight and greater alignment with other health products
under the Self-Care Framework.
Over the past 7 years, Health Canada has consulted extensively with stakeholders regarding proposed
changes to the regulation of Self-Care products and will continue to be open and transparent as it works
to implement other elements of the Self-Care Framework over the next several years.
Improved Natural Health Product Labelling:
Health Canada amended the Natural Health Products Regulations to support consistent and prominent
labelling of key information to support consumers in selecting and using NHPs, including:
Larger font size and better contrast;
Important product information, such as warnings and directions for use, would be required in a facts
table;
Consistent and prominent labelling of priority allergens; and
Modernized contact information on the package such as a website.
The Department has been consulting on this initiative since 2016 in the context of the Self-Care
Framework and has made a public commitment in February 2018 to introduce these changes as the first
phase of the Self-Care Framework.
An audit of Canada’s NHP program was conducted by the Commissioner of the Environment and
Sustainable Development (CESD) and the findings were published in a report to Parliament in April 2021.
This report noted that information on NHP labels was not easy to read. The recommendations listed in
the report included improving the labelling of NHPs to ensure that information on product labels is clear,
consistent and legible for consumers and can be read without the need for a magnification tool. In the
formal response to the report, Health Canada committed to addressing this recommendation through
these amendments
The changes in the labelling regulations and related guidance were the outcome of extensive
consultations with industry, patient safety organizations, and healthcare professionals.
To support industry in implementing these changes, the Department put in place a multi-year transition
period ending June 2028. The multi-year transition period will minimize the environmental impact and
costs for companies by allowing most companies to make the label changes at the normal re-labelling
timeline of their products and enable most companies to use their existing stock without having to recall
or destroy existing product.
Vanessa’s Law Powers:
Health Canada has observed evidence of low regulatory compliance across the NHPs industry as well as
potential safety issues which highlight the need for more robust systems to ensure regulatory
compliance. For example:
Since 2004, approximately 470 voluntary NHP recalls have been issued.
From 2004 until December 2021, Health Canada received reports of over 8,000 adverse reactions in
which NHPs use had a suspected role, of which over 5,000 were serious
Since 2016-17, Health Canada received over 3,500 consumer complaints implicating NHPs. This includes
cases where products were contaminated with mold, mildew, lead, arsenic, and other toxic elements.
The 2021 audit by the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development and by Health
Canada’s own inspections of NHP manufacturing sites noted significant non-compliance gaps that
required effective regulatory tools to manage, such as those in Vanessa’s Law.
The Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (also known as Vanessa’s Law) received Royal Assent in
November 2014 and amended the Food Drugs Act to give Health Canada additional transparency, post-
market monitoring, and compliance and enforcement tools for therapeutic products such as prescription
and over-the-counter drugs, biologic drugs, and medical devices. Through the Budget Implementation
Act, these tools have been extended to NHPs as of June 22, 2023.
Some authorities came into force upon Royal Assent to support immediate program enhancements,
including the provisions to:
1. order the recall of NHPs that present a serious or imminent risk of injury to human health
2. require a label change/package modification, if necessary to prevent serious injury to health
3. impose higher fines and penalties e.g., for having unauthorized products on the market
4. order a person to provide information that is in the person’s control and is necessary to determine if a
product presents a serious risk of injury to human health
5. disclose confidential business information in circumstances where the product may present a serious
risk of injury to human health or for the protections or promotion of human health or the safety of the
public
6. apply for a court injunction to stop or prevent the commission of an offence
7. prohibit false or misleading statements or information
8. incorporate by reference
9. apply for a court injunction to stop or prevent the commission of an offence
10. make publicly available any order of a recall, label change, tests and studies, and assessment.
The remaining authorities noted below have a delayed coming into force and an Order in Council and/or
regulations are needed to bring them into force. When and how these regulations come into force for
these provisions will be subject to consultation.
1. Power to require an assessment
2. Power to require tests or studies
3. Ability to add terms and conditions
4. Mandatory reporting of serious reactions by healthcare institutions
5. Duty of the Minister to publicize certain clinical trial information
The powers under the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act allow unsafe NHPs to be more
quickly removed from the market, protecting Canadians from serious or imminent health risks. This will
also help increase consumer confidence in NHPs on the market.
Some NHP industry stakeholders remain opposed to the extension of Vanessa’s Law powers to NHPs. The
Natural Health Products Protection Association (NHPPA), an active stakeholder advocating to repeal the
elements of the Budget Implementation Act pertaining to Vanessa’s Law, led the drafting of a Private
Member’s Bill (Bill C-368) for this purpose.
On December 5, 2023, MP Blaine Calkins (CPC) introduced Bill C-368 – An Act to amend the Food and
Drugs Act (natural health products) to exclude NHPs from Vanessa’s Law. The Bill awaits second reading
in the House.
NHP Fee Proposal:
Health Canada has noted throughout the development of the Self-Care Framework, and in its response
to the 2021 Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development audit of the NHP program,
that expanding fees to NHPs is critical to strengthening the NHP program to meet the needs of
Canadians and support its long-term sustainability.
The fee revenues would enable Health Canada to strengthen its oversight of NHPs, monitor labelling and
advertising, and put in place a permanent inspection program. The increased revenue would also help
improve Health Canada’s ability to:
detect and respond to quality issues;
address issues of non-compliance for unlicensed products; and
prevent harmful products from making their way into the marketplace.
The proposed fees reflect the costs associated with performing regulatory activities for NHPs. Three
types of fees are proposed that include significant cost reductions for small businesses:
Fees to evaluate applications for new NHPs or to amend existing NHPs (starting as low as $562 for
qualifying small businesses on the simplest applications to $58,332 for the most complex applications,
which are expected to be very rare);
Fees to assess new NHP site licence applications or amendments to existing site licences ($3,588 for
qualifying small businesses and $4,784 for larger businesses), and an annual site licence fee to support
site licence renewal and compliance and enforcement activities for products that are already on the
market (ranging from $5,191 for qualifying small business labelling facilities to $40,071 for larger
business sterile manufacturing facilities); and
Annual “right” to sell fees to allow companies the right to sell their NHPs in Canada ($406.50 for
qualifying small businesses and $542 for larger businesses annually).
Performance standards are also proposed for each of the fee lines, ranging from 30 days to 210 days
depending on the complexity of the review required.
While the proposed fees are also important to ensure the safety, reliability and quality of our NHPs, we
are considering a number of measures to help alleviate the impact of these fees on businesses, such as
fee reductions for small businesses (companies with fewer than 100 employees or between $30,000 and
$5M in annual revenue) ranging between 25% to 50%, and a full waiver for small businesses on their first
pre-market evaluation.
The Department held a public consultation on its fee proposal from May 12, 2023, to August 10, 2023, as
well as stakeholder information sessions to explain the proposal and respond to questions. Health
Canada is actively reviewing thousands of comments on its fee proposal, including the fee reduction for
small businesses, as part of an open and transparent consultation process with Canadians and
businesses.
The Department is revising the fee proposal to address the many concerns raised. The Department
intends to engage stakeholders in March 2024 for further discussions.
PERFLUOROALKYLATED AND POLYFLUOROALKYLATED SUBSTANCES (PFAS)
ISSUE
The Government of Canada has published a draft State of PFAS report. This draft report proposes that
PFAS as a class may cause harm to both human health and the environment. There is a considerable
amount of public interest in this very large group of substances.
KEY FACTS
Per- and polyfluoroalkyl substances (PFAS) are a group of over 4,700 human-made substances referred to
as “forever chemicals” because they are extremely persistent in the environment.
These substances are used in many industrial sectors, in certain firefighting foams, and in a wide range of
products, including food packaging, non-stick cookware, cosmetics, textiles, vehicle parts, and
electronics. PFAS are found nearly everywhere in the Canadian environment (ambient air, indoor air,
dust, and drinking water) and in people living in Canada, even in remote regions.
Scientific evidence to date indicates that certain PFAS are associated with adverse effects on the
environment and on human health, and the Government of Canada has taken action to address some
sub-groups of PFAS.
On May 20, 2023, the Government published a draft State of PFAS report that summarizes the current
scientific evidence on these chemicals and proposes that PFAS as a class may cause harm to both human
health and the environment, i.e., meets the definition of “toxic” under section 64 of the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA).
Comments on the State of PFAS report and risk management scope are being considered and will inform
the final report.
If the assessment conclusions are confirmed, the Government will propose actions to address identified
risks, including controls for PFAS in firefighting foams as well as options to minimize environmental and
human exposure from other sources and products.
The Government will also continue to invest in monitoring of PFAS in human and environmental samples,
and in research on their potential human health and environmental effects.
In February 2023, Health Canada in collaboration with provinces, territories, and other federal
departments proposed a new group-based objective that is expected to be finalized in the summer of
2024. This new group-based objective will reduce Canadians’ exposure to PFAS in drinking water.
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada are addressing PFAS as a class because
people living in Canada are exposed to many of these chemicals every day and emerging science shows
they are harmful to human health and the environment.
Publication of the draft state of PFAS report was an important step in the process of managing these
substances. The Government is working towards finalizing the report as soon as possible and, if the
conclusions are confirmed, will take action to manage identified risks.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO ADDRESS PFAS
While science has been evolving regarding the risks of PFAS, the Government of Canada has not waited
to act and has prohibited three subgroups of PFAS.
The Government of Canada has also proposed a new more stringent objective for PFAS in drinking water,
led a nomination of a subset of these substances for global action under the Stockholm Convention and
is developing an approach to consider the risk posed by biosolids contaminated with PFAS and to protect
the safety of Canadian agriculture.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO PROTECT PEOPLE IN SAGENUAY FROM PFAS
The Government of Canada has proposed a new draft objective for PFAS in drinking water with the aim
to reduce potential exposure to multiple PFAS considering them as a group instead of individual
chemicals.
The Government of Canada is supporting the province of Quebec through guidance on health effects,
testing protocols and water treatment strategies for contaminants in drinking water.
Questions about specific contaminated sites should be addressed to the responsible federal authority.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT ACTIONS TO PROTECT PEOPLE FROM PFAS IN CONSUMER & SELF-CARE
PRODUCTS, INCLUDING COSMETICS
Publication of the draft state of PFAS report is an important step in the process of managing these
harmful substances.
The Government is considering what actions are needed to protect people in Canada and their
environment from PFAS, including PFAS used in certain products.
The Government of Canada has a number of tools available under the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), Canada Consumer Product Safety Act, and the Food and Drugs Act to take
action on products, including cosmetics, that demonstrate a risk to the health and safety of people in
Canada.
BACKGROUND
In April 2021, the Government of Canada published a Notice of Intent to move forward with activities to
address the broad class of PFAS. The notice indicated that substance-specific information is lacking for
many PFAS that are currently used and, while risk management measures are already in place for a
number of PFAS, the scientific evidence to date indicates that other PFAS may also have associated
environmental and/or human health effects. Considering PFAS as a class of chemicals better addresses
situations where exposure occurs to multiple PFAS, and allows the Government to consider cumulative
effects and to prevent substituting a regulated PFAS with an unregulated PFAS (i.e., regrettable
substitution). Stakeholders were invited to provide initial feedback or indicate their interest in engaging
in further discussions.
Other Government of Canada Actions on PFAS
Existing Regulations
The Government of Canada has taken action under CEPA to prohibit the manufacture, use, sale and
import of certain subclasses of PFAS (perfluorooctonate sulfonate [PFOS], perfluorooctanoic acid [PFOA]
and long-chain perfluorocarboxylic acids [LC-PFCAs]) and products containing these substances, subject
to certain limited exceptions and permitted activities.
CEPA’s New Substances Notification Regulations ensure that no new substances, including new PFAS, are
introduced into the Canadian marketplace before undergoing ecological and human health assessments,
and that appropriate control measures have been taken, when required. Canada’s New Substances
Program has taken preventative action against potentially harmful new PFAS and will continue to ensure
that new PFAS that are imported or manufactured in Canada are assessed and risk managed, as
required.
Existing Guidelines
Federal Environmental Quality Guidelines for PFOS have been developed for surface water, fish tissue,
wildlife diet, and bird egg. Canadian Soil and Groundwater Quality Guidelines have also been developed
for PFOS. The development of guidelines for other PFAS is under consideration.
In February 2023, Health Canada proposed an objective for total detectable PFAS in drinking water. Once
finalized, the objective will replace the existing guidelines for PFOS and PFOA, and screening values for
nine other PFAS. The objective is lower than the existing maximum values, further protecting people in
Canada.
Addressing Fire-Fighting Foams
In 2021, Health Canada and Environment and Climate Change Canada announced an action plan to
protect firefighters from harmful chemicals released during household fires. The plan outlines a series of
actions such as conducting research and monitoring of firefighters’ level of exposure to chemicals,
including PFAS.
The Government of Canada continues to take action to reduce the environmental and human health
risks from known federal contaminated sites through the Federal Contaminated Sites Action Plan,
including those impacted with PFAS associated with the historic use of PFAS containing firefighting
foams. Non-federal PFAS contaminated sites also exist in Canada; these are under the jurisdiction of the
provinces, territories and/or municipal health authorities.
Addressing Biosolids
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) is working with Environment and Climate Change Canada,
Health Canada and provincial governments to develop a coordinated approach to consider the potential
concern associated with biosolids contaminated with PFAS, and to protect the safety of Canadian
agriculture. In May 2023, the CFIA proposed an interim standard for products that are imported or sold
as fertilizers or supplements. CFIA engaged with stakeholders and provincial governments this summer
to seek feedback on their proposed interim standard.
International Efforts
In 2021, Canada nominated LC-PFCAs, their salts and related compounds for addition to the Stockholm
Convention on Persistent Organic Pollutants. This international environmental treaty aims to eliminate or
restrict the production and use of persistent organic pollutants.
Research and Monitoring
The Government of Canada conducts regular monitoring and surveillance of certain PFAS in the
environment, wildlife and people living in Canada. The data show that while the levels of certain PFAS
have decreased over time in the Canadian population, other PFAS continue to increase in certain sub-
populations.
The Government of Canada continues to examine the potential health effects of PFAS, such as their
potential contribution to metabolic diseases and their effects on potentially disproportionately impacted
populations (including pregnant women and children). Research to understand firefighter's exposure to
chemicals, including PFAS, is also underway.
Ongoing surveillance of PFAS in foods through the Total Diet Study is required to ensure levels do not
increase. Additionally, a range of activities associated with the environmental concerns of PFAS, such as
research on the accumulation and toxicity of certain PFAS in organisms, and extensive monitoring in
various ecosystems and wildlife, have taken place and are ongoing.
PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD
ISSUE
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is an independent quasi-judicial body that protects
the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in Canada
are not excessive.
KEY FACTS
On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) came into
force. These amendments include a new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting
requirements for those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing (e.g., over-the-counter drugs and
generic medicines).
The Board of the PMPRB may issue non-binding Guidelines to operationalize the PMR. Since the coming
into force of the regulatory amendments, no new Guidelines have been put in place. Interim Guidance to
inform stakeholders of the approach for conducting price reviews during this period was adopted in July
2022 and updated in September 2023. A Guidance development process is now underway to implement
regulatory amendments, and to give effect to the Board’s commitment to modernize and simplify its
framework. The PMPRB wishes to finalize new Guidelines during 2024.
The Board is conducting consultations, in stages, as part of its new Guidelines development process.
On November 10, 2023, the PMPRB released a Scoping Paper outlining themes and questions to inform
its Guideline development. On December 5 and 6, 2023 interested stakeholders were invited to
participate in a Policy Roundtable to discuss the paper further. In addition, the PMPRB received 70
written submissions in December 2023. Most submissions were put forth by Rights Holders and Industry
Associations (51%), followed by patient advocacy groups (21%) and pharmacy and distributors (10%).
Additional consultations are expected going forward.
The PMPRB is overseen by a Board, appointed by the Governor in Council. There are five current Board
members: Chairperson Thomas Digby, Vice-Chairperson Anie Perrault, and members Carolyn Kobernick,
Emily Reynen and Peter Moreland-Giraldeau.
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in
Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON HOW SAVINGS WILL BE ACHIEVED AS A RESULT OF AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTED
MEDICINES REGULATIONS
In July 2022, amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force. These amendments
were designed to provide the PMPRB with new tools to carry out its mandate of protecting Canadians
from excessive prices for patented medicines and improve access for Canadians to quality medicines.
The new amendments include an 11-country basket of comparator countries, which removes the United
States and Switzerland and includes countries that are more like Canada economically and from a
consumer price protection standpoint.
The revised basket of comparator countries is estimated to have an impact on patented medicine
expenditures by reducing spending by $2.9 billion over 10 years. The way in which the PMPRB
operationalizes the amendments through its Guidelines may impact projected benefits. The new basket
is expected to result in lower drug prices for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL
INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S DECISION
PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that former Minister of Health, Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his
views with respect to the proposed Guidelines.
As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking it to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including provinces and territories, to
understand fully the short and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL
Officials working as staff within the PMPRB are public servants, and the PMPRB is responsible for its own
staffing. Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF
PATENT MEDICINES
The PMPRB was established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister of
Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an independent
body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are not paying
excessive prices.
The PMPRB and its legal framework are an important part of the pharmaceutical landscape, and the
Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting consumers
against excessive prices of patented medicines.
IF PRESSED ON GUIDELINES
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in
Canada are not excessive.
Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB
As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees charge for
patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve
voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price is
excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in
Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS
The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in supporting
research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and improving the
affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing over the
next ten years in Canada.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the government,
reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market to ensure
that they are not being sold at a price that the PMPRB finds to be “excessive”. The PMPRB can work with
patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to determine whether a price is
excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to refer matters to the PMPRB, which in
turn is required to inquire into the matter and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations (PMR), which form part of the PMPRB’s legislative framework.
On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) came into
force. These amendments, including a new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting
requirements for those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing (e.g., over-the-counter drugs and
generic medicines), provide the PMPRB with more updated tools to prevent excessive pricing for
patented medicines. The price reporting requirements for the new basket of countries have been in
force since July 1, 2022. The PMPRB has therefore received from regulated parties the new pricing
information respecting the new basket of comparator countries for all of 2022.
The new basket of comparator countries removes the United States and Switzerland and includes
countries with similar consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and marketed medicines as
Canada. The basket now comprises of Australia, Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Spain, along
with France, Germany, Italy, Sweden and United Kingdom, which have always been included.
The total quantified benefit of the revised basket, calculated through a cost-benefit analysis conducted in
2017, estimated the impact of the regulatory amendment on patented medicine prices to be $2.9 billion
over 10 years (according to the June 2022 Regulatory Impact Analysis Statement). While the estimated
impact for the cost-benefit analysis was conducted in a comprehensive manner using reasonable
assumptions, some differences in the benefits and costs relating to the amendments that came into
force can be expected.
In addition, the PMPRB's upcoming Guidelines that operationalize the regulatory amendments, the
extent to which rights holders voluntarily comply with the Guidelines, and, the extent to which the
Guidelines are an appropriate application of the Act and Regulations, may all have an impact on the
projected benefits.
On June 30, 2022, in anticipation of the coming into force of the amendments to the PMR on July 1,
2022, the PMPRB published Interim Guidelines for establishing non-excessive prices for drugs launched
during the period of time between the coming into force of the PMR and the publication of the Final
Guidelines.
Subsequently, on October 6, 2022, Draft Guidelines were published with a 60-day Notice and Comment
Period ending December 5, 2022. The PMPRB expressed the intention to issue Final Guidelines by the
end of the year and have the Final Guidelines come into effect on January 1, 2023. In addition to the new
Schedule of 11 comparator countries, the Draft Guidelines contained a number of substantive changes as
part of the Board’s modernization efforts.
On November 28, 2022, the former Minister of Health wrote to the Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB
asking that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to allow time to fully understand the
short and long-term impacts of the proposed guidelines. This letter was written in context of section
96(5) of the Patent Act, which states that the PMPRB must consult with various parties, including the
Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
In December 2022, the PMPRB announced that it would not implement the proposed new Guidelines on
January 1, 2023, as they had previously indicated. PMPRB communicated that the Interim Guidelines
would remain in place until further notice. On June 20, 2023, the PMPRB published a proposed
Amendment to the Interim Guidance regarding new medicines for a 60-day notice and comment period
ending August 21, 2023. On September 27, 2023 the Board announced its decision to adopt the
proposed Amended Interim Guidance, effective immediately. The Board also indicated its intention to
launch an iterative consultation process, conducted in stages with stakeholders with an aim to develop
new guidelines in 2024.
In December 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, Vice-Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of PMPRB,
confirmed her resignation and in February 2023, Matthew Herder confirmed his resignation from the
Board and published his resignation letter online. Douglas Clark, Executive Director (a public servant who
reports to the Chairperson) announced that he would remain as a special advisor for a specified period,
but resigned from his Executive Director position in February 2023.
In February 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J. Digby as the
chairperson of the PMPRB and on August 10, 2023 Anie Perrault was appointed as the vice-chairperson
of the Board. In October 2023 the Government of Canada announced appointments of Peter Moreland
Giraldeau and Dr. Emily A. Reynen to the Board. All terms are for five years, following an open, merit-
based and transparent selection processes.
On March 9, 2023, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) adopted a motion to conduct a study on
the PMPRB and invited the following witnesses, in addition to any further witnesses the committee may
consider relevant: the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, then Minister of Health; Matthew Herder, former
member of the PMPRB; Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, former acting chair, PMPRB; and Douglas Clark,
former executive director, PMPRB.
On April 27, 2023, HESA commenced its study on the PMPRB. Then Minister Jean-Yves Duclos made a
statement and, along with Deputy Stephen Lucas, Eric Belair and T. Nessim Abu-Zahra, answered
questions. Melanie Bourassa Forcier, former acting chairperson of the Board also made a statement and
answered questions. The study continued on May 2, 2023, with Matthew Herder, former Board member,
and Douglas Clark, outgoing executive director, PMPRB, each making opening statements and answering
questions. On May 4, HESA passed a motion that witnesses produce correspondence they consider
relevant to support their testimony to the committee. These documents have been published online.
It is expected that the committee will report its findings and recommendations to the House and request
that the government table a comprehensive response to the report.
RECALLS (GENERAL)
ISSUE
News outlets have featured several recent product recalls in Canada, including for products regulated by
Health Canada.
KEY FACTS
Health Canada is responsible for regulating the safety and quality of health and consumer products in
Canada. Persons manufacturing, importing, advertising or selling health or consumer products in Canada
must ensure that their products comply with federal laws and regulations.
Recalls are a key tool used to address issues with products that present risks to the health and safety of
consumers. A recall is a corrective action taken by government or industry to address consumer health
or safety issues associated with a product, and may include removing a product from distribution.
Product recalls are most often initiated by industry to take corrective measures to address health and
safety risks. Health Canada monitors recalls and may take enforcement action if industry does not
comply with applicable legislation, including by issuing mandatory recalls for some products.
Health Canada takes steps to advise the public when products are recalled, for example through the
Recalls and Safety Alerts website which provides easy access to a comprehensive list of recalls,
advisories, and safety alerts for health and consumer products.
KEY MESSAGES
This government’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
Health and consumer products sold in Canada must comply with federal laws and regulations. If a risk is
identified, we expect industry to address issues swiftly, including through product recalls when
appropriate.
Health Canada closely monitors the marketplace and will not hesitate to take action to help protect
Canadians from unsafe products.
The department’s priority is to ensure that people in Canada have the information they need to make
informed decisions about their health. Health Canada regularly publishes recalls, advisories, and safety
alerts to keep Canadian safe.
IF PRESSED ON DRUG, MEDICAL DEVICE OR NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCT RECALLS
Health Canada may become aware of potential health product issues through company notifications,
consumer or industry complaints, or through its own proactive compliance monitoring activities.
Depending on the issue, a recall may be necessary. If a regulated party fails to effectively recall a health
product, Health Canada will not hesitate to take further enforcement action to protect Canadians and
keep them informed.
Should the department have reason to believe that a health product presents a serious or imminent risk
to health, it also has the power to order a recall if a company does not take action in a timely manner.
IF PRESSED ON CONSUMER PRODUCT RECALLS
Regulated parties carry out recalls to remove consumer products from the Canadian market that may
pose a risk, as well as to minimize the risk to consumers by advising the public of what to do if they have
a product that has been recalled.
Health Canada may order a recall of a consumer product if it believes that the product is a danger to
human health or safety.
The department takes steps to ensure consumers are made aware of recalls and the actions they should
take through postings on its website and social media.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is responsible for regulating the safety and quality of health and consumer products in
Canada. This includes informing and protecting Canadians from health and safety risks associated with
these products after they are made available to consumers. Persons manufacturing, importing,
advertising or selling health or consumer products in Canada must ensure that their products comply
with federal laws and regulations.
There have been several recent news articles about product recalls posted on the Recalls and safety
alerts website. A recall is meant to address an issue that presents significant risk to the health and safety
of consumers.
Industry may carry out all recalls in a voluntary manner when they become aware of potential health and
safety risks of a product. This voluntary approach helps industry to provide the people in Canada with
quick and reliable information on how they can help protect themselves from dangerous products.
Health Canada monitors recalls to ensure they effectively manage the identified risk. Some federal
legislation also provides the Minister of Health the power to order a mandatory recall if they believe a
drug, medical device, natural health product or consumer product presents a serious or imminent risk to
the health and safety of consumers.
In 2014, the Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law) amended the Food and Drugs
Act (FDA) to improve the safety and oversight of therapeutic products (i.e., drugs and medical devices)
by introducing measures to, among other things, enable the Minister to order a person who sells a drug
or medical device to recall the product when the Minister believes there is a serious or imminent risk of
injury to health. While a manufacturer or importer is expected to voluntarily initiate a recall if their
product is found to pose a risk to health, a mandatory recall order can be used by the department to
remove a non-compliant product from the market. In 2023, the Government amended the FDA’s
definition of therapeutic products to extend these authorities under Vanessa’s Law to natural health
products, including the power to order recalls.
Additionally, the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act authorizes the Minister of Health to order a recall
of a consumer product if they believe, on reasonable grounds, that the product is a danger to human
health or safety. A recall order would be addressed to a person who manufactures, imports, or sells a
product for commercial purposes. The Minister of Health may also order a person to take certain
measures, including stopping the manufacturing or sale of a consumer product, or any other measure to
address or prevent a danger to human health or safety. If a person does not comply with a recall order or
an order to take corrective measures within the time specified, Health Canada may issue administrative
monetary penalties carrying fines of up to $25,000 a day and can also carry out the recall or the
corrective measure at the person's expense.
SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
ISSUE
The pandemic disproportionately affected Canadians living in long-term care homes. Canadians are
concerned about the availability of safe, high-quality long-term care services.
KEY FACTS
On January 31, 2023, the Standards Council of Canada, Health Standards Organization (HSO) and
Canadian Standards Association (CSA Group) announced the completion and public release of new
national long-term care standards.
Budget 2023 announced close to $200 billion over 10 years to support the Working Together to Improve
Health Care for Canadians Plan.
Funding includes $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for mental
health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
As a part of the previous Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter, Health Canada was tasked with creating a
Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
The Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations and engagement with stakeholders
and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act, with the objective of developing this new legislation.
KEY MESSAGES
Every senior in Canada deserves to live in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they live.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in long-term care homes
across Canada.
Long-term care residents deserve to live in dignity, comfort and respect. That is why the Minister of
Health and the Minister of Seniors were mandated to develop national long-term care standards and a
Safe Long-Term Care Act.
In January 2023, the Standards Council of Canada (SCC), Health Standards Organization (HSO) and the
Canadian Standards Association (CSA) Group released 2 new complementary, independent long-term
care standards. These standards provide guidance for delivering long-term care services that are safe,
reliable and centred on residents' needs.
The Government of Canada has undertaken extensive consultations and engagement on the new Safe
Long-Term Care Act. This includes consulting with experts, stakeholders, persons with lived experience,
and provinces & territories, as well as building on existing collaborations with First Nations and Inuit
partners.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT WILL BE TABLED
The Government of Canada is committed to doing more to support seniors across the country. We know
Canadians want to age closer to home and family, but also expect long-term care to be safe, when
needed.
As such, our government is developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure that all Canadians get
the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
The Government of Canada has carried out extensive consultations and engagement on a Safe Long-
Term Care Act. This includes consulting with experts, stakeholders, persons with lived experience, and
provinces and territories, as well as building on existing collaborations with First Nations and Inuit
partners.
The Government of Canada has also recently completed a public online consultation on Safe Long-Term
care, which will inform the development of the Act.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE NATIONAL LONG-TERM CARE STANDARDS WILL BE ENFORCED THROUGH
THE NEW SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT
It is important to note that the delivery of long-term care services is a provincial and territorial
responsibility.
Federal legislation will need to be respectful of this provincial-territorial jurisdiction. That is, it will not
mandate standards or regulate long-term care delivery.
The Government of Canada has already been collaborating with provinces and territories to support
improvements in long-term care, as highlighted by the $3 billion investment to support their efforts to
ensure standards for long-term care applied and permanent changes are made.
Negotiations are underway. Funding agreements allow us to continue to work together to prioritize the
uptake and adherence to the standards in order to provide high quality care to all Canadians that require
it.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care (LTC) in Canada
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health care
services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of LTC falls within
provincial and territorial (PT) jurisdiction.
LTC is referenced in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as “extended health care services.” Extended services
are not covered by the five criteria of the Act or its extra billing and user charges provisions, and
therefore are not subject to the Act’s penalty provisions.
While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but variations
and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
Mandate Letters
Previous Minister of Health Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports. Specific commitments
include:
Support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes
working with provinces and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify
shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get
the care they deserve.
Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
On January 31, 2023, the Government of Canada welcomed the release of complementary, independent
LTC standards from the Health Standards Organization (HSO) and Canadian Standards Association (CSA
Group) and thanked them for their dedicated work to complete the development of LTC standards. The
national standards development process was complementary to, but independent from, the
Government of Canada’s collaborative work with PTs to help support improvements in LTC. While Health
Canada did not fund the recently released LTC standards, it did provide funding to CSA Group and HSO to
support enhanced engagement and consultations with Canadians and stakeholders to ensure the diverse
perspectives were considered during the development of both standards.
The Government of Canada is also developing a new Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure seniors get
the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction. The Government of Canada
has carried out extensive consultations and engagement with stakeholders and Canadians on a Safe
Long-Term Care Act.
A 60-day online consultation (July 21 to September 21, 2023) invited Canadians to share their
perspectives and expertise on how to improve the quality and safety of LTC, foster the implementation of
the LTC standards, address human resources challenges, and strengthen accountability in the LTC sector.
Recognizing traditional jurisdictional responsibilities over the delivery of LTC, the Government of Canada
is also working with provincial and territorial governments on the Safe LTC Act and how to best support
the delivery of quality and safe LTC services. The consultations also included discussions and roundtables
with experts, stakeholders, Indigenous partners and Canadians to obtain advice on how federal
legislation can help support improvements in the quality and safety of LTC.
ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES /
ISSUE
There are key barriers and challenges related to access to sexual and reproductive health (SRH)
information and services, including abortion, in Canada. Accurate SRH information and culturally safe
and relevant SRH services, particularly for marginalized populations, is lacking across Canada.
KEY FACTS
People who are 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, racialized, living with disabilities (including chronic conditions),
newcomers, or women and youth from underserved communities face the highest sexual and
reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support, information, and services.
Often, they do not receive quality care.
KEY MESSAGES
All Canadians should have access to sexual and reproductive health resources and services, no matter
where they live.
Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created in 2021 to advance mandate
commitments. Through Budget 2021 and 2023, $81 million has been committed to the fund over six
years.
The fund supports community-based organizations that help make access to abortion, gender affirming,
and other sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for underserved
populations.
IF PRESSED FOR AN UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Since 2021, the Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund (SRHF) has committed $28.5M to community
organizations to help make access to abortion, gender affirming care, and other sexual and reproductive
health care information and services more accessible for underserved populations. An additional $9.7M
has been provided to Quebec.
Budget 2023 renewed the SRHF to 2026-27.
The SRHF is currently funding 23 projects.
The Medical Expense Tax Credit has been expanded to include more costs related to use of reproductive
technologies, making conception more affordable.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO CARE FOR TRANS AND NON-BINARY ADOLESCENTS
Health Canada is aware of the government of Alberta’s proposed policies that would reduce access to
gender affirming care for youth.
Our government believes decisions regarding gender-affirming care should be made using evidence-
based information.
Our government believes that transgender youth and their families should be supported to make
informed decisions about the different social and/or medical interventions they may wish to explore.
The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund is supporting 4 projects that address trans communities access
to care with an investment of approximately $5.9 million.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER ALBERTA’S DECISION ON TRANS CARE IS AGAINST THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
The aim of the Canda Health Act is to ensure all residents of provinces and territories have reasonable
access to medically necessary health care services on uniform terms and conditions and without charges
related to the provision of those services.
The Act does not stipulate specific procedures to be covered by provincial and territorial plans. Rather,
provincial and territorial health ministries determine medical necessity, in conjunction with the medical
profession.
Any procedures that are deemed medically necessary by a province or territory must be delivered in a
manner that meets that requirements of the Act.
IF PRESSED ON MISINFORMATION AND DISINFORMATION REGARDING THE CARE OF TRANS AND NON-
BINARY CHILDREN AND YOUTH
This government believes that trans and non-binary young people, and their families, should have access
to gender affirming, evidence based, and high-quality health care.
Gender identity is an inherent characteristic that cannot be changed.
This government is protecting trans and non-binary young people through strategic funding, as well as
through outlawing conversion therapy. The government is monitoring with concern the rise of both
misinformation and disinformation regarding trans and non-binary young people, and impacts on
support and public policy regarding trans and non-binary children, adolescents and adults.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS ABOUT DESISTANCE OR TRANSITION REGRET
While stories of “desistance” or “transition regret” can receive significant media attention and are used
as part of misinformation and disinformation campaigns, in fact it is rare that youth stop their gender
transition and return to living as their gender assigned at birth. Evidence shows that a number of young
people who do stop their transition report it was because they did not have enough support or were
experiencing discrimination due to being trans; some of these youth go on to transition later in life.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES – GENERAL
This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that no one
should be forced to carry an unwanted or unsafe pregnancy.
Of the $45 million committed in Budget 2021, $8.0 million to date has been invested in four projects
focused on access to abortion. Through these projects, new resources and supports are being developed
for health care professionals, access to accurate information about abortion is being improved, and
financial and logistical support for travel for abortion care is being provided.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES – COMPLIANCE UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT
While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done to
improve access in many areas of the country.
Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan, including
the introduction of new regulations, which is expected to eliminate patient charges for access to
abortion services.
The abortion clinic in New Brunswick closed in February 2024, but New Brunswick remains subject to
Canada Health Transfer deductions for patient charges levied through fiscal 2023-2024, for refusing to
provide coverage for these services.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING
ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY)
This fund is specifically designed to help women access abortion and it will not support initiatives that
discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or attempt to override the individual’s right to make
decisions about their own body.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGAL STATUS OF MEDICATION ABORTION IN THE UNITED STATES AND THE
AVAILABILITY OF MIFEGYMISO IN CANADA
Health Canada is aware that the U.S. Supreme Court will hear oral arguments on how patients can access
Mifepristone on March 26th, with the judgment expected in June.
Mifegymiso, which is not available in the U.S., is the only abortion pill authorized in Canada and publicly
covered by all provinces and territories. It combines Mifespristone and Misoprostol.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of Mifegymiso in Canada. There are currently no supply
issues.
IF PRESSED ON DATA
The Government is also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will
fill existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SEX EDUCATION CURRICULA
Health Canada is aware of the government of Saskatchewan’s recent policy change and Alberta’s
proposed policy change regarding sexual education.
Our Government is committed to working towards a country where everyone is free to be themselves
and participate fully in society. This is especially important when homes and communities are not
welcoming spaces for diversity.
The federal government believes that young people should have access to accurate sex education and
that schools should be an inclusive environment where all children can learn about keeping themselves
healthy and safe.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist lens, and
realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive health
services remain. Indigenous, racialized and 2SLGBTQI+ populations, as well as women and youth from
underserved populations face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers
to accessing support, information, and services.
Since the establishment of the Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund, Health Canada has successfully
issued two calls for proposals, and is now administering 24 projects. $29M has been committed to 23
SRH projects across Canada, and a further $9.7M has been committed to Québec for projects within that
province.
Of these projects, seven address 2SLGBTQI+ communities, four address access to abortion, four focus on
Indigenous communities, four address multiple priorities, two focus on racialized people or newcomers,
and two specifically address youth.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range of
indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based decision-
making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including prevalence
of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual knowledge and
behaviours.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death, killing
approximately 46,000 people in Canada each year. The Government has an ambitious target to reduce
tobacco use to less than five percent by 2035.
KEY FACTS
Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all individuals who
smoke.
In 2020, the total cost of tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion.
According to 2022 data, approximately 3.8 million people smoke cigarettes – about 12% of the
population in Canada over the age of 12.
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to help Canadians quit tobacco
and protect youth and people who do not use tobacco from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330
million investment over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada.
Our government is committed to reducing tobacco use in Canada to less than five percent by 2035.
Health Canada continues to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke from
smoking, and to provide people with information on the health hazards of tobacco use, and supports for
quitting smoking.
Canada recently became the first country to require written health warnings be displayed on individual
cigarettes.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE
Quitting smoking can be difficult. Our Government is committed to providing resources to help.
Our Government recently launched a campaign to raise awareness of quit smoking supports. Over four
million dollars is also provided to partners to support the Smoke-Free Curious campaign.
People in Canada can also contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their community,
where available. The number for the helpline is displayed on cigarette packs.
IF PRESSED ON YOUTH VAPING
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. We are encouraged to see that vaping rates
among youth have levelled off since 2021, however, they remain too high.
We remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and are taking action.
Regulations prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen or
heard by youth, set a maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products, and require manufacturers
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act found that the Act appears to be making
progress towards achieving its vaping-related objectives.
It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
Public consultations on the second review focused on tobacco, and ended on November 17, 2023. The
department is currently analyzing feedback received.
A final report will be tabled in Parliament in 2024 and will be made available online at that time.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO COST RECOVERY
Tobacco use is the leading preventable cause of illness and premature death in Canada.
That is why we proposed in the 2023 Fall Economic Statement to amend the Tobacco and Vaping
Products Act to implement a tobacco cost recovery framework.
This framework will help minimize the cost burden on taxpayers of funding federal tobacco and vaping
activities.
Health Canada will consult broadly on the proposed cost recovery framework before implementation.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also require health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or sibling,
and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also require health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or sibling,
and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The Strategy sets a
goal of reducing tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035 (5 by 35).
Data released from the 2022 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) show that smoking rates
continue to decline. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a national
average rate of 12% (3.8M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. While the recent declines are positive,
millions of Canadians are still smoking. Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in
Canada, killing half of all Canadians who smoke. Furthermore, prevalence rates among First Nations and
Inuit are much higher than that of other Canadians. Reaching the 5 by 35 goal will require continued
tobacco control actions both population-wide, and also targeting groups with higher smoking rates.
In March 2023, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms”. The report found that in 2020 the total cost of
tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion, or 22.7% of the total cost of substance use to
Canadians. Furthermore, it was responsible for nearly two in three lives lost (46,366 in 2020).
The previous Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ mandate letter includes a commitment to
require tobacco manufacturers to pay for the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco
control. This is one of a number of comprehensive measures the Government of Canada is taking to
reach 5 by 35.
