Created: 2021-07-12T12:10:35.949942
Name: Standing_Committee_on_Health_(HESA):_Supplementary_Estimates_(C),_2020-21:_Votes_1c_and_5c_under_Canadian_Food_Inspection_Agency,_Vote_5c_under_Canadian_Institutes_of_Health_Research,_Votes_1c_and_10c_under_Department_of_Health_and_Votes_1c,_5c_and_10c_under_Public_Health_Agency_of_Canada
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/1a56a6ac-00e5-4394-9005-f424754f15a2/resource/36f7c799-cd6a-4793-9df3-30d630335655/download/disclosure-hesa-supps-c-mar-12-en.pdf
Package ID: 1a56a6ac-00e5-4394-9005-f424754f15a2
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee Appearance', 'Supplementary Estimates (C) 2020-21']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances on Supplementary Estimates (C), 2020-21: Votes 1c and 5c under Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Vote 5c under Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Votes 1c and 10c under Department of Health and Votes 1c, 5c and 10c under Public Health Agency of Canada
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Covid-19 Cards
1. Accomplishments Related to COVID
2. Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy
3. Approvals Process/Clinical Trials/I.O.s/Expedited Pathways
4. Border Measures
5. COVAX
6. COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
7. COVID-19 Variants/Genetic Sequencing/Effectiveness of Vaccine Against Variants
8. Cybersecurity/Military Involvement
9. Delaying Second Dose/Mixing Vaccines
10. International Collaboration on Approvals
11. International Issues
12. Medical Device Regulations
13. NACI Guidance
14. NESS and PPE Procurement
15. Pfizer 6 doses
16. PT vaccine allocations
17. Public Health Measures
18. Self-Isolation Sites
19. Stakeholder Engagement
20. Status of Vaccine Approvals
21. Support for COVID-19 Research
22. Testing Capacity
23. Therapeutics
24. US Travel
25. Vaccine Certification
26. Vaccine Roll-out
Other Cards
27. Abortion Access (CHA)
28. Bulk Imports
29. Dental Care
30. GBV
31. Homecare
32. LTC homes
33. MAID
34. Mental Health
35. MSM
36. Opioids
37. Pharmacare
38. PMPRB Amendments
39. Rare Diseases
40. Suicide Prevention
41. Transfers
42. Essure
ACCOMPLISHMENTS RELATED TO COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented situation with an equally
unprecedented response. Since Canada received its earliest warning of an illness originating in Wuhan,
China at the end of December 2019, the Government has been working collaboratively with provinces
and territories as well as leveraging international partnerships to protect the health and safety of
Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What are the key accomplishments related to the COVID-19 response in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented situation with an equally
unprecedented response.
• Canada is recognized internationally as a model example of working across federal, provincial,
and municipal governments to support a collaborative, whole-of-government response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
• Canada has effectively leveraged domestic and international partnerships to share technical
expertise, exchange information, and learn from the experiences of other countries.
• This has helped us build a robust and agile response to the exceptional challenges that we are
facing.
• None of these accomplishments would be possible without the strong partnerships that exist at
all levels of governments, across jurisdictions and with key stakeholders, who are equally invested in
protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SPECIFIC ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Border/Travel Measures:
• To reduce the risk of imported cases and transmission of COVID-19 and its variants, the Public
Health Agency of Canada has implemented unprecedented border and travel measures.
• Measures to date include:
o Entry prohibitions;
o Compliance and enforcement efforts;
o Mandatory quarantine;
o Pre- and post-arrival testing; and
o Government of Canada approved accommodations while air travellers await their test
results.
• We have also enhanced screening measures at Canadian airports, and established a public
health presence at 33 points of entry – 9 airports and 24 land border crossings.
• In support of mandatory quarantine, and those travellers who arrive symptomatic or without a
suitable quarantine plan, we stood up 12 designated quarantine facilities in 9 cities across Canada.
Guidance
• We have provided public health guidance to public health authorities, Indigenous communities,
stakeholders, and the general public on how to protect the health and safety of Canadians and reduce
the spread of COVID-19.
FPT Engagement
• We have worked with provinces and territories and other stakeholders to accelerate diagnostic
testing capacity in order to detect cases of COVID-19, and its variants, more quickly.
• We have established a coordinated approach to the bulk purchase and distribution of personal
protective equipment, testing supplies and medical equipment, to facilitate the right supplies getting to
the right places in Canada.
• We are also working with provinces and territories to procure treatments in order to provide
COVID-19 patients access to safe and effective therapies.
• Further, in addition to a dedicated outbreak investigation team, we have established a Rapid
Surge Capacity initiative to support the needs of provinces and territories in responding to COVID-19
outbreaks, and mitigating transmission in hot zones where they have exceeded their own capacity.
Data and Surveillance
• We have enhanced our national approach to data collection and surveillance, to support the
continued monitoring of COVID-19 across the country.
• We have adopted novel approaches to monitor for COVID-19 in communities, including
monitoring wastewater for detection and early emergence of the virus.
• We have developed COVIDAlert, a free COVID-19 exposure notification app that can alert you to
possible exposures before you have symptoms.
• We have also developed the innovative ArriveCAN mobile app to support data collection and
sharing for compliance and enforcement.
Vaccines
• In partnership with provinces, territories, Indigenous communities, and the private sector, the
Public Health Agency of Canada has launched a cross-country immunization campaign.
• The Government intends to provide a vaccine to every eligible person in Canada who wants one
by the end of September 2021.
IF PRESSED ON COMMUNICATIONS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has been proactive and transparent in its communications
with Canadians.
• We have directly addressed the questions and concerns of tens of thousands of Canadians on
various aspects of COVID-19 since the beginning of January.
• We have also initiated new ways to connect with Canadians, including the Canada COVID-19
App, an information phone line, and a centralized website.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians. The overall response to
the COVID-19 pandemic is based on the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for
Biological Events, with the goal to support collaboration and engagement amongst
federal/provincial/territorial public health, health care delivery and emergency management
authorities.
ADVERSE REACTIONS / VACCINE HESITANCY
SYNOPSIS
A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for ensuring public confidence in the safety of
the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting Canada-wide immunization efforts. The Government of Canada is
working closely with partners to monitor vaccine safety.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the Government doing to ensure vaccine safety, including monitoring for adverse
reactions to the COVID-19 vaccines?
• What is the Government doing to assure Canadians have confidence in the COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Safety is our top priority for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before they are authorized.
• The Government of Canada monitors any adverse reactions and takes all necessary precautions
to ensure the COVID-19 vaccines are safe.
• So far, nothing unusual or unexpected has been detected. The benefits of the COVID-19 vaccines
outweigh the risks.
• Every week, the Public Health Agency of Canada publicly reports adverse events following
vaccination. This transparency helps support vaccine confidence.
• The Government of Canada is developing and implementing a public education campaign to
support the COVID-19 vaccine, and its delivery to Canadians. The campaign will include advertising,
outreach and community engagement to ensure that all Canadians have credible information to inform
their choice to receive the vaccine when it is available to them.
IF PRESSED
• The rigorous standards applied by Health Canada in authorizing vaccines for use in Canada,
along with reliable information provided to Canadians supports vaccine confidence.
• As with all vaccines, Health Canada will take action if any safety issues are identified. This can
include warning Canadians about potential side effects, changing the recommended use of the product,
or even removing the product from the market.
• Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that supports the provinces
and territories, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada and vaccine manufacturers in
detecting and investigating reactions, and responding to protect Canadians.
• Improvements have already been made to the surveillance system, in order to ensure timeliness
of notification and reporting. It is notable that Canada was one of the first countries to report on
adverse events at a national level.
BACKGROUND
Safety is a central consideration for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before they are authorized.
However, no health product is completely risk-free.
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
Safety data from clinical trials for the authorized COVID-19 vaccines showed that these new generation
mRNA vaccines are performing similarly to other vaccines and that the reactions are mostly mild or
moderate.
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are mild
reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild headache), although
serious but very rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction).
It is important to note that though an adverse event may occur after immunization, it does not imply
that the vaccine must have caused the adverse event. As the WHO states: “The fact that a vaccine was
administered within a reasonable time period of the occurrence of an event does not automatically
suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines are behaving in
the entire population and their real-world impact. Effective vaccine safety surveillance is critical for
rapidly detecting and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to
outweigh the risks, and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s
immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. This
system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness and
sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC, and Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network which provides weekly
reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities. Through its relationships with international regulators,
Health Canada also receives information about emerging safety signals in other jurisdictions.
Vaccine hesitancy
Addressing vaccine hesitancy is a longstanding priority for PHAC but with the arrival of COVID-19, the
stakes are higher than in the recent past. Concerted effort is underway with a range of partners to
enhance education and guidance, address knowledge and research gaps, and improve coverage data.
PHAC is working with healthcare providers to meet the needs of frontline vaccinators and other health
professionals who require tools to discuss vaccines with their patients and clients. The Agency is also
spearheading a national dialogue to meaningfully engage with Canadians about the importance of
COVID-19 vaccines and vaccination more broadly.
PHAC is working with many partners to better understand and address vaccine hesitancy related to the
new COVID-19 vaccines. These include both internal and external working groups with experts in vaccine
hesitancy from different fields of study. This also includes a Vaccine Confidence Task Group made up of
multidisciplinary advisors to help develop and provide the tools needed to meaningfully address
vaccination questions and concerns. It also involves funding for stakeholders, provinces, territories, and
community groups to help them develop tailored approaches that meet their community needs and
speak in their community voices. Funding through the Immunization Partnership Fund will be leveraged
to ensure Canada’s diverse and often underserved groups are taking full advantage of the vaccines
available to them.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has used agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID-19 clinical
trials and the review of COVID-19 vaccine and treatment submissions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has Health Canada done to facilitate and expedite access to COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of applications for
COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and submissions for authorization, while maintaining its high standards
for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• These measures have allowed us to authorize several clinical trials in Canada for COVID-19
vaccines, as well as the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and AstraZeneca vaccines, which are already being
administered to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF APPROVAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness
and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of March 2021, over 80 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for sale in
Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that
these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
Authorizing products
The Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in Relation to
COVID-19 created a mechanism for the expedited review of treatments, while ensuring that a high level
of scientific scrutiny is maintained.
The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and vaccines
for Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile
administrative and application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related
indications that were not in the original authorization; and,
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada, if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and
quality.
In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate action,
including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required, to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
As of March 1, 2021, 11 submissions have been received under the interim order – including 5
treatments and 6 vaccines. Four of these vaccines and one treatment have been authorized, while the
others remain under review.
Clinical Trials
Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new vaccine are both safe and effective in human
beings, and Health Canada is also facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada, using the
Interim Order respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs related to COVID-19, which was
issued in May 2020.
The IO introduces regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical trials to take place
more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient participation across the country. The IO
helps to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtaining patient consent in light of COVID-19 realities;
• broaden the criteria for qualified health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator
duties at remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinical trial
authorization.
Clinical trial applications are being reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in
response to COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to encourage the restart of the Canadian economy while
continuing to prevent imported cases of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• Now is not the time to travel. Canada continues to advise against non-essential travel to and
from Canada until further notice.
• Canada has established robust border measures, including travel restrictions and pre-departure
testing, for travellers coming to Canada.
• These measures have been effective in helping to protect the health and safety of Canadians,
while continuing to allow essential workers enter the country.
• The recently-introduced enhanced testing and quarantine requirements, in combination with
those already implemented, will further reduce the risk of importation and transmission of COVID-19
and new variants of the virus related to international travel.
IF PRESSED ON NEW UPDATES TO THE BORDER MEASURES
• The requirement for travellers arriving by air to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular
test taken within 72 hours, or a positive test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival, now applies to
travellers arriving to Canada by land as well, with some exceptions. For travellers arriving by land, the
negative COVID-19 molecular test result must be taken in the United States.
• Travellers arriving to Canada by land and air, with some exceptions, are also required to take a
COVID-19 molecular test when they arrive in Canada, and another toward the end of their 14-day
quarantine period.
• Travellers arriving by air, with limited exceptions, need to pre-book and stay up to three nights,
at their own expense, in Government of Canada authorized accommodation at the location of entry
while they await the results of their on-arrival tests.
• On receipt of a negative test result, travellers will be allowed to continue to a suitable place of
quarantine to complete their quarantine period.
• All travellers are required to submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable
quarantine plan, electronically via ArriveCAN before crossing the border or boarding a flight.
• To limit possible exposure of COVID-19 to others, we have introduced more stringent criteria for
suitable quarantine plans to reduce risk of household transmission, particularly to those who work with
at-risk sub-populations.
IF PRESSED ON PRE-DEPARTURE AND PRE-ARRIVAL TESTING
• Pre-departure and pre-arrival testing are helping to reduce the number of travellers arriving in
Canada with COVID-19. This layer of protection is working together with our quarantine approach.
• The goal of these measures is to prevent the introduction of new COVID-19 cases in light of
increased infection rates and new variants of concern.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
• Travellers are responsible for arranging a suitable place to quarantine prior to their arrival in
Canada.
• If no other suitable arrangements to quarantine are possible, individual travellers may be
referred to a federally designated quarantine facility, if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON SECURITY AT FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
• Government of Canada employees and security personnel are stationed within the Designated
Quarantine Facilities to ensure that entry and exit points are secure, as well as to support overall safety
and security within this controlled and monitored facility.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has recently increased the security presence at the
Designated Quarantine Facilities, enhanced security policies and procedures, and increased training to
staff on emergency protocols to support the overall safety of accommodated travellers.
• The Agency continues to support local police in any investigations.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH PROVINCES TO DATE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to collaborate with partners to digitize the
collection of health-related information from passengers pre-arrival through ArriveCAN.
• This allows traveller information to be shared quickly and securely with provinces and territories
- so they can contact travellers for public health follow-up - and with law enforcement to verify
compliance with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the RCMP and provincial and municipal law
enforcement agencies to verify compliance with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order.
• Compliance verification visits by a third party contractor are now underway in all provinces.
• Officials provide information handouts at the border, and contact travellers throughout their
isolation or quarantine period to remind them of the requirements.
• If travellers cannot be reached, or appear non-compliant with isolation or quarantine
requirements, they are referred to local law enforcement for follow-up.
• Failure to comply with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order is an offence
under the Quarantine Act. Penalties could include up to six months in prison and/or $750,000 in fines.
Tickets of up to $3,000 per day may also be issued for non-compliance pursuant to the Contraventions
Act.
• Violating other measures in the Quarantine Act, including exposing another person to serious
disease, can lead to up to three years in prison and/or $1 million in fines.
• The Government is engaging local police to urgently follow-up on cases of individual travellers
who leave the airport and do not comply with testing and quarantine measures. Travellers who refuse to
comply could face a fine of at least $3,000.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
• Public Health Agency of Canada’s Designated Officers are present at 31 Canadian points of entry
that receive international travellers.
• All international air travel to Canada is being directed to one of four airports (Vancouver,
Calgary, Toronto, or Montreal).
• As international travel resumes, the Public Health Agency of Canada will increase its public
health presence to 36 points of entry across the country.
• All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7 access to support from the Public
Health Agency of Canada’s Quarantine Officers through the remote Central Notification System.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S APPROACH TO TRAVEL ADVISORIES AND EASING OF BORDER MEASURES
• Canada’s Travel Health Notice was updated on January 16, 2021, to advise that all travellers
arriving from, or who have spent time in the United Kingdom, South Africa or Brazil in the 14 days
before they enter Canada are subject to secondary screening and enhanced measures, including
increased scrutiny of quarantine plans.
• The Government of Canada continues to advise against all non-essential travel outside of
Canada, including all cruise ship travel, until further notice.
• We continue to evaluate the evolving COVID-19 pandemic to inform our travel advice to
Canadians.
• As we explore a gradual approach to reopening international travel, we must consider:
o The capacity of our public health system;
o Provincial and territorial perspectives;
o Our capacity at the borders; and,
o The epidemiological situation within Canada and in other countries.
BACKGROUND
The continued identification of new variants around the globe, with demonstrated increases in
transmissibility, has introduced new risks to manage.
Between February 3, 2020, and February 14, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 45 Emergency
Orders under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce
risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce
the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
On Arrival Testing, Mandatory Hotel Stays and Enhanced Quarantine
On January 29, 2021, the Government of Canada announced enhanced testing and quarantine
measures, in addition to the pre-departure testing requirement already in place. All air travellers to
Canada, with limited exceptions, will face additional costs, including a COVID-19 molecular test on
arrival, as well as a hotel stay when they return to Canada.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to:
• submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan, electronically
via ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
• take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and,
• take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
As of February 22, 2021, travellers arriving by air are required to reserve and stay in a government-
authorized accommodation (hotel) for up to three nights, at their own cost, while they await the results
of the COVID-19 molecular test they took on arrival, before completing the rest of their mandatory 14-
day quarantine period.
To ensure travellers’ awareness and compliance with quarantine requirements, the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) is working with security companies to help complete compliance checks for
travellers arriving in Canada. Employees of these companies were trained by PHAC and authorized as
Screening Officers under the Quarantine Act. These Screening Officers will visit travellers’ quarantine
locations to establish contact, confirm identity and confirm that travellers are at the place of quarantine
they identified upon entry into Canada.
Travel Advisories
The Government of Canada’s current travel advice to all Canadians is to avoid all non-essential travel
outside of Canada (Level 3) and to avoid all cruise ship travel (Level 3). Although this travel advice is not
binding on Canadians choosing to travel abroad, some travel insurance providers no longer cover travel
booked on or after March 13, 2020, when these advisories came into effect. Canada’s Travel Health
Notice was updated on January 6, 2021 to reflect pre-departure testing requirements, and on January
16 to reflect the countries with variants of concern
Emergency Orders
Currently, the emergency order on the prohibition of entry from the United States (U.S.) is in place until
at least March 21, 2021. The other two emergency orders - prohibition of entry from countries other
than the U.S., and the quarantine, isolation, and other obligations order, are in place until at least April
21, 2021.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and provincial partners to
facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods and services, while continuing to
protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including
recreation and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with
some exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and,
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine ports,
and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers, including
quarantine officers, at 31 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
Testing is available on site at 16 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of March 4, 2021. At land
ports of entry with no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provided two take-home test
swabs kits to every traveller.
Testing Pilots
The Alberta Border Testing Pilot Program is suspended as of February 21, 2021 at 11:59pm EST. The new
federal testing program is utilizing much of the same infrastructure put in place for the voluntary
initiatives in Quebec and Alberta and build on the joint testing frameworks developed by provincial and
federal officials.
Security at Designated Quarantine Facilities
PHAC has enhanced our security presence at DQFs over the past 3 weeks and has developed and
enhanced policies and procedures, and increased training to staff to prevent some escalating situations
and emergency protocols. We continue our efforts to engage Police of Jurisdiction.
Government of Canada employees and security personnel are stationed at designated quarantine
facilities to ensure secured, controlled and monitored entry and exit points. All travellers who must stay
in one of these facilities are provided with information that articulates the details of the quarantine
requirement, including a code of conduct and potential fines for non-compliant behaviour.
On March 8, 2021, a total of 2,598 air travelers were screened at the four airports receiving incoming
passengers, with 101 referred to a designated quarantine facility (DQF). Since February 22, 2021, a total
of 41,088 passengers have been screened at the four airports, and a total of 1,077 have been referred to
a DQF. As of March 6, 2021, a total of 5,887 travellers have been referred to designated quarantine
facilities since the start of COVID19.
Enforcement
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement to ensure that travellers are abiding by the requirement
to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where compliance cannot be confirmed, PHAC
refers these travellers to the RCMP for compliance follow-up by local police. Maximum penalties for
failing to comply with an order under the Quarantine Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation and Other
Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to people who do not comply with the Quarantine
Act, with fines of up to $3,000 for different Quarantine Act offences (this does not apply in AB, SK and
the territories, as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the contraventions regime).
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person, while willfully
or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be liable for a fine of up to $1
million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
CANADA’S PARTICIPATION IN THE COVAX FACILITY
SYNOPSIS
• Canada is a strong supporter of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, a global
procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and timely access to COVID-19 vaccines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why is Canada participating in the COVAX Facility?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and
timely access to COVID-19 vaccines for participating economies.
• In September 2020, the Government of Canada committed approximately $220 million to the
Facility to procure up to 15 million vaccine doses for Canadians.
• To date, Canada has also contributed over $325 million to help COVAX procure and deliver
vaccine doses to priority populations in low- and lower-middle income countries as soon as possible,
particularly healthcare workers and high-risk populations.
• Through COVAX, Canada has access to a large, actively-managed portfolio of COVID-19 vaccine
candidates, diversifying and complementing the bilateral arrangements Canada has negotiated.
• Canada is expected to receive approximately 1.6 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine as its
initial COVAX allocation by the end of May, with as many as 535 thousand doses arriving this month.
• These AstraZeneca doses are in addition to others currently being deployed in Canada, secured
through an agreement with Verity Pharmaceuticals Inc./Serum Institute of India, and other doses to
come from Canada’s bilateral agreement with AstraZeneca.
• Following a thorough regulatory review, this vaccine has been authorized by Health Canada, the
World Health Organization, and other global regulators.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF ASTRAZENECA DOSES CANADA WILL RECEIVE
• Global manufacturing and distribution of vaccines carries uncertainty.
• Canada’s indicative minimum allocation of the AstraZeneca vaccine through COVAX was recently
updated from 1.9 million doses by the end of May to approximately 1.6 million.
• We expect additional doses of the vaccine to be made available in the second half of 2021.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN CANADA WILL RECEIVE ASTRAZENECA DOSES
• Deliveries of this allocation are expected to begin before the end of March and could be
completed by the end of May.
IF PRESSED ON THE ASTRAZENECA SUPPLY CHAIN
• These doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine will be manufactured at a Health Canada approved site
in South Korea.
IF PRESSED ON WHY CANADA IS RECEIVING DOSES THROUGH COVAX
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism to support the development and
equitable distribution of safe, effective and accessible COVID-19 vaccines for all participating
economies–both high-income and developing.
• Canada has contributed over $325 million to ensure that COVAX is able to procure and deliver
vaccine doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare workers and high risk populations, in
low and lower middle income countries as soon as possible.
• With this support, the COVAX Facility has begun delivering vaccine doses to the world. This is a
major win for us all.
• In an effort to secure a diverse portfolio of vaccine candidates for Canadians, and as part of its
vaccine options chosen via COVAX, Canada selected the AstraZeneca vaccine candidate prior to having
established a direct, formal agreement with the manufacturer.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE NATIONALISM
• Canada is committed to global collaboration to end this pandemic. We have contributed over
$325 million to secure and deploy COVID-19 vaccine doses for the COVAX Advanced Market
Commitment (AMC) for 92 low- and middle-income countries.
• The COVAX Facility is designed to provide timely access to vaccines for all participants, using an
equitable allocation framework to share scarce doses across countries so that all participants achieve a
measure of protection.
• To complement Canada’s participation in COVAX, we have secured bilateral agreements,
recognizing that the Facility is not designed to provide full coverage for any participants’ population.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SURPLUS VACCINE DOSES
• In December, the Prime Minister committed to Canada sharing surplus COVID-19 vaccine doses
with the world, should we receive more doses than necessary.
• We expect to have a better sense of any potential supply in excess of Canada’s needs, including
possible options through the COVAX Facility, as additional vaccine candidates are reviewed by Health
Canada for authorization, and as we confirm supply schedules and domestic deployment plans.
• Canada will work closely with our international partners, including other countries, Gavi, the
COVAX Facility, and vaccine manufacturers, to explore all possible options to ensure doses get to people
around the world who need them.
• As part of the $75 million announced in December 2020, Canada has provided Gavi up to $5
million to establish a mechanism to manage the global sharing of vaccines if and when there is excess
supply. This mechanism for sharing will be part of the COVAX Facility.
BACKGROUND
COVAX Overview
• The COVAX Facility is a global pooled procurement mechanism for COVID-19 vaccines designed
to foster equitable global vaccine access to help end the acute phase of the pandemic. It is co-led by
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), and the World
Health Organization (WHO). The COVAX Facility is aiming to develop an actively managed portfolio of
around 10 vaccine candidates to secure 2 billion vaccine doses for the world by the end of 2021.
• Canada has committed approximately $220 million to the COVAX Facility to procure up to 15
million vaccine doses for people in Canada. Canada is also contributing over $325 million to ensure that
COVAX is able to procure and deliver vaccine doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare
workers and high-risk populations, in low- and lower-middle income countries as soon as possible.
Securing doses for Canadians
• Canada’s participation in COVAX is through an ‘optional purchase model’, providing flexibility to
ensure that any doses obtained through COVAX are well-aligned with doses obtained through bilateral
agreements. Canada’s Vaccine Task Force has been engaged to provide advice on which vaccines Canada
should select.
• On February 26, 2021, COVAX confirmed that Canada would receive 1,624,800 doses of
AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 vaccine as its initial COVAX allocation. Of this total, 535,200 doses are expected
to arrive by the end of March and the remaining 1,089,600 doses are expected between April and the
end of May.
• Additional doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine could be made available through COVAX in the
second half of 2021.
• These doses would come in addition to the 2 million doses Canada has secured through an
agreement with Verity Pharmaceuticals Inc./Serum Institute of India and the 20 million doses Canada
secured through an advance purchase agreement directly with AstraZeneca.
Bilateral Advance Purchase Agreements
• The Government has already announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven
leading vaccine candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca (as well as the Verity
Pharmaceutical Inc./Serum Institute of India version of the AstraZeneca vaccine),
Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
• The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on it successfully completing clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to oversee the
coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys and immune system research that will tell us
how widely the virus has spread in Canada; provide reliable estimates of potential vulnerabilities in
Canadian populations; and provide details on infection-acquired and vaccine-induced immunity. At this
time, the results of these efforts indicate that the level of COVID-19 immunity remains very low across
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
Why did the Government of Canada establish an Immunity Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada established the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to determine how
widespread COVID-19 infection is in the Canadian population with a $300 million investment for this
work over two years.
• Our understanding of the levels of immunity in our population and in groups at higher risk of
infection, such as health care workers and older Canadians, supports our public health response, will
inform our work in preventing the spread of COVID-19 and provide evidence to inform vaccine delivery.
• Now that vaccines are being delivered to Canadians, the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force’s
studies will help us understand more about immunity in our population. Current levels of immunity in
the general population in Canada are still very low.
IF PRESSED
• The membership of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force includes partners from provincial and
territorial Ministries of Health, as well as experts from across the country.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is administering funding to support the studies
recommended by the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force.
• The Task Force is coordinating organisations across the country to contribute their testing
results to a “Sero-Tracker”, a web portal that summarises serological studies from around the world.
• Statistics Canada and Canadian Blood Donor organizations are contributing to the efforts of the
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities through nation-wide seroprevalence surveys.
• Studies of groups at higher risk of infection, such as health care workers, the elderly in Long
Term Care Facilities, children in schools, and inmates in correctional facilities are launching now to
determine the immunity levels in these vulnerable populations and the impacts of vaccine roll-out.
BACKGROUND
Serology Levels in Canada
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of large numbers of
people provide the data needed to understand the scale of infection in the Canadian population.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific groups can help to
direct proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or even disease-preventing
therapies should they become available, and inform targeted surveillance efforts to contain and stop
further outbreaks. Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec are conducting ongoing studies to assess
antibody levels from donor blood in all 10 provinces.
The Task Force website hosts a web portal called “Sero-Tracker”, which summarises serological studies
from around the world. Other organisations across the country are all actively contributing their testing
results to the larger national data.
To date, results from the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force funded studies and other initiatives indicate
that the levels of immunity in the general population in Canada are still very low, which is comparable to
data from other countries.
Government Initiatives
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19 serology surveillance and
targeted research studies, has been established to catalyze, support, and harmonize the design and
rapid implementation of population-based studies that will generate reliable first estimates of SARS-
CoV-2 immunity, overall and in vulnerable and unique populations across Canada.
The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force reflects key agencies of the Government of
Canada and includes representation from several provincial Ministries of Health as well as experts from
across Canada in matters related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology, infectious diseases,
public health, and clinical medicine.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website provides details of activities and findings, connects and
engages scientists within Canada and globally, and links with CanCOVID Network, a platform mandated
by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor to expedite communication and collaboration between the scientific,
healthcare and policy communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force engages various groups for input and advice, including an
Indigenous Advisory Circle, Federal, Provincial and Territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health, and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Statistics Canada is contributing to the efforts of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities with its
November 2, 2020 rollout of the pan-Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey to measure SARS-
CoV-2 antibodies and collect other COVID-19 related health information.
COVID-19 VARIANTS OF CONCERN
SYNOPSIS
• Several COVID-19 variants of concern have emerged internationally. As of March 4, the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is aware of three variants of concern present in Canada: the B.1.1.7
variant (first identified in the United Kingdom) the B.1.351 variant (first identified in South Africa), and
the P.1 variant (first identified in Brazil). PHAC, in collaboration with international partners, continues to
closely monitor COVID-19 variants.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada monitoring and addressing emerging COVID-19 variants?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is closely monitoring emerging COVID-19 variants of
concern.
• We are aware of COVID-19 variants of concern circulating internationally, three of which have
been identified in Canada.
• Furthermore, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research is mobilizing the research community
by investing up to $25M in support of SARS-CoV-2 variant research that will inform strong public health
policies, effective vaccines and treatments, and protect the health of all Canadians.
• We are also working with international partners, including the World Health Organization, to
build on what they are learning and better understand the variants of concern and their impacts.
• Research is ongoing, and we will continue to communicate information to Canadians as our
knowledge develops.
IF PRESSED ON VARIANTS
• All viruses mutate over time, and the virus that causes COVID-19 will also naturally mutate (i.e.,
change the genetic material in the virus).
• Not all virus mutations are of concern.
• “Variants of concern” are mutations that have a potential or confirmed impact on the
characteristics of the virus.
• A variant is “of concern” when it affects:
o Disease spread;
o Disease severity;
o Tests used to detect the virus; or,
o Vaccines and treatments.
• The variant first identified in the United Kingdom is the predominant variant circulating in
Canada, with ongoing efforts at borders to contain the variants first identified in South Africa and Brazil.
• We are closely monitoring the potentially significant mutations in three lineages of COVID-19,
known as B.1.427 or B.1.429, (first identified in California) and B.1.526 (first identified in New York
State). Scientists are evaluating these key mutations and the associated studies, so these are currently
categorized as “variants under investigation” rather than variants of concern.
• Canada is closely tracking the B.1.525 variant (first identified in Nigeria) under investigation in
British Columbia (which is currently not a variant of concern). At this time, there is no evidence that the
variant results in greater transmissibility or severity.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACTS OF COVID-19 VARIANTS OF CONCERN
• There is no conclusive evidence that the variants of concern identified in Canada to date impact
testing devices used in Canada.
• We are aware that vaccine manufacturers are investigating the impacts of these variants on
their vaccines.
• There are reports that certain types of vaccines may be less effective against the variants of
concern first identified in South Africa and Brazil. Current evidence suggests mRNA vaccines will
continue to be effective against B.1.1.7 (the variant first identified in the United Kingdom).
• Given the limited data on the new variants of concern, more research is needed to confirm
these early findings.
• Early data show the variants of concern first identified in the United Kingdom and South Africa
are associated with increased transmissibility.
• We are aware of reports from the United Kingdom that the variant of concern first identified
there may be associated with an increased risk of death.
• We continue to monitor the emerging evidence with domestic and international partners.
IF PRESSED ON PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
• The public health measures we have been practicing continue to be effective in preventing the
spread of COVID-19, including the variants of concern.
• We need to maintain the strictest vigilance in our public health measures and individual
practices.
• This will help to prevent these variants from re-accelerating the pandemic and making it much
more difficult to control.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to recommend a “layered” approach to personal
preventive practices, with multiple measures used at once, as the most effective way of protecting
yourself and others.
• We continue to use all evidence and models available to help us identify which combinations of
public health measures are most effective to help us control the pandemic, including the spread of
variants of concern.
• Some provinces and territories are implementing additional measures to reduce the chance of
variants of concern spreading in the community – for example, Alberta has provided new direction on
quarantine periods for contacts of cases infected with variants of concern.
• Each province and territory will continue to make plans according to the unique circumstances
they are experiencing within their jurisdictions.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER AND TRAVEL MEASURES
• Since February 15, 2021, travelers arriving by land to Canada, with some exceptions, are
required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result within 72 hours of pre-arrival, or
a positive test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival.
• In addition, as of February 22, 2021, travelers arriving by land or air, with some exceptions, are
required to:
o take a COVID-19 molecular test upon arrival and toward the end of the 14 day
quarantine;
o submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan before
crossing the border or boarding a flight; and,
o reserve prior to departure to Canada a 3-night stay in a government-authorized hotel
(for air passengers).
IF PRESSED ON LABORATORY WORK
• The National Microbiology Laboratory collaborates with international laboratories to monitor
and assess emerging COVID-19 variants of concern.
• The Global Health Security Initiative’s Lab network supports countries, including Canada, with
access to different COVID-19 strains for research and information sharing purposes.
• In April 2020, the Government of Canada contributed $40 million to support the creation of the
Canadian COVID-19 Genomics Network to help understand the genetic variations of the COVID-19 virus
as it evolves.
• The Network provides Canadian public health authorities with important genome sequencing
data, and also coordinates all COVID-19 genome sequencing efforts across Canada.
• The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is also investing up to $25M to scale up research to
increase our understanding of emerging variants, support research coordination in Canada and with
partners globally, and provide decision makers with rapid guidance regarding drug therapy, vaccine
effectiveness, and other public health strategies.
IF PRESSED ON VARIANTS OF CONCERN STRATEGY
• On February 12, the Government of Canada announced an investment of $53 million in an
integrated Variants of Concern Strategy to increase our capacity to find and track variants of concern.
• This national strategy leverages existing laboratories and expertise to drive public health
investigations and take rapid public health action.
• This partnership involves the Public Health Agency of Canada's National Microbiology
Laboratory, Health Canada, Genome Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
• To implement the Strategy:
- The National Microbiology Lab is providing $20 million, and the Canadian COVID-19
Genomics Network is providing $8 million, to increase genomic sequencing and real-time data sharing
capacity.
- The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is also providing up to $25 million to
increase our understanding of emerging variants and provide decision makers with rapid guidance for
drug therapy, vaccine effectiveness, and other public health strategies.
• The Variants of Concern Strategy is part of our science and evidence-based response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• As COVID-19 variants of concern continue to emerge, Canada will be prepared to detect, track,
and treat these new cases.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada is closely monitoring genetic variation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The
Canadian and global medical, public health and research communities are actively evaluating these
genetic changes to better understand the potential implications in terms of transmission, clinical
presentation and vaccine and therapeutics development.
Monitoring genetic variations combined with interprovincial and international spread of the virus will
become increasingly important when public health measures are slowly lifted and cross-border travel
resumes. Variants of COVID-19 are important to monitor for patterns of transmission (for example, in
different age groups), if more severe outcomes are observed, if testing devices can detect the variants,
and whether vaccines and therapeutics will continue to be effective.
A detailed characterization of genetic variations can also help researchers to:
• understand the viral and host mechanisms leading to disease and recovery;
• understand how it spreads through populations and other potential hosts; and,
• help identify suitable drug and vaccine targets.
As genetic variants become established in a population, they form a lineage (with a common ancestor
and descendants) that can be used to inform the origin of new cases. By comparing viral genome
sequences, scientists can monitor the spread of these established lineages in Canada. The genomic data
from identified cases can also provide additional evidence to identify related cases or matches in cluster
investigations, especially when contact tracing is not available or inconclusive.
To date, we are aware of several COVID-19 variants circulating internationally including variants of
concern first observed in the United Kingdom (B.1.1.7), South Africa (B.1.351), Brazil (P.1), as well as
other variants identified in Nigeria, Japan, and the United States. As of March 4, 2021, the B.1.1.7
variant has been reported in 97 countries, the B.1.351 variant has been confirmed in 53 countries, and
the P.1 variant has been identified in 26 countries.
In Canada, as of March 4, the B.1.1.7 variant has been identified in all Canadian provinces; the B.1.351
variant has been identified in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and
Nova Scotia; and the P.1 variant has been identified in Ontario. While initially, most of the variant of
concern cases reported in Canada were directly or indirectly associated with international travel (i.e.,
the traveler, or a close contact of the traveler), there now is evidence of community transmission of the
B.1.1.7 and/or B.1.351 variants of concern in Ontario, Alberta, British Columbia, Québec, Saskatchewan,
and Newfoundland and Labrador.
We are aware of a recent report from the United Kingdom that the variant first identified there may be
associated with an increased risk of mortality. We continue to monitor the emerging evidence with
domestic and international partners.
There is emerging concern that certain vaccines, including the mRNA vaccines, may have decreased
efficacy against the B.1.351 and P.1 variants. On January 20, laboratory results indicated that the Pfizer
vaccine is likely to protect against B.1.1.7, as well as B.1.351. However, on February 2, a study presented
preliminary data that suggested the vaccine may be less effective against the B.1.351 variant. On
January 24, Moderna reported that early laboratory tests suggest antibodies triggered by the Moderna
vaccine can recognize and fight the new variants, but may potentially be less effective against the
B.1.351 variant (though still above the threshold that is thought to be protective); the company noted
that more studies are needed to confirm this is true for people who have been vaccinated. On January
25, Moderna announced it is designing a booster shot to target the B.1.351 variant.
On January 29, Novavax reported that its vaccine candidate was more than 85% effective against the
background SARS-CoV-2, but noted decreased efficacy of less than 50% against the B.1.351 variant. On
January 30, Johnson & Johnson reported that a single shot of its vaccine was 66% effective overall in a
large trial across three continents; however, there were wide differences by region, and efficacy reached
57% in South Africa, where the B 1.351 made up 95% of the COVID-19 cases reported in the trial. The
Government of Canada signed advance purchase agreements with Novavax and Johnson & Johnson in
August 2020, though at this time, neither vaccine candidate is approved for use in Canada (pending
Health Canada authorization).
Research is ongoing regarding the impact of variants on the effectiveness of authorized drugs.
Preliminary results have shown that bamlanivimab (treatment) is expected to be rendered ineffective by
the B.1.351 variant.
CIHR is currently investing up to $25M to fund three complementary initiatives aimed to support global
efforts to address SARS-CoV-2 variants:
o Initiative 1: The Supplementary funding for CIHR funded COVID-19 researchers studying variants
Funding Opportunity will provide supplementary funding for CIHR-funded COVID-19 researchers
studying variants to accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and
align efforts in this field. This initiative represents an investment of $4.9 and was announced on January
29, 2021.
o Initiative 2: Priority funding of applications focusing on SARS-CoV-2 variants Funding
Opportunity will leverage the Fall 2020 Project Grant competition to invest in applications specifically
addressing SARS-CoV-2 variants across all pillars of research. This initiative represents an investment of
approximately $25.2 million in 52 research projects and was announced on March 12, 2021.
o Initiative 3: Funding of a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research that will enable the
rapid support of research activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and
population health threats of emerging variants of concern. This $9M investment was launched and
announced on February 12, 2021.
On February 2, as an additional measure to reduce community spread of variants, Alberta announced
that if someone who has tested positive for a COVID-19 variant chooses to stay home during their
isolation period, their household contacts will now need to stay at home as well in quarantine, until 14
days have passed from the end of the case's isolation period, for a total of 24 days. The past
requirement was 14 days total, set in place to cover the incubation period of the virus.
On February 12, the Government of Canada announced plans to increase our capacity to find and track
variants in the country by investing $53 million in an integrated Variants of Concern Strategy. This will
help rapidly scale up our surveillance, sequencing and research efforts. This national strategy brings
together public health and genomic sequencing along with epidemiology, immunology, virology, and
mathematical modelling. Funding will expand upon existing public health networks to establish regional
clinical and public health teams to quickly identify and characterize variants of concern. Through the
Strategy, we will also standardize data sharing across Canada and facilitate the access of information on
the variants from national and international databases. The funding will also create a research network
to complement surveillance efforts and public health actions as part of an integrated team, and provide
key information on the biological relevance of the variants to inform public health decisions.
PROTECTING THE ROLLOUT OF CANADA’S COVID-19 IMMUNIZATION PLAN AGAINST CYBERSECURITY
THREATS
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is working to protect the rollout of Canada’s COVID-19
Immunization Plan against cybersecurity threats.
KEY MESSAGES
• The urgent need to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic has created a global environment of
anxiety and competition for vaccines and resources.
• Hostile actors are seeking to take advantage of this period of uncertainty, for instance to steal
vaccine research, disrupt supply and spread disinformation.
• Cybersecurity threats are also a concern with key partners such as the United States and the
United Kingdom. This is an issue affecting every major actor responding to the pandemic.
• The Government of Canada takes these threats very seriously.
• Embedded in the Agency’s National Operations Centre, Canadian Armed Forces logistics experts
are fully aware of the threats posed by hostile cyber activities. They are in communication with cyber
experts from Communications Security Establishment Canada as well as other partners in the security
community to monitor the cyber landscape.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada remains dedicated to delivering vaccines safely and securely
to destinations throughout Canada.
• Canadians can help fight disinformation and other cyber threats by consulting reliable sources
for their news and information, such as the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security website.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian health sector is considered a key critical infrastructure that needs to be protected against
disruptions, whether caused by national disasters or hostile activities. It includes research and
development; intellectual property; digital networks and health data; supply chain and distribution;
pharmaceutical drugs (such as therapeutics and vaccines); medical and protective equipment; and
healthcare buildings and infrastructure.
The concept of critical infrastructure refers to processes, systems, facilities, technologies, networks,
assets, and services essential to the health, safety, security or economic well-being of Canadians.
Disruption of critical infrastructure could result in catastrophic loss of life, adverse economic effects, and
significant harm to public confidence.
In the context of the pandemic, hostile actors can be expected to attempt to steal vaccine research,
interfere with the integrity of vaccine supply chains, and spread disinformation in an effort to destabilize
and divide. Social media platforms and readily available cyber tools enable hostile actors to broaden the
scale, speed, range, and impact of their interference activities.
American and British intelligence agencies have publicly expressed concerns about hostile activities
targeting COVID-19 vaccine research. The European Medicines Agency reports being targeted by
malicious cyber activity, and private information technology companies are witnessing similar online
hostile activities.
A community of practice around cyber security has been established within the health sector. It brings
together over 100 stakeholders on a weekly basis with the objective of enhancing our collective
resilience. As part of this forum, Communications Security Establishment Canada shares the latest cyber
threat information, including sensitive information drawn from the latest intelligence available.
As another example of many federal government efforts, last summer, Public Safety Canada, in
partnership with the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and the Public Health Agency of Canada,
developed the Canadian Cyber Security Tool. This tool enables health sector organizations to perform an
easy self-assessment to identify areas for improvement in their cyber security posture.
NACI RECOMMENDATIONS FOR DELAYING SECOND DOSES AND INTERCHANGEABILITY OF mRNA
VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) has provided recommendations for the
two approved mRNA vaccines related to delaying second doses in a vaccine series and the
interchangeability of these COVID-19 vaccines.
KEY MESSAGES
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) has provided their expert advice on
dose intervals and the interchangeability of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines.
• NACI currently recommends that efforts be made to provide a complete vaccine series
according to authorized schedules. In exceptional circumstances, an extended interval between doses,
preferably within 42 days, may be considered to maximize the number of individuals benefiting from a
first dose of vaccine.
• On interchangeability, NACI recommends that the vaccine series be completed with the same
COVID-19 vaccine product. If the same vaccine product is not available, the other authorized mRNA
vaccine may be used to complete the series.
• NACI is actively reviewing emerging real-world evidence on the performance of the first dose of
the mRNA vaccines and will continue to update their guidance as required.
IF PRESSED…
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with provincial and territorial governments –
who have the responsibility for planning and implementing COVID-19 vaccination programs in their
jurisdictions – to allocate, distribute and administer vaccines as efficiently, equitably and effectively as
possible.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts in the
fields of pediatrics, infectious diseases, immunology, pharmacy, nursing, epidemiology,
pharmacoeconomics, social sciences and public health, who provides independent advice to the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) on the optimal use of vaccines in Canada.
NACI is providing Recommendations on the Use of COVID-19 Vaccine(s) to help inform the ethical,
equitable and effective roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines in the context of staggered authorization of
vaccines.
Delayed second dose for authorized mRNA vaccines
On December 23, 2020, NACI updated their Recommendations to include an ethical analysis of the
options for the delivery of a second dose of COVID-19 vaccine in the context of a limited vaccine supply.
This analysis was completed using NACI’s established Ethics, Equity, Feasibility and Acceptability (EEFA)
Framework and was informed by PHAC’s Public Health Ethics Consultative Group (PHECG). The analysis
was completed to inform ongoing FPT discussions about holding doses in reserve to ensure timely
administration of second doses, according to manufacturer timelines, versus using initial supply to
immunize a greater number of people in a shorter timeframe, with the risk of second doses being
delayed.
On January 12, 2021, NACI updated their Recommendations to include further guidance related to
extended dose intervals. NACI recommends that efforts be made to provide a complete vaccine series
according to authorized schedules; however, NACI recognizes that provincial and territorial
governments, who are responsible for immunization programs in their jurisdictions, will have to
determine the best way to manage their vaccine supply based on their unique needs and circumstances,
including local epidemiology of the disease, healthcare system capacity and vaccine management
logistics. In exceptional circumstances, jurisdictions may consider an extended interval between doses,
preferably within 42 days, to maximize the number of individuals benefiting from a first dose of vaccine
by delaying the second dose until further vaccine supply is available. Jurisdictions may refer to the
management options section and ethical analysis of options for the delivery of a second dose of COVID-
19 vaccines in NACI’s Recommendations to assess their vaccine distributions options.
Due to limited clinical trial data, there is a high level of scientific uncertainty around the duration of
protection COVID-19 vaccines provide in situations involving an extended interval between vaccine
doses.
As COVID-19 immunization programs continue to roll-out, real-world effectiveness data is becoming
available. There is mounting evidence in Canada and internationally that dose 1 of authorized mRNA
COVID-19 vaccines offers significant protection against symptomatic COVID-19 disease, based on
ongoing vaccine effectiveness monitoring. Evidence to date suggests a vaccine effectiveness of 80% or
higher after dose 1 of authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccines. However, some data suggests that an
immune response typically associated with long-term immunity is not elicited until after the second
dose. There is also currently no data available on how long protection from 1 dose will last or the
maximum interval one can wait between receiving dose 1 and dose 2 before effectiveness begins to
decrease.
NACI is actively reviewing emerging real-word evidence on the performance of the first dose of
authorized COVID-19 vaccines and will continue to update their guidance as required.
Follow-up of vaccine effectiveness in individuals for whom the second dose was delayed or who have
otherwise missed their second dose will continue to be important to inform future recommendations.
Both authorized mRNA vaccines are a two-dose series. The Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine has an authorized
schedule of 21 days, with an alternative schedule of 28 days. The Moderna vaccine has an authorized
schedule of 28 days.
Interchangeability of mRNA vaccines
NACI recommends the vaccine series be completed with the same COVID-19 vaccine product. If the
same vaccine product is not available, the series should be completed with a vaccine of the same type
(i.e. both should be mRNA vaccines). If individuals receive two different vaccine products, active
surveillance of effectiveness and safety will be important.
NACI will continue to update their guidance as new vaccines become authorized for use in Canada and
as evidence on these vaccines evolves.
International Comparisons:
Vaccine planning and prioritization has been underway in many countries by expert groups similar to
NACI, including at the World Health Organization. Every country has their own unique situation that is
informed by their local epidemiology, values and preferences, social infrastructure and healthcare
system. We fully expect different countries to take different approaches based on these factors, and the
supply schedule for their respective COVID-19 vaccines.
INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION ON APPROVALS
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada has a long history of collaborating with international regulators. This has continued
throughout the pandemic, with Health Canada working closely with its international partners to share
information and data on COVID-19vaccines and therapeutics.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is Health Canada collaborating with other international regulators to support and
accelerate the review of COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada has a long history of collaborating with its international counterparts, including
the United Kingdom’s Medicines and Healthcare Products Regulatory Agency, the European Medicines
Agency, and the United States’ Food and Drug Administration.
• Health Canada supports international collaboration, which helps to strengthen regulatory
capacity and increase the availability of medicines.
• International collaboration between regulators also reduces the burden on industry by
promoting harmonization on product specifications and streamlining responses to regulatory questions.
• Throughout this pandemic, Health Canada has continued this collaboration, sharing data and
information with its international partners on COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics under review. These
partnerships and collaborative mechanisms have supported harmonization and rapid regulatory
decision-making.
• More recently, Health Canada has been working closely with international regulators and
manufacturers to assess the impact of the new variants on vaccine efficacy.
IF PRESSED on examples of international collaboration…
• Health Canada joined the pilot phase of the European Medicines Agency’s (EMA) “Opening our
Procedures at EMA to Non-EU Authorities (OPEN)” project on December 18, 2020. The initiative makes it
possible for trusted regulatory authorities outside of the European Union to collaborate with the EMA.
• Health Canada is also an executive committee member of the International Coalition of
Medicines Regulatory Authorities (ICMRA), which provides strategic leadership to address current and
emerging regulatory and safety challenges in human medicines. Along with the World Health
Organization, there are 29 ICMRA regulators participating on the many COVID-19 Working Groups, who
have a key role in aligning public messages related to vaccine trials and vaccine confidence.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the ICMRA has expanded its scope of work to provide a
global strategy for aligning the approaches of regulators to COVID-19 treatments and vaccines, including
by setting minimum standards of efficacy and safety globally.
• Health Canada is a major player in leading and contributing to outcomes of this work.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF VACCINE AUTHORIZATIONS RELATIVE TO INTERNATIONAL COUNTERPARTS
• Health Canada authorized Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna before or within days of other major
regulators.
• In addition, vaccines by AstraZeneca, Janssen, Novavax and Verity Pharmaceuticals/Serum
Institute of India are currently undergoing Health Canada’s regulatory review.
• Although Health Canada collaborates with other trusted regulators, we make our own
independent authorization decisions based on our own regulations. The timing of such decisions is
based on when a submission is made to Health Canada and the review process.
• Health Canada is using an agile regulatory process to review vaccines as quickly as possible while
maintaining its high standard for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• Sites making vaccines for Canada may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the
United States. These differences may result in different timelines for authorization.
BACKGROUND
International collaboration
Since the onset of the pandemic, Health Canada has been actively involved in the ICMRA COVID-19
initiatives. All the ICMRA COVID-19 meeting reports/regulator statements are listed on the ICMRA
website, and stakeholders have used the website information as trusted material on COVID-19 vaccines
and therapeutics. http://www.icmra.info/drupal/en/covid-19
Since the onset of the pandemic, Health Canada has led and participated in numerous ICMRA COVID-19
related working groups and bi-weekly workshops and meetings:
• Head of Agency bi-weekly COVID-19 policy meetings (20 meetings);
• Co-chair ICMRA COVID-19 bi-weekly working group meetings (18 meetings);
• Co-chair workshop on COVID-19 observational research (5 workshops);
• Regulatory workshop on development of COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics and vaccine safety
(5 workshops);
• Five collective statements published on the ICMRA website and on international regulator
websites:
o Regulators collective support to combat COVID-19;
o Guidance on COVID-19 clinical trials;
o WHO/ICMRA joint statement on regulatory alignment for COVID-19 medicines and
vaccines;
o Continuation of COVID-19 clinical trials after vaccine authorization; and
o COVID-19 vaccine confidence (stakeholders and healthcare providers).
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to
global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• I have been engaging with my G7 counterparts on a regular basis to share information on public
health measures, to learn from others’ experiences and best practices and to identify possible joint
actions to tackle this pandemic.
• Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international counterparts, including Germany, the United
States and the United Kingdom, to discuss our respective COVID-19 responses. These discussions are
valuable opportunities to learn from each other and strengthen our domestic and international
responses.
• Technical program staff within my Health Portfolio also regularly engage with their international
counterparts to exchange information and best practices to inform and enhance our response.
• Canada looks forward to continued engagement on global health issues with all relevant
partners as we fight the current COVID-19 pandemic and chart a path forward to strengthen our
collective capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to future health emergencies.
IF PRESSED on Implication of a Potential EU Vaccine Export Transparency Mechanism
• Based on the announcement that was made by the European Commission, the proposed
scheme would not restrict exports, but would require all companies producing vaccines against COVID-
19 in the EU to provide early notification whenever they want to export vaccines to countries outside of
the EU.
• Canada is working closely with its partners in the European Commission and vaccine shipments
have continued to receive authorization for export.
IF PRESSED on the U.S. Relationship with the WHO and PAHO
• Canada remains strongly committed to constructive engagement in multilateral institutions,
including the WHO and PAHO, which are essential to help us accomplish together more than any one
country can do alone.
• We will continue to work with other Member States to ensure that the WHO and PAHO are
strong, accountable, transparent and well-governed institutions.
• We welcome the decision by U.S. President Joe Biden to reverse the U.S. withdrawal from the
WHO and their recommitment to multilateralism. We look forward to working with the new U.S.
administration on a range of issues, including on how to strengthen the WHO’s work in global health
emergency preparedness and response.
IF PRESSED on Allegations of Undue Chinese Influence in WHO
• We have valued the WHO’s global leadership and coordination during this pandemic, and have
confidence that the organization is working with all Member States, for all Member States.
• Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest in making it a strong, accountable,
inclusive and well-governed institution, whose actions and recommendations are guided by Member
States, and the best available science and evidence.
• We will continue to actively participate in oversight and accountability review processes.
• In particular, we look to the WHO to work closely with China to understand the zoonotic origins
of the virus – this understanding could help prevent future pandemics.
• Canada is fully committed to supporting the WHO-convened mission so that it is a success, and
we have encouraged China to be open and transparent as part of this important process.
• As the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve around the world, Canada will continue to work
closely with its international partners, including the WHO and China, to reduce risks to Canadians and
the global community.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global response
• As highlighted in the Resolution adopted at the World Health Assembly in May 2020, Canada
supports a comprehensive review of the global response.
• We welcome the work of the Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and Response,
which is leading an impartial and independent evaluation of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic,
and look forward to reviewing their recommendations when they are released in May. We are pleased
that a prominent Canadian, Dr. Joanne Liu, is contributing her significant global health expertise and
experience.
• Canada will continue to engage in this review process – and with the global community – to
identify important lessons learned from this pandemic. This includes pressing State Parties to meet their
obligations under the International Health Regulations (i.e. the sharing of timely, accurate and
sufficiently detailed public health information).
IF PRESSED on our working relationship with the WHO
• As a founding member, Canada is a strong supporter of the WHO. Canada engages with the
WHO to advance domestic and international health priorities, share Canadian expertise on health issues,
and protect the health of Canadians and people around the world.
• The WHO has a critical role in the COVID-19 response as the key global public health body.
Canada values the WHO’s leadership and coordination role in the COVID-19 response, including their
role overseeing the International Health Regulations, driving collaborative global research efforts
towards new vaccines and effective treatments, working with all actors to address shortages of critical
medical supplies and personal protective equipment, and supporting the most vulnerable countries in
their preparedness and response efforts.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
• I look forward to working with the Biden administration, including my counterpart, the new
Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services, to fulfill the commitments set out in the
Prime Minister’s Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work with their
counterparts at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Health and Human Services, to
strengthen our efforts to control the pandemic, collaborate on public health responses, and build
resilience against future outbreaks.
BACKGROUND
Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19,
which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S. Canada
has also participated in various G20 discussions on ways to strengthen our collective capacities to
prevent, prepare and respond to future health emergencies. Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s
impact across sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers are engaging regularly with their
international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Employment.
In addition, technical staff of the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) have engaged with their
counterparts in a variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally (e.g., World Health Organization
(WHO), U.S. Centres for Disease Control Global Health Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network (GOARN)), to exchange information and best practices that have informed and
enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Research and Development
Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role in establishing the
WHO global research and innovation roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is also supporting the Canadian
Treatments for COVID-19 Trial (CATCO), which is contributing to the WHO SOLIDARITY trial to find
effective treatments for COVID-19. CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Diseases (GloPID-R), which
continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-moving collaboration that is needed across a multiplicity
of players domestically and internationally.
Global Equitable Access to COVID-19 Health Technologies
Canada co-hosted the Coronavirus Global Response launch event in May 2020 in support of the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A) – a global collaboration between governments, scientists,
businesses, philanthropists and global health organizations to accelerate development, production, and
equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. Canada has pledged a total of $940
million to support ACT-A’s goals and is also a member (represented by Minister Gould) of the Facilitation
Council for the Accelerator, which provides support for its work through political leadership, advocacy,
and mobilization of additional resources.
Within ACT-A, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) and
the WHO are leading a pooled procurement mechanism for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines called
the COVAX Facility. This pools the resources of economies to make advanced purchase agreements for a
number of promising vaccine candidates. The Facility includes both low- and lower-middle income
countries, whose purchases will be financed by official development assistance through the COVAX
Advanced Market Commitment (AMC), and upper-middle and high-income countries who self-finance
their own purchase of vaccine doses for domestic use. The Facility is a strong multilateral mechanism
that supports timely access to vaccines for all participating economies.
In September 2020, Canada signed a binding commitment to participate in the Facility through an
optional purchase agreement that could see Canada acquire vaccine doses through the Facility for up to
20% of the Canadian population. Canada has committed an additional $325 million to the COVAX
Advance Market Commitment for vaccine procurement, distribution, and delivery for low- and middle-
income countries. By joining, Canada is contributing to collective efforts towards a safe, effective, and
affordable COVID-19 vaccine, in line with the Prime Minister’s commitment to help ensure that once a
vaccine is developed, it will be produced at a scale and cost accessible to all countries. As of December
15, 98 high-income economies have joined the Facility; alongside the lower-income countries
participating in the COVAX AMC, there is a total of 190 economies that will benefit from the COVAX
Facility.
On December 18, 2020, the Prime Minister confirmed Canada’s commitment to share potential surplus
COVID-19 vaccine doses with the world should Canada receive more than necessary. International
pressure continues to build for high income countries who have started domestic vaccine roll out to
support equitable access goals by sharing doses or taking other actions to support increased supply. At
the WHO Executive Board meeting in January 2021, the WHO Director General noted that “the world is
on the brink of a catastrophic moral failure” due to COVID-19 vaccines being rolled-out in mostly high-
income countries, with some countries prioritizing bilateral deals and manufacturers prioritizing
regulatory approval in high income countries rather than submitting full dossiers to the WHO.
Global Vaccine Supply Issues
In response to delivery delays by AstraZeneca and a temporary reduction of Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine in
the EU, the European Commission (EC) announced on January 25, 2021, the proposal of an export
transparency scheme, whereby all companies producing vaccines against COVID-19 in the EU will have
to provide early notification whenever they want to export vaccines to countries outside of the EU. The
proposed scheme would not restrict exports, but would make companies file a notification in advance of
its exports to non-EU countries. The proposed mechanism appears to be quite different from the export
authorization scheme, such as the temporary measure the EC adopted in March 2020 to restrict the
exports of personal protective equipment (PPE) from the EU. Such scheme required early notifications
to be assessed against supply/demand considerations and an export authorization to be granted by
Member State authorities. It is unclear whether the EC would impose such restrictions, particularly if it
believes the EU is being unfavourably treated with respect to supply. Canada is seeking further
information on the timelines for the EC’s proposal and details for its implementation. There could be an
interim measure while Member States are consulted on the potential adaptations and scope of the
mechanism and future steps. It was noted, however, that humanitarian efforts would not be affected by
this.
World Health Organization (WHO)
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the WHO, averaging over $70
million annually for the past 10 years in assessed and voluntary contributions to support the work of the
organization.
The WHO has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the COVID-19
response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their preparedness and response efforts.
Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and evidence-based guidance during this rapidly evolving
pandemic. With the Region of the Americas at the epicenter of the pandemic, Canada continues to
support the WHO regional office of the Americas (PAHO) in its critical coordinating and technical role in
responding to the health challenges that the region is facing.
On May 29, 2020, President Trump announced that the U.S. was terminating its relationship with the
WHO due to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the pandemic and a perceived bias towards
China. On July 7, 2020, the White House provided the Secretary-General of the United Nations with
formal notice of its intention to withdraw from the WHO, which would have come into affect 1 year
after this notice. On January 20, 2021, President Biden reversed the U.S. withdrawal from the WHO and
committed to resuming regular engagement and fulfilling its financial obligations to the organization. On
January 21, 2021, Dr. Anthony Fauci delivered a special address to the WHO Executive Board expressing
the renewed U.S. commitment to multilateralism, diplomacy, gender equality, sexual and reproductive
health and rights, and global health.
Canada has consistently expressed support for an independent, comprehensive review of the global
response, which would consider the actions of all actors and partners, including the WHO, undertaken at
an appropriate time.
At the 73rd session of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2020, Canada co-sponsored a
resolution on COVID-19 that called for an independent, comprehensive review of the WHO-coordinated
international health response to COVID-19.
As follow up to the resolution, the WHO Director General announced in July 2020 the creation of the
Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPR), co-chaired by former New Zealand
Prime Minister and UNDP Administrator Helen Clark, and former President of Liberia, Ellen Johnston
Sirleaf. Canadian physician and former president of MSF International, Dr. Joanne Liu, was selected as
one of the eleven panelists by the IPPR co-chairs in September 2020. At the 148th meeting of the WHO
Executive Board in January 2021, the IPPR co-chairs provided an overview of their interim findings,
stressing that a “course correction is needed now”. They pointed to a number of failings which require
action, including: the failure to prepare adequately for pandemic threats; preparedness metrics that did
not correspond with country responses; and, inadequate data and tools for rapid detection and
response. The IPPR is expected to present its final recommendations to WHO Member States in May
2021.
On January 14, 2021 a team of WHO-convened international experts began an investigation into the
zoonotic origins of COVID-19. The joint international team was comprised of 17 Chinese experts and 17
international experts from ten countries (no Canadians). In terms of preliminary findings, the experts
were unable to determine the origins of the virus, although they concluded that the most likely scenario
was from an animal host (likely a bat) via an intermediary host species. China held a highly orchestrated
press briefing on the mission on February 10th, and continues to promote the theory that the virus
could have entered the Wuhan market via imported frozen food packaging and that it was circulating in
other parts of the world before December 2019. After the Wuhan press briefing, the US and UK made
public statements of concern on the mission and the ways its findings were communicated. The full
report of the investigation is expected in March.
In May 2020, the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health
Emergencies Programme, which provides oversight and monitoring of the development and
performance of the Programme, published an Interim report on WHO’s response to COVID-19: January-
April 2020. The Interim report was a compilation of observations of how various structures and
processes functioned during the early months of the pandemic. The IOAC is expected to provide their
next report and set of recommendations at the 74th World Health Assembly in May 2021.
Dr. Theresa Tam is a member of the IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity and exercise their
responsibilities with full regard for the paramount importance of independence.
COVID-19 MEDICAL DEVICE AUTHORIZATIONS
SYNOPSIS
• The Interim Order respecting the importation and sale of medical devices for use in relation to
COVID-19 (Interim Order No. 1) was set to expire in March 2021. On March 1, 2021, Health Canada
issued a second interim order (Interim Order No. 2) to extend the flexibilities of the first so that devices
can continue to be sold and imported in Canada. This ensures accelerate access to certain medical
devices in Canada during the COVID-19 outbreak.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the devices needed during the
COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada understands the need to have a variety of medical devices, including test kits to
meet Canadians’ public health needs.
• On March 1, 2021, Health Canada issued new interim orders extending the regulatory
flexibilities for expedited access to COVID-19 medical devices.
• Health Canada will continue to leverage all regulatory tools to ensure Canadians have access to
safe and effective health products to fight COVID-19.
• Since the start of the pandemic, we have authorized more than 600 COVID-19 medical devices
including: testing devices, protective equipment, decontamination devices for NIOSH N95 respirators,
ventilators, reagents, and swabs.
• A medical device is authorized after Health Canada completes a scientific assessment, ensuring
that it meets requirements for safety and effectiveness.
• Early diagnosis is critical to fighting the spread of COVID-19. Health Canada is making it a priority
to review all types of COVID-19 tests, including new innovative testing options.
• Health Canada also continues to expedite applications for medical device establishment licences
for products such as masks, gowns, and respirators.
IF PRESSED … on respirators decontamination
• Extending the use of personal protective equipment through decontamination is one way of
helping Canada meet supply needs.
• Health Canada is looking at ways to safely and effectively decontaminate PPE including single-
use respirators, and medical masks.
• Health Canada has authorized devices to decontaminate respirators under the Interim Order for
Medical Devices.
IF PRESSED… on exceptional import and sale of COVID-19 devices
• The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purposes
helps prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19.
• Under this IO, Health Canada added almost 270 medical devices to the List of Medical Devices
for Exceptional Import and Sale.
• Importers with medical device establishment licences can import these medical devices after
notifying Health Canada five days in advance.
BACKGROUND
On March 1, 2021, the Minister of Health signed the Interim Order No. 2 Respecting the Importation and
Sale of Medical Devices for Use in Relation to COVID-19. IO No. 2 contributes to securing Canada’s
medical device supply chain by:
• providing an expedited pathway for authorizing COVID-19 medical devices; and
• helping to facilitate access to safe and effective COVID-19 devices for health care workers and
other Canadians.
IO No. 2 repeals the Interim order respecting the importation and sale of medical devices for use in
relation to COVID-19, which came into force on March 18, 2020. It maintains many of the flexibilities of
the previous interim order, which are needed to assess evidence that demonstrates the safety and
effectiveness of medical devices. It also continues to allow the importation and sale of COVID-19
medical devices that were authorized under the previous interim order.
As well, IO No. 2 introduces new requirements for medical devices authorized under this new interim
order or the previous interim order:
• for importers and distributors of all medical devices to hold a medical device establishment
licence (MDEL)
• for all manufacturers, importers and distributors to comply with bilingual labelling requirements
These new requirements align with those in the Medical Devices Regulations.
Guidance for new manufacturers of COVID-19 medical devices
Health Canada has published guidance on several topics, including serology tests, ventilators, , swabs,
PPE including face coverings and respirators. Webinars were held with provincial and territorial
healthcare partners, industry and healthcare professionals to provide information and guidance on the
safety, effectiveness and quality requirements for these medical devices. Several new Canadian
manufacturers have received IO authorization for these medical devices.
NACI’S GUIDANCE ON KEY POPULATIONS FOR COVID-19 IMMUNIZATION
SYNOPSIS
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) provides guidance on the prioritization of key
populations for early COVID-19 immunization when initial vaccine supply is limited. NACI released
updated guidance on priority populations for Stage 2 and 3 of vaccine rollout on February 15, 2021.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) has updated its expert guidance
on priority populations for COVID-19 vaccination.
• Based on data indicating that racialized and marginalized populations are disproportionately
affected by COVID-19 disease in Canada, the Committee has included this group as a priority for
vaccination.
• Protecting those most vulnerable to illness, hospitalization and death is central to reducing the
impact of COVID-19 on all Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
• In addition to racialized and marginalized communities, NACI also identifies adults in or from
Indigenous communities, residents and staff in congregate living settings, adults aged 60 and over,
frontline essential workers, including first responders, and essential primary caregivers in their
recommendations.
• These priority groups continue to reflect the evidence on risks of exposure and severe illness in
Canada, along with achieving equity in vaccine roll-out.
• The Committee’s guidance is advisory in nature. Provincial and territorial governments are
ultimately responsible for final sequencing of priority groups for immunization.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with provincial and territorial governments –
who have the responsibility for planning and implementing COVID-19 vaccination programs in their
jurisdictions – to allocate, distribute and administer vaccines as efficiently, equitably and effectively as
possible.
BACKGROUND:
In the early stages of COVID-19 vaccine rollout when supply is limited, it will not be feasible to provide
vaccines to all Canadians immediately. Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is
an external body of experts in the fields of pediatrics, infectious diseases, immunology, pharmacy,
nursing, epidemiology, pharmacoeconomics, social sciences and public health, which provides
independent advice to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) on the optimal use of vaccines in
Canada. NACI provides guidance on key populations for early COVID-19 immunization to help inform
ongoing federal, provincial and territorial planning for the efficient, equitable and effective allocation of
COVID-19 vaccines in Canada.
On November 3, 2020, NACI released Preliminary guidance on key populations for early COVID-19
immunization when initial vaccine supply is limited. NACI reviewed available evidence on COVID-19
transmission and burden of disease, and consulted stakeholders to develop preliminary guidance.
On December 4, 2020, following the receipt of additional information on vaccine characteristics and
delivery schedules, NACI released refined Guidance on the efficient and equitable prioritization of initial
doses of COVID-19 vaccines, further sequencing key populations for early immunization identified in
their initial guidance.
On February 15, NACI released updated guidance on prioritization of key populations for Stage 2 and 3
of vaccine rollout. This guidance is informed by a review of evidence on biological and social risk factors
for severe COVID-19 disease, and builds on the extensive stakeholder engagement previously
completed. NACI also integrates ethical decision-making, including equity, feasibility and acceptability
across all key populations.
In Stage 2, NACI recommends initial doses of authorized COVID-19 vaccines be offered to adults in
racialized and marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19. Racialized and
marginalized populations have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19 within Canada and around
the world due to a number of intersecting equity factors, including systemic barriers to accessing
healthcare. Available data in Canada reveal that ethno-culturally diverse neighbourhoods experience
disproportionately higher rates of COVID-19 infections, deaths, and hospitalizations. For example,
neighbourhoods with the highest proportion of visible minorities (≥25%) had a mortality rate twice as
high as those with the lowest proportion of visible minorities (<1%).
NACI’s guidance is advisory in nature as immunization program planning and delivery decisions fall
under provincial and territorial jurisdiction. Provincial and territorial governments are ultimately
responsible for final sequencing of priority groups for early immunization based on jurisdictional needs
and circumstances, including public health considerations, local epidemiology, healthcare system
capacity and vaccine management logistics.
Indigenous Communities:
The Government of Canada continues to engage Indigenous partners on planning for vaccine programs,
and to determine how to best serve Indigenous peoples, many of whom live in crowded multi-
generational housing. Given the particular challenges some of these communities face, special
consideration will be given to vaccine roll-out in these communities.
International Comparisons:
Vaccine planning and prioritization by expert groups similar to NACI is underway in many countries, and
at the World Health Organization. Every country is unique and is expected to take a different approach
informed by their local epidemiology, values and preferences, social infrastructure and healthcare
systems.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
AND MEDICAL DEVICE PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
The global COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an initial unprecedented shortage of personal protective
equipment (PPE), medical equipment, and supplies. To support the needs of Canada’s frontline
healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination with the provinces and territories,
launched a significant bulk procurement and bolstered the pandemic stockpile, engaging a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers both internationally and through the Government of
Canada’s domestic “Call to Action” to increase domestic production.
As a result of these efforts, the Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving shipments on a daily basis by
air, land and sea, and Canada is now successfully producing Made-in-Canada PPE, medical equipment
and supplies to address the urgent needs of frontline workers, and the safety of Canadians at large.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare workers with the PPE
required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of COVID-19?
• What is the Government of Canada doing to prepare for resurgence and/or mass vaccination
campaign scenarios?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada is continuing to receive a steady supply of PPE with shipments arriving daily, which is
rapidly allocated to provinces and territories.
• As of January 6, Public Services and Procurement Canada has confirmed contracts for a variety
of PPE, medical equipment and supplies including:
o over 187.7 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95 respirators; FFP2);
o 419.9 million surgical masks;
o 60.3 million face shields;
o 1.8 billion pairs of gloves;
o 132.8 million protective gowns; and,
o 40 thousand ventilators.
• We allocate PPE and supplies based on an 80/20 formula, with 80% being allocated to provinces
and territories to distribute within their jurisdiction and 20% to replenish the inventory of the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile. This formula was developed in consultation with provinces and
territories.
In response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories, we are also deploying PPE,
medical equipment and supplies from the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS WORKING TO SECURE A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY
OF PPE IN CANADA
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Health Canada, provinces and territories to
review the supply and demand of PPE, medical equipment and supplies, based on worst-case
epidemiological scenarios, to determine maximum needs.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada are also continuing to work with
provincial and territorial partners to identify supply gaps and ongoing procurement needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE MADE-IN-CANADA VENTILATORS
• As part of the Plan to Mobilize Industry to fight COVID-19, contracts were awarded to five
Canadian suppliers for the procurement of ventilators.
• Current modelling suggests an oversupply of ventilators. The Government of Canada is
currently working with manufacturers to reduce volumes.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorial governments to
develop an allocation strategy for these ventilators.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will also be retaining an inventory of ventilators in the
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to meet future needs of the healthcare sector.
IF PRESSED ON CAE VENTILATORS
• All medical devices received by the Public Health Agency of Canada undergo a quality
assessment process. If a deficiency is identified, the affected units are returned to the manufacturer for
further assessment, repair or replacement as appropriate.
• Health Canada continues to monitor the safety, quality, and effectiveness of all medical devices
for use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and territories
(PTs) can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters and other
public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items
such as: medical equipment and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and
blankets.
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of the frontline health care response to
COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach of interdepartmental
coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, National
Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the Department of National Defense, Public Services and
Procurement Canada (PSPC), Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Canada (ISED).
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to be able to respond in a reasonable manner to the
most common emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement
and management of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• It provides surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient; and
• It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health emergencies, for example,
costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
PHAC acknowledges that the pandemic created unprecedented demand for certain types of supplies.
Canada, like most countries, is applying the lessons learned from the COVID-19 outbreak to our
stockpiling strategies and considering all options going forward to ensure that the most effective
stockpile practices are implemented and maintained.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and warehouses strategically
located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved from nine warehouse locations across Canada
to six. An independent assessment indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’
role as timely surge capacity support.
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS has added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 1 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while obsolete and expired
supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
NESS Funding
In 2010-11, the ongoing annual base funding for the NESS, including salary and operating costs was $5.6
million. By 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS was reduced to $3 million. Additional funding
has historically been provided to the NESS through internal reallocation decisions and incremental
funding decisions through which PHAC has received funding linked to specific purchases, such as a four-
year investment in medical countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began in 2015-16.
More than $5.8 billion has been invested in the NESS since the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Canada for the procurement of PPE, medical equipment and supplies and for logistics and warehousing.
PPE Procurement, Domestic Capacity Building and Distribution
As agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health, PHAC is allocating bulk procured PPE using an 80/20 formula:
80% is distributed to PTs on a per capita basis and the remaining 20% replenishes the inventory of the
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS), including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada
to support the requirements of First Nations on reserve.
Procurement and distribution of PPE for other government departments is led by PSPC.
In addition to original bulk procurement efforts, ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian
industries to increase domestic manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce
equipment and supplies including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role, conducting
technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of Canada technical specifications
for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell website.
Access is further facilitated by Health Canada, by expediting regulatory approvals of products through
the Interim Order (IO) for Medical Devices signed by the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. Health
Canada intends to introduce a second interim order to maintain the flexibilities and regulatory oversight
provided by the current IO until at least the fall of 2021. As the regulatory authority, Health Canada also
continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all medical devices for use in the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as provinces and
territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada. Manufacturers and importers are
also required to notify the Minister of Health of medical device shortages considered critical.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-19 and working
with companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
Health Canada is also modelling PPE, medical equipment and supplies, and supply and demand at
provincial and territorial, as well as pan-Canadian levels, to understand and plan for possible pressure
points across different sectors of the economy and to inform future procurement plans of PPE, medical
equipment and supplies.
In addition, the government is also exploring opportunities for more environmentally conscious federal
PPE, medical equipment and supply procurement.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers and manufacturers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before distribution to PTs. If
PHAC cannot account for the quality of equipment, it is not distributed to the provinces and territories
for frontline healthcare response. This process is supported by testing capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with suppliers to address
issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers in the future once issues are
identified.
Health Canada continues to monitor authorized medical devices for safety and effectiveness after
authorizing them for use in Canada. If concerns arise, Health Canada takes appropriate action to protect
the health and safety of Canadians.
KN95 Respirators
On May 8, 2020, the CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators received by the
Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out of China, 8 million did not meet
the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1
million met specifications, and 1.6 million were pending testing results. The number not meeting
specifications has since increased to approximately 10 million. PSPC has suspended shipments from this
supplier and is pursuing the appropriate recourse on behalf of PHAC. Where possible, supplies that do
not meet specifications are subsequently assessed for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19. Each has
been contracted to provide made-in-Canada ventilators (for a total of up to 38,520): FTI Professional
Grade (FTI), CAE, Canadian Emergency Ventilators/Starfish, Vexos and Thornhill Medical.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Updated information and modelling
indicate that Canada has successfully secured an appropriate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet
its potential needs.
As of January 13, 2021, the Government of Canada has successfully secured over 21,000 ventilators.
Thanks to the efforts of our suppliers and based on latest modelling estimates, Canada now has more
ventilators than would be needed in a worst-case COVID-19 resurgence scenario. As a result, PSPC and
PHAC are working with the manufacturers to identify opportunities to reduce the volumes.
CAE Ventilators
CAE is one of five companies contracted by the Government of Canada to domestically manufacture
ventilators. While the company initially received authorization from Health Canada under the Interim
Order in June 2020, Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada identified quality issues
associated with the initial shipment of ventilators delivered in July 2020. Health Canada required CAE to
issue an amendment to address issues identified. Further to the amendment submitted by CAE, HC
authorized the CAE Air 1 version 1 on September 28, 2020. CAE also submitted an application for the
CAE Air 1 version 2, which Health Canada authorized on November 18, 2020.
PHAC has identified concerns with ventilator quality and reported observations to Health Canada for
regulatory consideration. In December 2020, Health Canada requested and assessed information from
CAE relating to their quality system. The review concluded CAE has an adequate quality management
system in place.
In January 2021, PHAC reported issues with backup power modules within the CAE ventilators. Health
Canada’s assessment of this issue is ongoing.
ADDITIONAL DOSES OF PFIZER VACCINE IN VIALS
SYNOPSIS
On December 9, 2020, Health Canada authorized the Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine in a 5 doses/vial format,
based on information submitted by the manufacturer. Shortly after global authorization, media reports
indicated that it was sometimes possible for healthcare professionals to extract a 6th dose from the
vials. This is mainly due to the required overfill in vials for these types of products to ensure that the
appropriate number of doses can be withdrawn. The vaccine remains unchanged and there is no change
to the volume of vaccine in each vial.
Recently, other regulators have authorized changes to the product labelling, to reflect that a 6th dose
can be obtained when specific types of syringes are used to remove doses, provided they can be
extracted with the specialty syringes called low dead-volume syringes. This also seemed to provide a
solution to supply-constrained vaccine roll-outs.
On February 9, Health Canada authorized a submission from Pfizer-BioNTech to change the Product
Monograph and label for its COVID-19 vaccine to reflect that each vial contains six doses of vaccine,
instead of five. The change comes into effect immediately
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How will Canada ensure that these changes to Pfizer product labeling will not negatively impact vaccine
roll out?
KEY MESSAGES
• As the regulator of Health Products, Health Canada is taking every measure to expedite and
support the availability of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines.
• Health Canada had previously acknowledged in December that a sixth dose could be extracted,
where possible.
• Pfizer-BioNTech has provided Health Canada with new information supporting that six doses can
be reliably extracted from the vials with the use of low dead-volume syringes. The Department has
reviewed the submission and determined it to be acceptable.
• With this label update, the vaccine remains unchanged and there is no change to the volume of
vaccine in each vial.
• Health Canada has issued terms and conditions to Pfizer-BioNTech regarding this labelling
change. Pfizer-BioNTech is required to provide continued educational support, if needed, to vaccine
points of use in Canada to facilitate implementation of the 6 dose per vial label change.
• The company must also provide Health Canada with a quarterly report on product complaints.
• Canadians can be confident that we will still receive all of the vaccine doses we have purchased.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT A 6th DOSE MEANS FOR VACCINE SUPPLIES
The vaccine remains unchanged and there is no change to the volume of vaccine in each vial.
Pfizer-BioNTech will start delivering vials labelled as containing six doses instead of five doses. As a
result, Pfizer-BioNTech will ship fewer vials to Canada, but the country’s overall allotment remains the
same.
BACKGROUND
The Pfizer/BioNTech vaccine was authorized by Health Canada in a 5 doses/vial format, based on
information submitted by the manufacturer in the original application for authorization. Containers of
injectable products are required to have excess volumes to ensure that the appropriate number of
doses can be withdrawn.
Since initial authorization, an additional available dose in the vials has been reported, particularly when
small volume syringes are used to withdraw the 0.3 ml dose.
Pfizer-BioNTech has provided the Department with information supporting that six doses can be reliably
extracted from the vials with the use of low dead-volume syringes. A low dead-volume syringe is
designed to have less space, compared to other syringes, between the needle and the plunger. This
reduces the amount of liquid that is wasted when used for an injection.
Pfizer/BioNTech applied to make changes in the product labelling in Europe and in the US to reflect this
6th dose and that specific syringes should be used. These changes have now been implemented.
PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL VACCINE ALLOCATIONS
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to securing and deploying a sufficient supply of safe and
effective vaccines for all persons in Canada.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada worked with the provinces and territories and Indigenous communities to develop a
vaccine rollout strategy that focuses efforts, in the context of a limited initial vaccine supply, on
protecting those at greatest risk of severe illness, hospitalization, or death.
• To date, the Government has distributed over 2.8 million doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech and
Moderna vaccines to the provinces and territories.
• Recent supply disruption are behind us. Pfizer and Moderna shipments are ramping up
significantly, and the Government expects to receive the 6 million doses of Moderna and Pfizer-
BioNTech vaccines by the end of March 2021, as per the original plan. As well, with Health Canada’s
recent authorization of the AstraZeneca vaccine, we are expecting an additional 2 million doses of this
vaccine from the Serum Institute of Canada, of which 500,000 doses have already arrived in Canada.
• We are continuing to get ready for the big increase in vaccine shipments that we are expecting
to begin in April and anticipate that the provinces and territories will be able to achieve much greater
vaccination coverage, including the vaccination of the additional groups that NACI has recently
recommended be given priority.
• We want to assure Canadians that we are working in close collaboration with the provinces and
territories in order to ensure that all eligible persons in Canada who want to be vaccinated have access
to a safe vaccine by the end of September 2021.
BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. The plan put an emphasis
on six main principles—Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability;
Fairness and Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting.
Based on this model, Canada has remained adaptable, keeping in mind equity and fairness in respect to
all aspects of the vaccine supplies and distribution to the provinces and territories.
Canada has remained engaged and involved with provinces and territories (PT) in order to address any
potential gaps in vaccine allocations, keeping in mind that PT governments are responsible for
administering vaccination programs and determining public health requirements in their jurisdictions.
Canada has secured contracts with vaccine suppliers and conducted regulatory reviews to ensure the
safety of its authorized vaccines. Furthermore, by providing logistics services and by covering the costs
of vaccines, Canada will continue to provide support to PTs, which includes, but is not limited to,
enhancing PT cold-chain capacity.
We will continue to coordinate the delivery of vaccine supplies and will work with PTs to unlock and
optimize resources across the country. Furthermore, federal, provincial and territorial officials, along
with indigenous leaders, are continuing to meet frequently to refine plans for the distribution and
administration of vaccines throughout Canada. Canada’s engagement to date ensures equitable access
to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples as well as distribution of vaccines to Canada’s northern
territories and other remote and isolated areas.
ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), along with provincial and territorial partners, is continually
evaluating and adjusting the response based on the most recent evidence and the current
epidemiological situation. Current public health measures we have been practicing continue to be
effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government adjusting public health measures to address the current situation in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• We are seeing the positive effect of the public health measures we have been practicing, in the
steady decline in COVID-19 activity in Canada.
• These measures continue to be effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19, including
variants of concern.
• Now more than ever, it is important for everyone to continue to maintain strong and effective
personal preventive practices, and:
- Minimize the number of non-essential in-person interactions you have with people from
outside of your immediate household; and
- Keep these interactions:
o as few and as brief as possible; and
o from the greatest physical distance possible.
• Even a single infected person with mild symptoms, or symptoms that are not yet showing, can
start a chain reaction of exposures and infections, both at private gatherings and in public settings.
• Canadians should apply a “layered” approach with multiple measures used at once
• We are continually evaluating the impact of easing and re-instating public health measures, in
collaboration with our provincial and territorial partners, based on the most recent evidence and the
current epidemiological situation.
• We continue to use all evidence and models available on an ongoing basis to help us identify
which combinations of public health measures are most effective to help us control the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCIAL/TERRITORIAL-SPECIFIC MEASURES
• Provinces and territories implement public health measures for their own jurisdictions.
• These measures may vary to reflect differences in pandemic activity across the country and
between regions within provinces and territories.
• In response to the varied epidemiological situations across Canada, we are seeing some health
authorities reinstating or easing public health measures, and providing tailored public messaging based
on local circumstances.
• Each province and territory will continue to make plans according to their COVID-19
transmission realities.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF VACCINES ON LIFTING OF PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
• Vaccines are a valuable additional tool in our fight against COVID-19 in Canada, but do not
replace the need for continuing to follow public health measures.
• All individuals should continue to follow recommended public health measures regardless of
their personal vaccination status or the level of vaccine coverage in their community.
• As more evidence emerges, public health authorities will make appropriate adjustments to
recommendations on public health measures.
IF PRESSED ON THE ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES IN RESPONSE TO SARS-CoV-2 VARIANTS
• PHAC is closely monitoring emerging COVID-19 variants.
• Current public health measures we have been practicing continue to be effective in preventing
the spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.
• Now more than ever, it is important for everyone to follow public health measures to reduce the
transmission of COVID-19 and any variants of concern in communities.
• Individuals should apply a “layered” approach, using multiple personal preventive practices at
once to protect themselves and others from COVID-19 and any variants of concern in communities. This
includes:
- Minimizing the number of interactions with people from outside of one’s immediate
household; and
- Keeping these interactions as few and as brief as possible, from the greatest distance
possible.
BACKGROUND
Public health measures (PHM) are the non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented by
federal/provincial/territorial and local public health authorities to control COVID-19 transmission. Some
of these PHM are personal preventive practices focused on helping individuals to protect themselves
and others, such as following advice of local public health authorities, staying home and away from
others if sick, wearing non-medical masks, physical distancing, hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette,
and self-monitoring. Public health authorities also aim to prevent transmission by undertaking testing
programs to detect and isolate cases, tracing people who have had a high-risk exposure to an infectious
case and quarantining them so they cannot transmit COVID-19 to others. Community measures such as
public education campaigns, restrictions on gatherings, and school, business and workplace measures,
help to protect groups and the community at large.
All PHM, including case detection and isolation, contact tracing and quarantining, and individual
personal preventive practices as well as community-based measures, need to be sustained in order to
maximize our ability as a society to control the spread of the virus over the long term. Public health
authorities will need to continue to rapidly identify, respond to outbreaks, including the management of
new cases of COVID-19 and their high-risk contacts to reduce community-spread, and prevent large
increases in case numbers and associated hospitalizations. It is important to consider how to reduce the
impact of seasonal respiratory infections, so that public health resources and health care system
capacity are not overwhelmed when dealing with COVID-19 cases occurring at the same time.
A series of models are being used to identify the potential impact of different combinations of control
measures on infection rates in the Canadian population. On an ongoing basis, these models help to
identify which combinations of PHMs, applied with what intensity, are most likely to reinforce pandemic
control. The role of public adherence to these measures is a critical factor for ultimate effectiveness.
PHAC is continually evaluating the impact of PHM on the number of cases reported through surveillance
systems, and is adjusting guidance as needed in collaboration with provincial and territorial partners.
Community-based PHM are most effective when implemented as early as possible in response to
epidemiological triggers of concern (e.g. increases in unlinked cases). Therefore, preparations include
being ready to re-implement restrictive community PHMs by the provinces and territories or at the
municipal public health level. It is important to remember that it takes about two weeks before the
impact of PHM can be seen in our surveillance data. This is because of the time lapse between when a
person is infected, when they are tested and subsequently reported to PHAC as a confirmed case.
When adjusting PHM, it is paramount that a protective approach for those most likely to experience
serious illness due to COVID-19 be maintained throughout the pandemic. Furthermore, jurisdictions
have to balance the risks associated with spread of COVID-19 with the unintended social and health
consequences of restrictive PHMs, including among vulnerable groups.
COVID-19 SAFE VOLUNTARY ISOLATION SITE PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
Through the Fall 2020 Economic Statement, the Government of Canada established the Safe Voluntary
Isolation Sites Program ($100 million over 2 years), as part of Canada’s growing list of rapid response
tools against the spread of COVID-19. The program aims to decrease community transmission of COVID-
19 by addressing gaps identified for individuals who live in housing that may be crowded or have
insufficient space for proper distancing from household contacts to self-isolate. The voluntary isolation
sites will help reduce the risks of spread of the virus among household contacts, especially in Canada’s
most densely populated cities, municipalities and health regions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How will funding voluntary isolation facilities help with our fight against COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is taking action to support individuals who lack the space and means
to undertake an effective isolation.
• The availability of voluntary isolation sites is expected to help lower the rate of COVID-19
community spread via reduced transmission among those living in crowded housing.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing funding for these sites across Canada.
• We are working to identify cities and municipal regions that would benefit from this program.
IF PRESSED on voluntary isolation sites vs. Designated Quarantine Facilities
• Voluntary isolation sites are different from Designated Quarantine Facilities.
• Designated Quarantine Facilities are for individuals who are ordered to stay under the
Quarantine Act. This includes travelers who arrive in Canada without a valid pre-departure molecular
test, are symptomatic upon arrival, or do not have an appropriate quarantine plan upon entry into
Canada. These facilities are operated under federal jurisdiction.
• Voluntary isolation sites are meant for individuals who cannot safely isolate at their usual place
of residence due to crowded housing or resource constraints. These sites are operated under the
direction of local, municipal, or provincial health partners.
IF PRESSED on the location of selected sites
• The program exists to fill a gap for cities, municipalities, and health regions that are at risk of
high rates of transmission due to factors such as crowded housing.
• The first site under this program was launched in the City of Toronto as a pilot on September 12,
2020.
• Following the creation of the national program, three more sites have been announced and are
now operational. These sites are located in the Region of Peel, the City of Ottawa, and the Region of
Waterloo. Additional sites are expected to be announced shortly.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to identify other cities and municipalities that
could benefit from a voluntary isolation site to reduce community transmission of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the occupancy rates of the different voluntary isolation sites
• Since opening, the voluntary isolation sites have accommodated a steady stream of people from
their respective communities.
• The sites continue to provide safe self-isolation rooms to their residents while operating with
strong infection prevention and control measures in place.
• Eligibility criteria to access the sites is determined by local public health officials.
BACKGROUND
Context for Safe Self-Isolation
When presenting with symptoms of COVID-19, self-isolation is one of the most effective ways of
reducing the risk of spreading the virus. However, for some Canadians, crowded housing conditions and
restrictive costs can make it unsafe or impossible to effectively self-isolate at home.
Within the context of the broader COVID-19 pandemic response, evidence has emerged that individuals
facing socio- and economic challenges are at higher risk of contracting COVID-19. Evidence suggests that
densely populated neighbourhoods have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including its
most severe outcomes. Individuals from these neighbourhoods may have more difficulty properly
isolating themselves due to factors such as overcrowding and/or resource constraints. The
establishment of voluntary self-isolation sites aims to assist in addressing this issue.
Role of Eligible Recipients
Sites selected under the Program will provide a centralized location where identified individuals can
safely self-isolate for the required period. Regular monitoring and reporting will be conducted in
coordination with local public health officials. The sharing of best practices will be encouraged among
the selected sites to optimize effective site operation and administration of services under the
objectives of the Program.
Costs Covered by Federal Funding
Federal funding will include: transportation to and from the site, lodging, meals and incidentals such as
bedding and other necessities for residents, as well as on-site security and cleaning personnel for the
facility. It is also understood that related activities may be required, such as those performed by public
health professionals in the context of infection prevention and control.
Eligibility to access the self-isolation site
Through its case and contact management process, local public health officials will identify individuals to
be offered transfer to the isolation site on a voluntary basis.
For example, if a person is COVID-19 positive and lives in a home where there is no separate room in
which they can isolate, they may be considered as a candidate for the voluntary self-isolation site.
Individuals who are household contacts will also be considered if, for example, the individual cannot
isolate safely from positive case(s). Those awaiting test results may also be considered.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is engaging with provinces and territories, Indigenous
partners and stakeholders through established fora, Federal/Provincial/Territorial governance tables,
and bilateral discussions, to inform a coherent and comprehensive approach to COVID-19 vaccine roll-
out in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What has the Government of Canada done to engage provinces, territories, Indigenous partners and
stakeholders on vaccine roll-out?
KEY MESSAGES
• Delivering and administering COVID-19 vaccines to Canadians is the most complex immunization
initiative ever undertaken in Canada, and requires the collaboration of all partners.
• Canada’s immunization response involves extensive collaboration between the Government of
Canada, provincial and territorial governments, First Nations, Inuit and Métis partners, public health and
logistical experts, vaccine manufacturers, and all Canadians.
• Federal, provincial, and territorial officials are meeting frequently to implement and adjust plans
for the distribution and safe administration of vaccines throughout Canada, including to initial priority
populations.
• We have engaged with a broad range of health professional organizations and non-health
stakeholders, such as industry groups and faith-based leaders, over the last few months to inform
planning and share credible information to build vaccine confidence. These engagements have been well
received.
IF PRESSED ON IMPLEMENTATION OF VACCINE ROLL-OUT…
• The next few weeks will be challenging when it comes to vaccine supply and the Government of
Canada is working with provinces and territories to adjust plans and schedules for vaccine delivery as
necessary.
• PHAC’s National Operations Centre and public health officials are in daily contact with
provincial/territorial vaccine operations centres and public health experts to share the latest
information and guidance to support vaccine administration across all regions of Canada.
• The Government’s COVID-19 pandemic response has strengthened existing relationships with
Indigenous partners, and forged new ones, in order to support safe and culturally appropriate access to
COVID-19 vaccination.
• Collectively, we have made progress on immunizing priority populations and are actively
planning for the second stage of vaccination with greater vaccine supply and expansion of priority
populations this spring.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada is committed to engaging public, Indigenous and private sector partners to
help ensure a smooth roll-out of vaccines across the country (e.g., address any supply chain or health
human resource gaps).
Federal Provincial Territorial (FPT) Initiatives
The federal government has been and will continue to work closely with provinces and territories (PTs)
to support the timely, safe, and effective immunization of all Canadians. Over 220 FPT meetings have
been held over the last year to discuss the COVID-19 pandemic response and vaccines:
• FPT Chief Medical Officers of Health and Assistant Deputy Ministers of Public Health across all
governments make up the FPT Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19 (SAC), which meets at least
twice weekly to lead a coordinated public health response to the pandemic and provide scientific and
public health advice to the Conference of FPT Deputy Ministers of Health (CDMH) pertaining to the
coordination, public health policy, and technical content related to COVID-19.
• In their leadership role, the CDMH meets at least weekly to manage ongoing collaboration,
ensure the priorities and direction of FPT Ministers of Health are implemented, and to address emerging
issues. Vaccination has been a priority area of their deliberations and collaboration for months.
• All FPT Ministers of Health meet regularly, approximately once every two weeks, to set broad
policy direction and collaborate on communications and support for vaccination plans across the
country.
• The Prime Minister holds regular First Ministers Meetings, often weekly, with all premiers to
provide leadership over all aspects of government responses to the pandemic. Vaccine roll-out is a
priority for First Ministers’ dialogue.
On January 15, 2021, FPT Ministers of Health issued a joint statement that affirmed the response to the
COVID-19 pandemic is built on a solid foundation of collaboration. It highlighted this spirit being evident
in the work of front line workers, Indigenous partners, and federal, provincial and territorial
governments to implement vaccination campaigns of unprecedented scale and complexity to protect
Canadians against COVID-19.
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. It is based on 6 core
principles: Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability; Fairness and
Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting. The plan was developed in consultation with PTs
and National Indigenous partners.
On December 3, 2020, FPT Ministers of Health approved SAC recommendations on the allocation of
COVID-19 vaccines and sequencing of priority populations for the first quarter of 2021 vaccination roll-
out.
On November 12, 2020, FPT governments confirmed their commitment to a principled approach to
COVID-19 immunization, as set out in COVID-19 immunization: Federal, provincial and territorial
statement of common principles. The statement spells out FPT roles, responsibilities, and states that all
governments share responsibility for ensuring that all Canadians have access to safe and effective
vaccines against COVID-19.
Stakeholder Relations
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is focused on collaborating with key national stakeholders and
continues to engage a broad range of health professional organizations and non-health stakeholders on
Canada’s immunization plan, vaccine roll-out and vaccine confidence. The aim of this engagement is to
share information and discuss issues of concern to inform response efforts on COVID-19, including
vaccination plans. PHAC has held regular meetings on a bi-weekly basis with a range of health
associations and those closely aligned with the health sector including: the Canadian Medical
Association, Canadian Nurses Association, Canadian Public Health Association, Canadian Pharmacists
Association, HealthcareCAN, Canadian Red Cross, first responders, and allied health professionals.
Meetings over the last year have also taken place with the business sector including critical
infrastructure organizations, agriculture/agri-food sector and small business sector.
PHAC is currently collaborating with other federal departments to host outreach sessions with
stakeholders supporting those populations disproportionately impacted by COVID-19 to share
information about COVID-19 vaccination to increase awareness and support vaccine uptake.
Indigenous Engagement
A renewed relationship with Indigenous Peoples through reconciliation remains a priority for the
Government of Canada and PHAC. PHAC works to address health inequities experienced by Indigenous
Peoples by providing internal leadership on Indigenous public health issues through policy, cultural
competency and engagement. PHAC is working closely with federal organizations, such as Indigenous
Services Canada(ISC) and Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, and is engaging
directly with national, regional and local Indigenous organizations, to understand and address emerging
issues and public health priorities of First Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples including on the COVID-19
response and vaccination roll-out planning.
The COVID-19 pandemic response has strengthened relationships with Indigenous partners and afforded
increased collaboration with other federal departments, particularly with ISC. PHAC continues to engage
regularly with a range of Indigenous partners, including National Indigenous Organizations and
Indigenous health professional organizations on federal action related to COVID-19, including public
health advice, vaccine prioritization, communications, safety, efficacy and roll-out.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Five COVID-19 vaccines have now been authorized by Health Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the current status of COVID-19 vaccines expected to be available for Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• On March 5, 2021, Health Canada approved the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine, the first single-dose
COVID-19 vaccine authorized in Canada.
• With five vaccines now authorized - Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca vaccines, and Janssen - we
have additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly as possible.
• The authorized COVID-19 vaccines in Canada provide additional tools to fight this pandemic as
quickly as possible.
• In addition, Health Canada continues to review the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine for authorization.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUTHORIZED VACCINES
• The Janssen vaccine is the first single-dose COVID-19 vaccine to be authorized in Canada. All
other authorized vaccines require two doses. As with the AstraZeneca vaccine, the Janssen vaccine can
also be stored and transported at refrigerated temperatures, between 2 and 8˚C for at least three
months, giving greater flexibility in how it can be distributed across Canada.
• The Janssen vaccine is approved for adults 18 years of age and older. Almost 20% of the
participants in the clinical trials were 65 or older, and no differences in safety or efficacy were seen.
• The authorization of additional vaccines to fight this pandemic can only help. They provide
additional tools to fight COVID-19 as quickly as possible, and will provide more supply to the market.
IF PRESSED ON EFFICACY OF JANSSEN AND ASTRAZENECA COMPARED TO HIGHER EFFICACY OF MRNA
VACCINES
• Each vaccine has unique characteristics, and Health Canada’s review has confirmed that the
benefits of all of these vaccines outweigh their risks.
• Canada has negotiated a broad and diverse COVID-19 vaccine portfolio to ensure we have
sufficient supply for everyone in Canada, while also mitigating risks of supply disruptions.
• Having additional vaccines from different manufacturers can help meet volume requirements to
get more people vaccinated sooner and offers more vaccination options.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS IN GENERAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness
and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF OTHER DECISIONS
• Health Canada continues to review the Novavax vaccine. We aim to issue a decision in general
alignment with those of our major regulatory partners.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines by
allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as it becomes available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Advance purchase agreements
The Government has announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven leading vaccine
candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson &
Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on successful completion of clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers of the vaccine candidates recommended by
the Vaccines Task Force. While regulatory approvals are separate from the procurement process, Health
Canada is expediting all vaccine drug submissions.
Status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer vaccine on December 9, 2020, a week after the UK authorized it,
two days before the US FDA, and almost two weeks before Europe.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna vaccine on December 23, 2020, 5 days after the US, and the
Janssen vaccine 6 days after the US.
Europe, the UK, and other jurisdictions have now authorized the AstraZeneca vaccine. Health Canada
worked closely with the European Medicines Agency on that review, but still have to complete all of the
aspects of the review for Canada.
Health Canada continues to engage with all of the vaccine manufacturers to ensure that data is
submitted to Canada at the same time it is provided to other major regulators, which is supporting
similar completion timelines.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
quickly find a vaccine and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and return to a more normal
life.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the government doing to participate in this unprecedented international effort?
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic.
• Since March, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $200 million
in more than 400 research projects, including 128 international collaborations, which focus not only on
vaccines, but also on other therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics.
• Our government is also investing an additional $144 million through CIHR to scale up research to
increase our understanding of persistent and emerging gaps and priority areas including variants and
provide decision makers with rapid guidance and evidence.
• In addition, our government is proud to support the creation of new research evidence to
address the mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Long-term care is also a priority for the next steps of the COVID-19 response and CIHR is
collaborating with partners across Canada to inform the implementation of promising interventions and
policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that CIHR will support Indigenous communities as they lead strengths-
based and solutions-focused research that is bold and innovative, thanks to an additional $2 million
investment in priority support from CIHR.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will bring the evidence we need to help
Canada address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID-19 and
is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
Medical countermeasures funding accounts for 53 of the 100 projects funded for a total of $36.5M,
including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and clinical
management. The social and policy countermeasures funding accounts for 47 of the 100 projects funded
for a total of $17.7M, including research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health
response and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
CIHR subsequently launched the Sex as a Biological Variable Supplement funding opportunity to provide
additional funding to researchers, funded through the first rapid research response, to investigate
potential molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning observed sex differences in SARS-CoV-2 viral
pathogenesis and its associated immune response. This represents a total investment of $665K to 14
researchers to offset the costs associated with incorporating, comparing and analyzing male, female
and/or intersex biological samples, including cells, tissues and animals, into the proposed research
program.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures
against COVID-19. Building on the March 2020 investment, the majority of this investment enables
researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and social
countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
• Approximately $100M of this $114.9 million investment was allocated to the second COVID-19
Rapid Research Funding Competition. In collaboration with its partners, CIHR was able to support 153
grants representing a total investment of $123.5 million. Twenty-two of these were funded in
partnership with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, and focus on improving our understanding of
COVID-19 immunity in Canada, a $12.4 million investment.
• Approximately $10 million of the $114.9 million investment was allocated to CIHR’s COVID-19
and Mental Health Initiative. In collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada, this initiative supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. New knowledge
generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely
manner.
• This investment also secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials
responsive to WHO priorities to increase the understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines,
therapeutics, mental health supports and clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR – in partnership with PHAC - funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi-disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short- and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
Though vaccines are becoming available, support for research on treatment options and large clinical
trials must continue to ensure that these treatments are successful. CIHR is working tirelessly with its
partners to find ways to do this.
Further, medical countermeasure funds will also allow the Government of Canada, under the leadership
of CIHR, to set up a Centre for Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies Research that will lay
the groundwork towards more nimble domestic and global pandemic research coordination. The Centre
will allow CIHR to support real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the
research community and decision-makers alike, as well as to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHR funded network) produced national guidance
documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines related to prescribing,
dispensing, and delivery of opioids and other narcotics during the COVID-19 pandemic to support people
who use drugs.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR and partners have invested
$1.8M to date, to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement and the Canadian Patient
Safety Institute.
On September 29, CIHR launched a funding opportunity to invest approximately $2 million in support
strengths-based, solutions-focused research that is bold, innovative, Indigenous community-led, and
that addresses the immediate, intermediate, and/or long-term consequences of COVID-19 and/or
informs future preparedness. This will provide research funding for Indigenous communities and
organizations and researchers of Indigenous ancestry in Canada who are responding to the unique
health and well-being needs of Indigenous Peoples as they relate to the COVID-19 pandemic. The results
are expected in spring 2021.
In October, CIHR completed an independent review of the Canadian International Surveillance Border
Study (led by McMaster Health Labs) which is part of the Government of Canada’s continued research
response to address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. In partnership with Health
Canada, $2.5M in funding is being provided to McMaster Health Labs to help determine the
effectiveness of an airport-based COVID-19 surveillance program.
Finally, building on the priorities from CIHR’s recent COVID-19 investments, CIHR will support projects
focused on emerging priorities. CIHR is launching several rapid response competitions to meet its
objectives. So far, this includes:
• The COVID-19 Knowledge Synthesis Network Funding Opportunity, to support collaboration and
rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge and evidence across the full breadth of
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health measures, clinical management, health-
system arrangements, and economic and social impacts). This $1M investment was announced on
January 13, 2021
• The Network of Clinical Trials Networks Funding Opportunity, to expand existing national and
international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on interventions to prevent, detect, manage,
and/or treat COVID-19. This $6M will be announced on January 20, 2021.
• CIHR is currently investing up to $25M to fund three complementary initiatives aimed to support
global efforts to address SARS-CoV-2 variants:
o Initiative 1: The Supplementary funding for CIHR funded COVID-19 researchers studying
variants Funding Opportunity will provide supplementary funding for CIHR-funded COVID-19 researchers
studying variants to accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and
align efforts in this field. This initiative represents an investment of $4.9 and was announced on January
29, 2021.
o Initiative 2: Priority funding of applications focusing on SARS-CoV-2 variants Funding
Opportunity will leverage the Fall 2020 Project Grant competition to invest in applications specifically
addressing SARS-CoV-2 variants across all pillars of research. This initiative represents an investment of
approximately $25.2 million in 52 research projects and was announced on March 12, 2021.
o Initiative 3: Funding of a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research that will
enable the rapid support of research activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual
and population health threats of emerging variants of concern. This $9M investment was launched and
announced on February 12, 2021.
• As part of its larger Medical Countermeasures 3 envelope, CIHR will invest in a series of rolling
competitions designed in an iterative way in consultation with partners so that these investments
strategically target key emerging research priorities and gaps that best contribute to Canada’s ongoing
response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way (in similar fashion to our current response to
variants).
o While most competitions under this series are set to roll out throughout the 2021-22
fiscal year, the Emerging COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities Funding Opportunity has already been
announced and launched on March 3, 2021. The total funding amount available for this and upcoming
COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities competitions is approximately $119M. The amount invested in
this competition will not be the full amount and will depend on the number and quality, as assessed by
peer review, of applications received.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories to distribute the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio and BD Veritor
rapid tests, as well as putting in place surge support for laboratory testing.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians have access to effective
COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure tests to meet both current and future
demand as testing continues to increase across the country.
• As part of this work, we purchased five rapid tests – the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW,
Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and Quidel Sofia – and have worked with our provincial and territorial
counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• Cepheid GeneXpert tests began shipments in the spring of 2020, and the first shipment of
Abbott tests were sent in late October 2020. Shipments to provinces and territories will continue each
week as supply arrives in Canada.
• To date, over 28M tests have been distributed across Canada, including over 3.1 million Abbott
IDNOW tests, 17.8 million Abbott Panbio tests, 6.3 million BD Veritor tests, and 0.8 million Quidel Sofia
tests. These tests are being provided to provinces and territories at no cost to them.
• Provinces and territories decide how to deploy these technologies, informed by the Pan-
Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance that was released in October.
• We have also put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
• My department continues to work with colleagues in Public Services and Procurement Canada,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to identify
and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• As emerging testing and screening products or platforms become available and approved for use
in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial and territorial
officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and conducting laboratory testing for the
virus that causes COVID-19. As of March 4, 2021, over 24.7 million tests for COVID-19 were performed in
Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Beginning September 3, a table outlining progress by provinces and territories in increasing their testing
capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory compared
to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement, has been published online.
As of March 1, the projected maximum testing capacity reported by provinces and territories was
215,959 tests/day, meeting the testing capacity target as articulated by provinces and territories under
the Safe Restart Agreement.
Province/ Testing Capacity Projected Max. Testing Capacity as % of
Territory Commitment under the Capacity* Commitment
SRA (tests/day) (tests/day)
BC 20,000 20,617 103%
AB 22,000 22,000 100%
SK 4,000 3,846 96%
MB 3,000 3,500 117%
ON 78,000 116,000 149%
QC 35,000 41,386 118%
NB 2,500-3,000 3,000 100-120%
NS 2,500 2,500 100%
PE 835 850 102%
NL 2,500-3,000 1700 57-68%
NU N/A 300 N/A
NWT 225 110 49%
YT 160 150 94%
TOTAL 170,720 – 171,720 215,959 >100%
The federal government has activated additional laboratory capacity to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. Six federal labs are currently operational and can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 12,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as well as Correctional Services
Canada. By the end of March 2021, surge capacity should be between 16,000 and 21,000 tests/day,
about 10% of the target of 200,000 tests/day.
As we move into the next phase of lifting some public health measures and re-opening some parts of the
economy, cases of COVID-19 will still occur until the population has enough immunity or a vaccine is
available to prevent the disease.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community. In this next phase, testing will be
critical for groups that are more vulnerable to complications from COVID-19. This testing will be an early
warning for our healthcare system.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
ACCESS TO TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s medical system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to treatments for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
• In September 2020, I signed an Interim Order that created a mechanism for the expedited
review of treatments, while ensuring that we maintain a high level of scientific scrutiny.
• As of the beginning of March, 11 submissions have been received under the Interim Order –
including 5 treatments and 6 vaccines.
• On November 20, Health Canada issued its first approval under the Interim Order for a
treatment using a monoclonal antibody from Eli Lilly (bamlanivimab). Canada has secured access to 26
000 doses of bamlanivimab and provinces have received shipments since December.
• We have also authorized, with conditions, the drug remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19. In
September, the Government of Canada secured 150 000 vials of remdesivir for Canadians. Initial
shipments to Provinces and Territories began in September and will continue this year.
• As of March 1, 2021, Health Canada continues to review 4 treatments under the Interim Order –
2 monoclonal antibody combination therapies with proposed indications similar to Bamlanivimab (Eli
Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination and Hoffman-La Roche’s casirivimab and imdevimab
combination); an antiviral from Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories Limited (favipiravir); and an anti-inflammatory
drug from the Pendopharm Division of Pharmascience Inc. (colchicine).
• The Government of Canada continues to engage proactively with domestic and international
companies to negotiate advance purchase agreements for the procurement of treatments to ensure
timely access.
IF PRESSED ON BAMLANIVIMAB
• Health Canada has authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab for the treatment of adults and
pediatric patients 12 years of age or older with mild to moderate COVID-19, who weigh at least 40 kg
and who are at high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 illness and/or hospitalization.
• Bamlanivimab is the first product to be authorized in Canada using the Interim Order pathway
for COVID-19- drugs and vaccines.
• Under the Interim Order, there are terms and conditions associated with the authorization. This
means that there are requirements for the manufacturer after authorization to provide additional data
pertaining to the quality, effectiveness and safety of the drug.
• In a clinical study, treatment of high-risk patients with bamlanivimab reduced the proportion of
COVID-19-related hospitalization or emergency room visits compared to placebo-treated subjects.
• On January 21, 2021, Eli Lilly issued a press release on the results from the BLAZE 2 trials
demonstrating a significant reduction in the risk of contracting symptomatic COVID-19 in residents and
staff of a nursing home. Health Canada will review this data once submitted to determine if any changes
should be made to the product’s use.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
• Health Canada has authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment of
patients (12 years of age or older, who weigh at least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen to help them breathe. We approved this drug with conditions
for the manufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality.
• Despite the World Health Organization’s (WHO) updated guidelines advising against the use of
remdesivir, Health Canada continues to support this drug as a treatment option, which is in line with
other international regulators.
• Specifically, remdesivir modestly decreases patient time in hospital and continues to provide
benefit for patients and health care systems when used according to the authorized indication.
• Health Canada will continue to evaluate the information about remdesivir, and will take the
appropriate steps to ensure the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT AVAILABILITY
• Health Canada is closely monitoring global treatment development and is in active discussions
with manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory and scientific advice for Canadian clinical
trials and regulatory approvals.
• As of January 28 2021, Health Canada has received 11 submissions under the interim order. This
includes 5 treatments and 6 vaccines (Moderna, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Verity
Pharmaceuticals/Serum Institute of India and Novavax).
• On November 20, Health Canada, under the Interim Order, authorized a monoclonal antibody
from Eli Lilly.
• There are terms and conditions associated with the authorization. This means that there are
requirements for the company after authorization to provide additional data pertaining to the quality,
effectiveness and safety of the drug.
• While recognizing the urgent need for treatments, all products will undergo a rigorous scientific
review to ensure they meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER
• The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and
vaccines for Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile
administrative and application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related
indications that were not in the original authorization; and,
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
• Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety,
efficacy and quality.
• In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
• Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate
action, including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required,
to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the World Health Organization, amongst others, to
share information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based approaches for
treatments. The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay
informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
• Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health professionals and Canadians are
looking for the latest information about health products for COVID-19. The department has created a
new website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and
who to contact for questions. We are also making sure information relevant to health professionals and
Canadians is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON THERAPEUTIC INVESTMENTS
• The Government of Canada is collaborating with academia and the private sector to advance
research and development of therapeutics including pre-clinical research, bio-manufacturing and
enhancing capacity for and access to clinical trials.
• The Government of Canada is closely monitoring and reviewing emerging evidence on possible
COVID-19 treatments, such as corticosteroids, antiviral drugs and antibody treatments.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with provinces and
territories to ensure rapid and equitable access to therapeutics.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food and Drugs Act and
the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and provide the Government with additional
powers.
The amendments will:
• help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
• seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for Canadians;
and
• allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is needed to
respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered in other
jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may not fully meet some of
the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act — such as packaging requirements.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new website for the
health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for
questions. Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19
website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to COVID-19.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab for the treatment of adults
and pediatric patients 12 years of age or older with mild to moderate COVID-19, who weigh at least 40
kg and who are at high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 illness and/or hospitalization.
Bamlanivimab is the first product to be authorized in Canada using the Interim Order pathway for
COVID-19- drugs and vaccines. Under the Interim Order, there are terms and conditions associated with
the authorization. This means that there are requirements for the manufacturer after authorization to
provide additional data pertaining to the quality, effectiveness and safety of the drug.
Bamlanivimab has received Emergency Use Authorization from the US FDA.
The Institut national d’excellence en santé et en services sociaux (INESSS) has published a report on
healthcare system implementation that concluded that there is insufficient data to support the use of
bamlanivimab in the treatment of COVID-19. Similarly, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) released a report with their recommendations on January 14, highlighting limited
data and issues of bringing COVID-19-positive patients into healthcare settings to receive infusions,
which could impact delivery of care to non-COVID patients.
While Health Canada assesses the benefit/risk balance of new treatments based on their safety, efficacy,
and quality, INESSS and CADTH conduct independent cost-benefit analyses of new treatments that
consider other information in addition to safety and effectiveness. Given their regional mandate for
drug use and reimbursement, INESSS’s and CADTH’s recommendations may be different from Health
Canada.
Other antibody products under review
Health Canada has also received two submissions for combination antibody treatments with proposed
indications similar to Bamlanivimab (Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination and
Hoffman-La Roche’s casirivimab and imdevimab combination). Monoclonal antibodies are being tested
both as treatment for mild/moderate COVID-19, and also as prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
Remdesivir
Health Canada has authorized with conditions the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) manufactured
by Gilead Sciences Canada, Inc. for the treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require oxygenation. As a condition of authorization, the manufacturer will submit
to Health Canada:
• post-market safety monitoring reports, as well as reports on all serious adverse drug reactions,
annual pregnancy safety reports and any foreign regulatory actions related to the safety of remdesivir;
• any further data on the safety and efficacy of the drug, including final data from ongoing clinical
trials and additional safety data on patients with liver and kidney disease; and
• further quality data confirming that the manufacturing processes and controls will consistently
produce product of suitable quality for the intended use.
Remdesivir has also been granted emergency or conditional authorization in the U.S., Europe, Japan,
Singapore, Switzerland and Australia, and the US FDA has granted it full authorization. In Canada, the
authorization included a full scientific review. There is no expiry date on the authorization.
One existing clinical trial authorized by Health Canada to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
remdesivir for use in Canada is still ongoing. This clinical trial will continue to gather more data on the
drug.
On November 20, the World Health Organization (WHO) released a guidance document, which
conditionally recommends against the use of remdesivir in patients with COVID-19, regardless of disease
severity. This follows the release of the WHO’s Solidarity trial results, which indicate that remdesivir
appeared to have little or no benefit for hospitalized patients.
Health Canada’s authorization with conditions of remdesivir was based on the National Institute for
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)’s Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial (ACTT-1) trial results and is
limited to patients with severe COVID-19 who have pneumonia requiring supplemental oxygen. The
large, randomized controlled trial ACTT-1 demonstrated clear clinical benefit for this subset of COVID-19
patients.
Health Canada continues to support the use of remdesivir according to its authorized indication and in
the context of clinical trials. Health Canada has not authorized the routine use of remdesivir in patients
outside these two scenarios.
Two new variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged in the UK and South Africa but the activity of remdesivir
against these new variants is not expected to be affected. Health Canada has contacted Gilead Sciences
for information on how they plan to assess the impact of these mutations on the efficacy and safety of
remdesivir. Regulatory action is not expected to be required at this time, which is consistent with other
international regulators.
Favipiravir
Favipiravir is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that has not been authorized in Canada.
There are currently two authorized clinical trials with favipiravir with study sites in Canada, which have
been sponsored by Appili Therapeutics Inc:
• The CONTROL trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 outbreaks in long-term care
homes. This study is led by Dr. Alison McGeer, an infectious disease specialist in the Sinai Health System.
• The PEPCO trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 in vulnerable people who have had
recent direct exposure to someone with a confirmed COVID-19 infection.
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories filed a submission to Health Canada for favipiravir
(brand name Reeqonus) for the treatment of COVID-19 under the interim order pathway.
Colchichine
Colchicine is an anti-inflammatory agent currently approved in Canada for the prophylaxis and
treatment of gout flares in adults and for Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF). The currently
recommended doses of colchicine range from 0.6 mg to 2.4 mg/day. Only the 0.6 mg tablet is approved
for use in Canada.
Colchicine is being investigated as a treatment for the reduction of COVID-19 complications in adults in
on-going clinical trials, with study sites in Canada:
• The COLCORONA trial is studying its use in non-hospitalized patients with COVID-19. The study
uses a 0.5 mg tablet strength, which is not approved in Canada but available in other markets such as
the UK and Australia.
• The ACTCOVID19 trial is studying the use of colchicine in symptomatic outpatients, as well as
hospitalized patients. This study uses the 0.6 mg tablet from SANDOZ. Depending on availability, the 0.5
mg tablet might also be used.
On January 22, 2021, the Montreal Heart Institute issued a press release on the final results of the
COLCORONA trial, followed by the sponsor, Pharmascience on January 23, 2021.
On January 25, 2021, Pharmascience filed a drug submission to Health Canada for colchicine for the
treatment of COVID-19 under the Interim Order pathway.
Dexamethasone
Clinical trial results announced in June 2020 showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to
reduce inflammation, cut death rates by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients
admitted to hospital. As a result, the WHO has updated its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19.
Although the dexamethasone study’s results are preliminary, the researchers behind the project suggest
the drug should immediately become standard care in severely ill patients.
The oral tablet format of dexamethasone was added to Health Canada’s list of Tier 3 shortages on May
1, 2020 based on its current indications for use. Tier 3 shortages are those that have the greatest
potential impact on Canada’s drug supply and health care system. Drugs on this list are in high demand
or in shortage. Apotex and Pharmascience are the only two companies in Canada that market the
dexamethasone oral tablet. There are currently no active shortages reported by either company.
Health Canada is continuing to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis.
The IV format of dexamethasone has not been determined to be a Tier 3 shortage; a consensus
determination was made to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis. Health Canada is also
monitoring the supply situation for dexamethasone alternatives, corticosteroids such as
methylprednisolone, prednisolone and hydrocortisone.
BORDER MEASURES – UNITED STATES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put in place successive border measures in response to
COVID-19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government doing to protect Canadians at the Canada/United States border?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has established robust border measures, including quarantine and travel restrictions as
well as pre-departure testing for travellers to Canada.
• U.S. citizens are permitted to travel directly from the United States to Alaska and vice-versa for
non-discretionary purposes, such as going for work, and returning home.
• Some U.S. citizens are also permitted to enter Canada for legitimate work purposes, including to
provide an essential service, or for compassionate reasons, as specified under the Orders in Council.
• U.S. citizens should not be taking the opportunity to travel within Canada for personal or
discretionary reasons. This is an enforceable offence, with monetary penalties.
IF PRESSED ON LAND ARRIVALS
• As of February 15, 2021, all travellers arriving to Canada by land, with some exceptions, are
required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in the United States within
72 hours of pre-arrival, or a positive test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival.
• We continue to collaborate with partners in the United States to strengthen our border
measures and keep our countries safe.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINATED TRAVELLERS/SNOWBIRDS RETURNING TO CANADA
• At this time, proof of vaccination will not replace other border measures, including the
requirement to provide proof of a COVID-19 test result. Individuals who have been vaccinated are still
required to quarantine on entry to Canada.
• A vaccine protects an individual from illness, but we need more evidence to understand if a
vaccinated person can still transmit the virus.
IF PRESSED ON TRAVEL TO THE U.S. FOR HEALTH CARE
• We recognize that quarantine requirements have a significant impact on Canadians who have
just received essential medical services or treatment outside of Canada.
• Persons who receive essential medical services in another country are now exempt from pre-
arrival and pre-departure testing, testing on arrival, and mandatory quarantine requirements, provided
certain conditions are met. These include a requirement for a licensed health care practitioner indicating
that the medical services are essential.
• Additionally, the Chief Public Health Officer has issued an exemption for asymptomatic Canadian
citizens, permanent residents, or persons with status under the Indian Act who accompany a dependent
child, or an asymptomatic person requiring assistance, in accessing the essential medical services or
treatment.
BACKGROUND
Between February 3, 2020 and February 14, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 45 Emergency
Orders under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce
risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce
the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including
recreation and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with
some exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to
• submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan, electronically
via ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
• take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and
• take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
Testing is available on site at 5 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of February 22, 2021.This
service will be available as of March 4, 2021 at another 11 land ports of entry. At land ports of entry
with no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provide two take-home test swabs kits to
every traveller.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine ports,
and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers, including
quarantine officers, at 33 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
VACCINATION CERTIFICATION
SYNOPSIS
There is currently no pan-Canadian proof of vaccination framework. Work is underway to develop a
Government of Canada position on this matter.
KEY MESSAGES
• Governments and international bodies around the world are exploring the possible use of
vaccination certificates as one tool to support the re-opening of societies and economies.
• As some jurisdictions begin to think about granting privileges to vaccinated people, any similar
consideration in the Canadian context would have to be based on reliable scientific evidence.
• Scientific evidence is clear that the COVID-19 vaccines approved for use in Canada are highly
effective at preventing illness. However, we do not yet know whether vaccinated individuals can spread
the virus, and thus pose a public health risk.
• At this time, the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that all
individuals should continue to practice recommended public health measures to help prevent the
spread of the virus and to help control the pandemic, regardless of vaccination status.
• As scientists work to understand COVID-19 immunity, we are focusing on the public health
measures that we know are effective, including wearing a mask, washing hands and maintaining physical
distancing.
IF PRESSED ABOUT GOVERNMENT OF CANADA POSITION ON VACCINATION CERTIFICATES
• We are aware that other countries and international actors are beginning to consider how
vaccination certificates could be deployed in the coming months and years to help reopen societies.
• We continue to monitor developments in this area, as well as the latest scientific information
about virus transmissibility.
BACKGROUND
The concept of an “immunity passport”, a proposed document or e-certificate proving that a person has
been vaccinated, or has a certain level of immunity to COVID-19, has been suggested in the media as a
potential basis to grant permissions or exemptions from COVID-19 rules. While the Government of
Canada has not decided yet whether it would develop a pan-Canadian proof of vaccination framework,
media reports have highlighted this possibility.
Provinces and territories administer vaccines and are responsible for keeping records of vaccinations.
Public health is within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, including potential decisions on whether to
relax public health measures based on vaccination status. The Government of Canada is the lead on
international travel and interprovincial travel. While it may at some point have an interest in a pan-
Canadian approach to proof of vaccination, it has no access to patient health data.
International scan
Around the world, governments, non-governmental organizations, and private companies are exploring
the concept of vaccination certification as a vehicle for conferring or re-instating certain freedoms
within their countries and organizations, and, in the case of countries, as a means to facilitate travel
across and beyond their national borders.
Some of the countries exploring this option include Israel, Iceland, Hungary, Denmark, Ireland, and Chile.
As well, a number of airlines are planning ways to help travellers comply with anticipated state
requirements, while others, such as Qantas and Korean Air, are planning to implement their own
vaccination requirements.
Organizations around the world are establishing working groups to develop international standards and
technical specifications, and Canada is attending ongoing discussions.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is convening a consortium for a Smart Vaccination Certificate to
establish common standards and governance for the security, authentication, privacy, and data
exchange of certificates, in the event they are used globally. The group will also provide guidance to its
member states to help them adopt certification if they decide to pursue this option. The Chief
Information Officer from the Public Health Agency of Canada has been invited to sit on this working
group.
Domestic scan
Some of the provinces and territories are considering whether vaccination certification would be of
benefit in their jurisdictions, but none have asserted a firm plan to implement this tool.
In December 2020, Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott indicated that "voluntary" proof of
vaccinations may enable vaccinated individuals to: travel…perhaps for work purposes, for going to
theatres or cinemas or any other venues.
In December 2020, BC’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Bonnie Henry, indicated that BC will have a
vaccination database for tracking purposes.
In December 2020, Premier Andrew Furey said Newfoundland and Labrador is not considering
demanding proof of vaccination for access privileges.
COVID-19 VACCINE ROLLOUT
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to securing and deploying a sufficient supply of safe vaccines
to inoculate all Canadians.
Key Messages
• In partnership with provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities, the Government of
Canada has successfully launched Canada’s COVID-19 immunization campaign, the biggest in the
country’s history.
• Health Canada has approved three COVID-19 vaccines—those by Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, and
AstraZeneca. Other vaccines, such as the ones by Janssen and Novavax, are currently undergoing Health
Canada’s regulatory review.
• The provinces and territories ultimately determine how vaccines are best used; however,
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization provides guidance and has recommended key
populations for early vaccination to obtain the greatest initial impact and protect those most vulnerable
to transmission and infection.
• Those recommended for early vaccination are seniors and workers in long-term care homes,
assisted-living seniors facilities, retirement homes, and chronic care hospitals; healthcare workers on the
frontlines of patient care; adults 70 years and older, beginning with those 80 years and older; and those
living in remote and isolated Indigenous communities and the Territories.
• Once these initial priority populations have been vaccinated, the next recommended groups are
the remaining adults in and from Indigenous communities; residents and staff in congregate living
settings; adults 60 years and older; adults in racialized and marginalized communities hardest hit by
COVID-19; first responders; frontline essential workers; and some essential primary caregivers.
• The Government will continue to ensure Canadians have all relevant, accurate, and up-to-date
information about the vaccines, and will continue to work to address vaccine hesitancy and increase
vaccine confidence.
If pressed on vaccine production volatility….
• The Government of Canada is working with manufacturers and the provinces and territories to
adjust plans and schedules for vaccine delivery.
• We expect the delivery of 4 million doses of the Pfizer vaccine, 2 million doses of the Moderna
vaccine, and 1 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine by the end of March 2021.
• We continue to secure contracts with vaccine suppliers and are making every effort to ensure a
timely vaccine rollout.
BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. It is based on 6 core
principles—Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability; Fairness and
Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for administering vaccination programs and
determining public health requirements in their jurisdictions. The federal government is responsible for
securing contracts with vaccine suppliers, conducting regulatory review and ensuring safety of vaccines,
delivering vaccines and supplies to provinces and territories (PTs), liaising among different PTs and
Indigenous leaders, and supporting the PTs with the administration of vaccines.
Federal, provincial, and territorial officials are continuing to meet frequently to refine plans for the
distribution and administration of vaccines throughout Canada. Both levels of government are also
sharing information with each other about vaccine coverage rates, vaccine safety, and inventory levels,
so that any potential issues or shortcomings can be identified quickly and addressed. Adverse Effects
Following Immunization (AEFI) are being tracked.
In order to address potential supply chain gaps and to have contingencies available, Canada has engaged
the private sector to deliver a broad range of end-to-end logistics and support services. A contract has
been awarded to a consortium for logistics services.
Priority populations
National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) guidance outlined a targeted vaccination program
to achieve public health goals as efficiently, effectively, and equitably as possible during this early period
when vaccine supply is limited. NACI recommended the following key populations for early (‘stage 1’)
vaccination:
• Seniors and workers in long-term care homes, assisted living senior facilities, retirement homes,
and chronic care hospitals;
• Healthcare workers on the frontlines of patient care;
• Older adults, starting with those 80 years and above, and then moving in 5-year increments to
reach those 70 years and older; and
• Remote or isolated Indigenous communities and the Territories.
On February 15, 2021, NACI released guidance on additional priority populations for vaccination, once
initial populations have received a vaccine. Stage 2 populations include:
• Adults in or from Indigenous communities, including in urban settings;
• Residents and staff of all other congregate settings (e.g. migrant workers’ quarters, correctional
facilities, homeless shelters);
• Adults 60-69 years of age, beginning with those 65 years of age or over;
• Adults in racialized/marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19;
• First responders (including police, firefighters, military, coast guard);
• Frontline essential workers who cannot work virtually and have direct close physical contact
with the public;
• Essential primary caregivers for individuals who are at high risk of severe illness from COVID-19
due to advanced age (60 years of age or over).
NACI’s guidance for stage 3 priority populations includes:
• Individuals 16-59 years of age with an underlying medical condition at high risk of severe illness
due to COVID-19 and their essential primary caregivers;
• All adults 50-59 years of age, beginning with adults 55 years of age or over;
• Non-frontline healthcare workers who are needed to maintain healthcare capacity;
• Non-frontline essential workers.
CANADA HEALTH ACT ANNUAL REPORT
SYNOPSIS
The 2019-2020 Canada Health Act Annual report was tabled in Parliament on Monday, February 22,
2021. The report includes information on compliance issues from 2019-2020 as well as deductions and
reimbursements made in March 2020 for extra-billing and user charges that occurred in 2017-2018.
In the days following the tabling there was media attention regarding the abortion issue in New
Brunswick (NB) and the resulting March 2020 Canada Health Transfer (CHT) deduction of $140, 216.
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in
Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at Clinic 554 in
Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services received in private
clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
How is the government following through on its responsibility to administer the CHA?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt the lives of Canadians at an unprecedented
level, our universal health care system has been an enduring source of comfort.
• I take my responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• The Canada Health Act Annual Report provides Canadians with a clear picture of how the
publicly funded health care insurance plans of provinces and territories operate.
• While provinces and territories are, for the most part, in compliance with the Canada Health
Act; in instances where a compliance issue has been identified and remains after initial enquiries our
Government works closely with the jurisdictions to resolve the issue, as outlined in the Canada Health
Act Annual Report.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• In March 2020, a penalty of $140,216 was levied against New Brunswick’s Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) payment for patient charges that occurred in 2017-18.
• Given patients have continued to be charged to access insured services, New Brunswick will be
facing additional deductions to future CHT payments.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
Canada Health Act Annual Report
On an annual basis, the federal Minister of Health is required to report to Parliament on the
administration and operation of the Canada Health Act, as set out in section 23 of the Act. The vehicle
for so doing is the Canada Health Act Annual Report.
The 2019-2020 Canada Health Act Annual Report was tabled in Parliament on Monday, February 22,
2021.
In addition to outlining how the provinces and territories satisfy the criteria of the Act, the report details
a number of high-profile compliance issues including: deductions taken from provincial Canada Health
Transfer payments in March 2020 as a result of patient charges, that occurred in 2017-2018, and
subsequent reimbursements issued under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy to those
provinces that have taken steps to eliminate these charges. The following deductions and
reimbursements were made in March 2020:
• New Brunswick's CHT payment was reduced by $140,216 in response to the province's lack of
coverage under its health insurance plan for abortion services outside the hospital setting.
• Newfoundland and Labrador's CHT payment was reduced by $70,819 as a result of user charges
for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. After working with
Health Canada to develop, and then successfully carry out, a plan to eliminate these user charges,
Newfoundland and Labrador received a reimbursement for deductions taken in both 2019 and 2020,
totaling $72,168.
• British Columbia's CHT payment was reduced by $16,753,833 for patient charges at private
clinics. Health Canada authorized a partial reimbursement of BC’s March 2018 and 2019 deductions for
a total of $16,019,539 to British Columbia in recognition of efforts taken by the province to address and
eliminate these charges.
Abortion Issue in New Brunswick
In the days following the tabling some media attention focused on the abortion issue in New Brunswick
and the resulting Canada Health Transfer deductions.
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services received in private
clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health Act. New Brunswick's
March 2020 CHT payment was reduced by $140,216 in response to the province's lack of coverage
under its health insurance plan for abortion services outside the hospital setting.
On October 29, 2020, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association informed the province it would be
launching a Charter challenge to NB Regulation 84-20, and provided the NB Attorney General with a
statement of claim. The Association had previously advised the province it would take legal action if the
regulation was not amended to permit coverage for abortion services received outside hospitals.
U.S. PROPOSAL TO ALLOW BULK IMPORTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FROM CANADA
SYNOPSIS
• On October 1, 2020, the United States published the final rule on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, creating a pathway for licensed U.S.
pharmacists or wholesalers to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for the Canadian
market. The rule could worsen the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada and put the health of
Canadians at risk.
• The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on
November 27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help prevent bulk importation
programs, such as the one recently established by the U.S., from causing or exacerbating a drug
shortage in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to safeguard Canada’s drug supply from U.S. bulk importation
schemes?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue to have access to the medicines they need is a top priority for
our Government.
• This is why, on November 27, 2020, I signed an interim order prohibiting certain drugs intended
for the Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of Canada, if that sale could cause or
exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
• Canada’s drug market is too small to meet the demand for prescription drugs of both Canadian
and American consumers.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FOR CANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased drug prices for Canadians. The
Government of Canada is committed to improving Canadians access to, and the affordability of,
necessary prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with
key partners to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• This interim order respects international trade rules, and is not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributes to
millions of jobs in both countries and to increased North American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On October 1, 2020, the final rule for the U.S. regulatory proposal on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs was published. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, and creates a pathway for
licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored program approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA), to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for
the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be FDA- and HPFB-approved drugs labeled for
sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The Canadian seller must be licensed by Health
Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a provincial authority, and must also be registered with the
FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import request to the FDA at least 30 days in advance of product
entry and arrival into the U.S. The program allows only a direct supply chain of one manufacturer, one
Canadian seller and one importer for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk.
On March 9, 2020, the Government of Canada submitted comments during the U.S. consultation
process to publicly document Canada’s opposition to the proposed rule, given that it is not deemed to
be an effective solution to high drug prices in the U.S. and that it could exacerbate drug shortages in
Canada. The comments also made it clear that the Government of Canada will take the necessary
measures to safeguard Canada’s drug supply.
President Biden has indicated support for importation programs as a solution to high drug pricing in the
U.S. States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription
drugs from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have already
enacted legislation to authorize such a program, and 16 other states have similar legislation in progress.
As of March 2021, Florida and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for review and approval.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. Large industry players, representing 90-95% of pharmaceutical distribution in
Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this program. However, there is the
potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any industry uptake could have an impact
on the Canadian drug supply.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on November
27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help ensure that bulk importation programs,
such as the one recently established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage in Canada.
Under the interim order, certain drugs intended for the Canadian market are prohibited from being sold
for consumption outside of Canada if that sale could cause or worsen a drug shortage.
The interim order also authorizes the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or
drug establishment licence holder (DEL) that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate
an existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not in the scope of the interim order.
Health Canada will administer this interim order through compliance promotion, monitoring, and
verification activities. DEL holders who violate the terms of the Interim Order may be subject to
enforcement actions, which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or
the suspension or cancellation of the DEL.
DENTAL CARE
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with Parliament on its study of national
dental care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• My mandate letter highlights this Government’s desire to work with Parliament to study and
analyze the possibility of national dental care.
• Dental care is only one aspect of our commitment to improving health care for Canadians. The
2019 Speech from the Throne committed to work with provinces and territories to address health needs
arising from the pandemic, but also to improve access to primary care, set standards for long-term care,
address the opioid epidemic and implement pharmacare for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-62 FEDERAL DENTAL CARE PLAN
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and Minister of Health Mandate Letter both committed to
support Parliament in studying and analyzing the possibility of a national dental care program.
• The results of this work by Parliament would be helpful for determining the best approach for
identifying gaps, improving access to dental care, and determining a federal role in this area. The
Government looks forward to the outcomes of Parliamentary work on this issue.
BACKGROUND
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health both
committed the Government to work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of national
dental care. The 2020 Speech from the Throne is silent on this issue.
• In February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) agreed to
undertake a study on the development of a national dental care program, although the study never
began during the last session. On October 26, 2020, New Democratic Party Member of Parliament Don
Davies introduced a motion that HESA undertake a study on the development of a national dental care
program as an insured service for Canadians. Health Canada remains ready to support a study by the
Committee, should it decide again to undertake that work.
• In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental
care program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated
that this program would cost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3
billion to clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually
through 2024-25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year,
and decrease to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
• During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified inequality and
wasted spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care avoidance due to cost results in
preventable oral health emergency room spending. The NDP planned to address this issue through a
national, income-based “Denticare” plan that would have provided free care for households earning
under $70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between $70,000 and
$90,000.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental
services in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was
publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans.
• Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care
for all residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select
services for groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
• Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental
coverage for services not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental
services to Canadian Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries, and some veterans and
refugee claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of
Canada’s employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in
2020-21, which is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not
including the value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income
tax system provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable
medical expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical
expenses.
• Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
SYNOPSIS
Family violence, including all forms of intimate partner violence, accounts for roughly 40% of violent
crime reported to police. The emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic create additional risks for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families.
KEY MESSAGES
• Gender-based violence, including family violence, is a serious public health issue that can have
lasting impacts on both physical and mental health of Canadians.
• Our Government has invested nearly $200 million over the last five years to establish the
Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence.
• We are also investing approximately $6 million annually in community-based projects that
support the health of survivors of family violence.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government has announced new initiatives that can
help reduce the risk and impacts of family violence; including funding for Kids Help Phone, shelters and
sexual assault services, income support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable
organizations.
BACKGROUND
The consequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short and long-term mental
and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs. These can include: behavioural
problems in children; drug and alcohol use and attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and
lack of stable employment in adulthood; and, depression and financial problems in older adults. In
addition, spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created increased risks for the health and safety of many vulnerable
Canadians, as children and families face increased stress, and may have difficulty leaving abusive
relationships or accessing support or prevention programs.
One-third of Canadians reported that they were very or extremely concerned about family stress from
confinement, and 8% of Canadians reported that they were very or extremely concerned about the
possibility of violence in Canadians homes. Among people over the age of 50, 6% reported increased
verbal and physical conflict during the COVID-19 pandemic. Additional data collected in Fall 2020 will be
analysed to clarify the degree to which Canadians are personally experiencing violence during
confinement.
New Government Initiatives, announced between March and October 2020, that will help address
pressures on vulnerable families in the context of COVID-19 include:
• $7.5 million investment to Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis support for
children and youth;
• $100 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
• multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and families,
including the enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence, PHAC is investing
more than $8 million per year ongoing to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child
maltreatment, and equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to survivors.
Supporting the Health of Survivors of Family Violence
In addition to these new investments to prevent gender-based violence, PHAC invests over
$6 million per year to support the health of survivors of family violence, through guidance and training
for professionals, and through the delivery and testing of health promotion interventions for survivors.
These projects are measuring their impact on health outcomes such as anxiety, depression and Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Family Violence Initiative
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative (FVI), which brings together 12 departments
and agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family violence. On behalf of the FVI, PHAC
hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a web-based source of current information on family
violence for health professionals and the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to supports and
services available in each province and territory.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH)
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the unintended consequences of COVID-19 on
concerns of violence in the family and parenting challenges. The analysis will seek to estimate the
prevalence of concerns of violence among the population in Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and
compare prevalence in the previous year, while also identifying those groups that may potentially have a
higher risk of these concerns than the general population.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family relationships
and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts surveillance on family violence; and supports analysis to
understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
Home Care
SYNOPSIS
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is some evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services
during the first wave of the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal
care This situation increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
• In light of COVID-19, the federal government is taking additional actions to help people stay in
their homes longer while working alongside the provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the government doing to ensure that Canadians have access to quality home care
services during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over ten years directly to provinces
and territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• To support Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada and
provincial/territorial governments also reached a $19B Safe Restart Agreement, which includes $740
million in funding to support our most vulnerable populations, including incremental infection
prevention and control measures to protect those receiving home care and palliative care, and those in
long-term care.
• In the 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government committed to take additional action to
help people stay in their homes longer and to look at further targeted measures for personal support
workers, who do an essential service helping the most vulnerable in our communities.
• Our government will continue to take any action it can to support seniors while working
alongside the provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• In the Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada committed to fund up to $1 billion
for a Safe Long-Term Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people from COVID-19 and
support infection prevention and control in long-term care and assisted living facilities. This is in addition
to $740 million provided through the Safe Restart Agreements for provinces and territories to improve
measures to control and prevent infections in home care, long-term care, and palliative care facilities
and services.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care. This guidance was
developed through the National Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control and endorsed
by the Pan-Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home
care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
COVID Impacts on Home Care
The Canadian Institute for Health Information has highlighted the following impacts COVID-19 has had
on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home Care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement.
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, and lay out the initiatives that
each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
SYNOPSIS
The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. More than 67% of COVID-19 deaths in Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities.
Even residents of these facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation and
reduced services. This has highlighted longstanding challenges in supportive care, including gaps in
infection prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, testing, and visitation policies.
As of February 22, 2021, Ontario is the most affected province, with at least 121 known active outbreaks
in LTC/assisted living facilities in Ontario, followed by Manitoba (99), Alberta (83), Québec (82), British
Columbia (13), Saskatchewan (10), and New Brunswick (2). Additional outbreaks may be active across
provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the federal government doing to support provinces and territories in addressing major
issues in long-term care facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is taking important steps to respond to the significant challenges faced
by long-term care facilities across the country.
• In the Fall Economic Statement, we committed to fund of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people from COVID-19 in long-term care and
support infection prevention and control.
• Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
• We are also committing $6.4 million over two years, starting in 2020-21, to the Canadian
Foundation for Health Improvement to expand its LTC+ initiative, which supports pandemic
preparedness in long-term care facilities and seniors residences with coaching and seed funding to help
address gaps in infection prevention and control.
• Earlier this year, the Government of Canada and provincial/territorial governments reached a
Safe Restart Agreement, supported by over $19 billion in federal investments, to help provinces and
territories restart the economy, while making Canada more resilient to waves of the virus.
• This included $740 million in funding to support our most vulnerable populations, including
increasing infection prevention and control measures to protect those in long-term care, and those
receiving home care and palliative care.
• The Canadian Armed Forces have provided unwavering support to Canadians throughout the
COVID-19 pandemic. During the first wave of the pandemic they rapidly and successfully mobilized
approximately 1,700 personnel to provide support to long-term care facilities in Quebec and Ontario.
National Defence continues to stand ready to contribute to the whole-of-government response to
COVID-19, while also maintaining operational readiness abroad.
• The government also continues to work with the Canadian Red Cross to support provinces and
territories facing outbreaks in long-term care. The Red Cross works closely with local authorities in order
to provide assistance in long-term care homes.
• In addition, the Government of Canada is supporting provinces and territories through the
procurement and distribution of authorized vaccines, which will help protect long-term care residents.
• We will continue taking any action we can to address challenges in long-term care institutions
and support seniors, while working alongside the provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published guidance on the care of residents in long-
term care, as well as infection prevention and control guidance to help prevent COVID-19 infections
among residents and workers in long-term care and assisted-living facilities, as well as in home care. This
guidance was developed through the National Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control
and endorsed by the Pan-Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in hospitals
and long-term care facilities.
• The Government of Canada adapted the Investing in Canada Infrastructure program to respond
to the impacts of COVID-19. A new temporary COVID-19 Resilience stream has been created to provide
provinces and territories with added flexibility to use existing resources to fund quick-start, short-term
projects, including health infrastructure such as long-term care homes.
• In collaboration with partners, the Health Canada-funded Canadian Foundation for Healthcare
Improvement and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute have launched an initiative to spread promising
practices in preventing and mitigating the impact of COVID-19 on long-term care and retirement homes.
The goal of the initiative is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future
outbreaks.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE…
• The Government announced its intention to work with the provinces and territories to set new
national standards for long-term care so that seniors get the best support possible.
• The Government will also look at further targeted measures for personal support workers, who
do an essential service helping the most vulnerable in our communities. Canada must better value their
work and their contributions to our society.
• The Government of Canada will work with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to
explicitly penalize those who neglect seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
IF PRESSED ON THE FALL ECONOMIC STATEMENT…
• Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada committed up to $1
billion for a Safe Long-term Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care
and support infection prevention and control.
• Federal officials are currently working with their provincial and territorial counterparts to put
plans and mechanisms in place to flow this federal funding.
• Further, the government committed $6.4 million over two years, starting in 2020-21, to the
Canadian Foundation for Health Improvement to expand its LTC+ initiative, which supports pandemic
preparedness in long-term care facilities and seniors residences with coaching and seed funding to help
address gaps in infection prevention and control.
• The government also reiterated its commitment to establishing national standards for long-term
care as a means to address critical gaps in long-term care facilities, including raising the working
conditions of lower-wage essential workers in senior care, particularly personal support workers, who
have persevered in the face of adversity.
BACKGROUND
Concerning Outbreak
In the last week of February 2021, there has been a major outbreak of COVID-19 in the CHSLD Lionel-
Émond in Gatineau, Québec in which at least two dozen residents and staff tested positive. Most of the
latest cases are asymptomatic and were discovered only after scheduled screening.
Within this facility, 96% of residents have already received one dose of a COVID-19 vaccine in December
2020. It is important to note that all of the residents only received one dose of the vaccine, lowering its
efficacy in comparison to the full two-dose recommendation. It is also important to note that only 41%
of CHSLD workers in this facility have been vaccinated. This outbreak highlights the need to continue
taking infection prevention and control measures in long-term care facilities.
Reports and recommendations
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for the improvement for LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement (CFHI) and
Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI) released a report in summer 2020 outlining promising practices
in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term care and retirement homes prepare for
possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate their effects:
• Preparation;
• Prevention;
• People in the workforce;
• Pandemic response and surge capacity;
• Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and
• Presence of family.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Several provinces and territories have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities,
including Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of
the ongoing investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results.
Investigation reports completed to date have identified of key factors that contributed to the outbreaks
including staffing issues (e.g. shortages, lack of training/orientation, working ill/asymptomatic), lack of
proper PPE, insufficient equipment, poor communication between management/staff/families, poor
infrastructure and lack of managerial oversight. Key recommendations for quality improvement include
addressing staff challenges (e.g. increase full-time positions, staffing ratios, training), improve infection
prevention and control measures and improved pandemic planning.
Families of residents in long-term care facilities have publicly reported their frustration and concern
regarding how their loved ones are cared for, as well as the poor conditions in the residences. Families
are calling for increased accountability and systematic changes in how long-term care facilities are
operated. A number are bringing legal action against facilities over their COVID-19 response.
Government of Canada Actions
While long-term care is primarily a provincial and territorial responsibility, including the oversight of
publicly and privately operated long-term care homes, the federal government is taking a number of
steps to respond to the significant challenges faced by long-term care facilities across the country in the
context of the COVID-19 pandemic. These actions are laid out in the Key Messages and If pressed
sections.
LTC+: “Acting on Pandemic Learning Together” initiative: To help the long-term care sector share
learnings and strengthen pandemic preparedness, the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare
Improvement (CFHI) partnered with the Canadian Patient Safety Institute to launch the LTC+: Acting on
Pandemic Learning Together initiative. It is based on the findings captured in their report “Reimagining
Care for Older Adults: Next Steps in COVID-19 Response in Long-Term Care and Retirement Homes”
from summer 2020 (outlined in the Reports and recommendations section above). Participating teams
receive seed funding from CFHI to support needed improvements, access to training sessions and
materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components. As of January 7th,
2021, 351 teams are participating in the program with another 54 applications in process. It is this
initiative that received an additional $6.4M in funding through the Fall Economic Statement. Recently,
CFHI released a checklist for essential care partners for safely re-entering long-term care homes during
COVID-19.
The Fall Economic Statement also provides $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social
Development Canada to support training up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an
accelerated 6-week online training program combined with a 4-month work placement, to address
acute labour shortages in long-term care and home care.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On September 24, CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly funded LTC homes
offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of these facilities can be public or private.
Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory. Overall, 54% of
LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (28% for-profit, 23% not-for-profit and 3% no breakdown) and
46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (ie, Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was transferred to the
province in April 2016. VAC now supports about 4000 Veterans in over 1150 provincially and privately
owned and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an enhanced level of
services and specialized programs for veterans.
Since 2007, Revera Inc. is a wholly-owned operating subsidiary of the Public Sector Pension Investment
Board (PSPIB), an independent Crown corporation established under the Public Sector Pension
Investment Board Act in 1999 and is registered under the Canada Business Corporations Act.
The PSPIB operates at arm's length from the federal government – i.e., it is not part of the federal public
administration. Its business affairs are managed by an 11-member Board of Directors, and investment
decisions are informed by a governance model outlined in the PSPIB Act.
Canadian Armed Forces
The Canadian Armed Forces have provided unwavering support to Canadians throughout the COVID-19
pandemic.
During the first wave of the pandemic they rapidly and successfully mobilized approximately 1,700
personnel to provide support to long-term care facilities in Quebec and Ontario. Over two and a half
months, the Canadian Armed Forces made a difference in a total of 54 long-term care facilities – 47 in
Quebec and 7 in Ontario.
CAF members were properly supported, trained, and equipped throughout every stage of their
deployment. National Defence continues to stand ready to contribute to the whole-of-government
response to COVID-19, while also maintaining operational readiness abroad.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – DEBATE ON BILL C-7
SYNOPSIS
• Bill C-7 was originally tabled on February 24, 2020 to respond to the Superior Court of Quebec
decision in Truchon, which struck down the eligibility requirement of a reasonably foreseeable natural
death (RFND). Consideration of the Bill was paused in Spring 2020 due to the pandemic and the Bill died
on the order paper with the prorogation of Parliament in August 2020. The Bill was reintroduced in the
House of Commons on October 5, 2020 with no changes.
• The Quebec court originally suspended its judgment until March 11, 2020. This deadline has
since been extended four times, most recently to March 26, 2021. If legislative changes are not passed
prior to this date, there will be a difference in eligibility for MAID between Quebec and the rest of
Canada.
• Bill C-7 was passed in the House of Commons and referred to the Senate on December 10, 2020.
It was studied by the Senate Standing Committee on Legal and Constitutional Affairs who heard over
130 witnesses (pre-study and formal review). The Senate referred the Bill, with proposed amendments,
to the House of Commons on February 18, 2021. The Government tabled a motion in response to these
amendments on February 23, 2021, which are being debated in the House.
• The original MAID legislation required that a Parliamentary Review of its provisions and of the
state of palliative care in Canada be initiated at the start of the 5th year following Royal Assent to C-14 –
i.e. by June 2020. It was originally anticipated that this review would be initiated on time but this was
delayed due to the pandemic.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• The Quebec Court has yet again extended the timeline for applying the Truchon decision, likely
for the last time. Will the Government finally meet this timeline?
KEY MESSAGES
• Bill C-7 was reintroduced in Parliament on October 5, 2020. It responds to the Truchon decision,
while also addressing areas where there is strong provider and public support for improvement in the
medical assistance in dying law.
• The Quebec Court responded to our request for some additional time to conclude the legislative
process. We are working diligently with Parliamentarians to meet the new deadline of March 26, 2021
and provide a consistent legal framework for MAID for all Canadians.
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the Parliamentary Review, which will provide an
opportunity to address complex issues not addressed in Bill C-7. It is up to Parliament to determine the
scope and timing of this review.
If pressed on Private Members Bill C-268: Protection of Freedom of Conscience Act
• The Criminal Code provides significant protection for health care professionals in relation to
MAID.
• The current legislation explicitly states that nothing in the MAID legislation compels a health
care provider to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in dying. This is not changed by
Bill C-7.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. These proposed amendments were:
● remove the RFND eligibility requirement (those suffering solely from mental illness would not be
eligible);
● introduce two-tracks of safeguards (RFND and non-RFND);
● allow “waiving of final consent” for eligible persons in the RFND category who may lose capacity
to consent before MAID is provided; and
● expand data collection to provide a more complete picture of MAID in Canada
The original Bill was terminated with the prorogation of Parliament. Bill C-7 was re-introduced on
October 5, 2020; its content was unchanged.
The Quebec court originally suspended its judgement until March 11, 2020. In response to requests by
the Government of Canada, the date of invalidity has been extended four times, most recently to March
26, 2021. During the period of suspension, Quebec residents who meet all eligibility requirements (other
than RFND) are able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their request
for MAID considered.
As of early March 2021, 19 Quebec residents have applied for exemptions. Eighteen of these requests
have been approved, with one request still pending. Two people have received MAID through an
individual exemption, including Jean Truchon.
GOVERNMENT RESPONSE TO SENATE AMENDMENTS
On Tuesday, February 23rd, the Government tabled a motion in response to the Senate’s amendments
to Bill C-7 as follows:
• Include a sunset clause of 24 months, after which the exclusion of individuals with a mental
illness as a sole underlying medical condition would become invalid. This includes an obligation for the
Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an independent review on MAID for persons with a mental
illness.
• An obligation to initiate a Parliamentary Review within 30 days following Royal Assent. This
would address issues such as mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative
care, and the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
• An obligation for the Minister of Health to make regulations for the collection of information
about the race, Indigenous identity and/or respecting any disability of a person who requests or receives
MAID, if that person consents. Regulations would guide the use, analysis and interpretation of that
information, including for the purposes of determining the presence of any inequality – including
systemic inequality – or disadvantage based on race, Indigenous identity, disability or other
characteristics, in MAID.
The Government did not accept two other Senate amendments: one proposing to define mental illness
to ensure that individuals with neuro-cognitive diseases are not automatically ruled ineligible for MAID;
and another which would allow advance requests as well as a waiver of final consent for persons who
are eligible for MAID but are not dying.
BILL C-268 PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT
Bill C-268, the Protection of Freedom of Conscience Act, proposes to amend the Criminal Code to create
two hybrid offences to protect the conscience rights of healthcare providers in relation to MAID: (1) an
offence prohibiting the use of violence or threats of violence, coercion or intimidation to compel a
healthcare professional to participate, directly or indirectly, in the provision of MAID; and an offence
prohibiting firing or refusing to employ healthcare professionals because they refuse to take part in
providing MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
As outlined in the current legislation, the 2016 law was to be referred to one or more Parliamentary
Committees by June 2020, but this did not take place as a result of the pandemic. The parliamentary
review will provide an opportunity to undertake a comprehensive review of the MAID legislation, as well
as the state of palliative care in Canada. The timing and scope of the review have not yet been set, and
will be determined by Parliamentarians.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID require the federal Minister of Health to produce an annual
report of MAID data. The first report, released on July 24, 2020, covers data collected under the new
reporting regime for the 2019 calendar year.
This report indicated that, in 2019, there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID, accounting for 2.0% of all
deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This represents an
increase of 26.1% over 2018 numbers, with all provinces experiencing a steady year over year growth in
the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all data sources are considered, the total of number of
medically assisted deaths reported in Canada since the enactment of federal legislation is 13,946.
Importantly, it also found that the majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported to have
received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access palliative care services
before receiving MAID, the majority (89.6%) would have had access to these services according to the
reporting practitioner. Similarly, 89.9% of persons receiving MAID deemed to require disability support
services received them.
Federal reporting regulations setting out requirements for physicians, nurse practitioners and
pharmacists came into force in November 2018. Under this new reporting regime, data is collected on
all written requests for MAID and its provision. The regulations will need to be updated to reflect the
changes to the legislation proposed by Bill C-7.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The Government remains committed to increasing access to mental health and substance use
resources and supports for Canadians whose regular services are not accessible.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address the increased stress, worry, and anxiety that
Canadians are experiencing due to COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 continues to create stress and anxiety for
many Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access to their regular support networks.
That is why the Government has launched a new online portal that provides access to a virtual network
of psycho-social supports.
• Wellness Together Canada is the first national program of its kind, providing 24/7 access to free
evidence-based tools and resources.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, Canadians across the country can access supports ranging
from self-assessment and peer support, to confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists and
other professionals.
• Wellness Together Canada complements existing provincial and territorial services, and does not
replace them.
• All services are available in both official languages, and phone counselling sessions are
supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and dialects.
• To date, the Government of Canada has invested $68M in Wellness Together Canada.
• Wellness Together Canada adds to the suite of virtual tools, such as the Canada COVID-19
mobile app, ensuring that Canadians have access to information, resources, and other supports during
this difficult time.
• As part of the Safe Restart Agreement, $500M was also provided directly to provinces and
territories for immediate mental health and substance use service needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCESS THAT HEALTH CANADA UNDERTOOK TO AWARD
THE CONTRACT FOR WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• Health Canada with Public Services and Procurement Canada launched a competitive process to
provide funding through a targeted request for proposals (RFP).
• A targeted approach was necessary due to the scope and complexity of services required and
the urgency to provide mental health and substance use supports to Canadians during COVID-19.
IF PRESSED FOR INFORMATION ON THE CONSORTIUM OF ORGANIZATIONS MANAGING WELLNESS
TOGETHER CANADA
• Wellness Together Canada is the result of the work of a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
• Wellness Together Canada receives support from additional partners and stakeholders, such as
Greenspace, Bell Let's Talk, Canada Health Infoway, Mental Health Commission of Canada, Canadian
Psychological Association, and Medavie.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION...
• The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health information legislation and standards to
maintain the security and confidentiality of personal information.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for families who may be especially vulnerable
to stress given the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
• Our Government is quickly mobilizing efforts to develop and disseminate reliable and timely
public health resources to help families, including parents caring for children with Autism Spectrum
Disorder, navigate through these difficult times.
• Our Government also recognizes that young people are particularly vulnerable to mental health
challenges during these difficult times, and that many do not have access to needed supports.
• As a part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is
providing support to young people via phone, text and live chat.
• We are also investing an additional $7.5M in Kids Help Phone to support their ongoing services
for youth, as a leader in responding to the needs of young Canadians.
• In addition to these actions, the Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to
provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to expand access to mental health and
addiction services, including those provided to children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONT LINE WORKERS…
• Health care workers and other front line personnel working in stressful situations are
susceptible to mental health problems. That is why Wellness Together Canada features a dedicated text
line for front line workers that provides immediate access to psycho-social supports.
• In addition, the portal features Program Navigators that can assist front line workers and other
Canadians in accessing portal resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
• Wellness Together Canada provides culturally appropriate services to Canadians through an
inclusive portal experience, tailored to meet the needs of varying age groups and diverse populations.
• The portal also supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote
areas, facing stigma or financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Address Impact Of Covid-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Increasing Mental Health System Capacity
Health Canada has invested $68 million in Wellness Together Canada, a free 24/7 portal for mental
health and substance use supports. An amendment had been finalized that will augment supports,
expand the portal’s reach and capabilities in needed areas, and extend access to the portal until April
2021.
The initial funding for the portal was part of the $240.5M investment (described below) to increase
access to virtual services and digital tools to support Canadians’ health and well-being during COVID-19:
• $25M for Wellness Together Canada
• $15M to support the growing family of digital products that includes the Canada COVID-19 app
• $200M to expand virtual care services across Canada in partnership with provinces, territories
and other federal partners, such as Canada Health Infoway.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. Funding is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral
agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction services for
children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven models of
community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary health
services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment, $500M has been allocated to support
immediate mental health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service
infrastructure (workforce, targeted programs) to provide wrap-around care, harm reduction and
evidence-based treatment services and programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC is providing $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to respond to the increased demand for mental health
services for children and youth.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is currently leading a COVID-19 and Mental Health
Research Initiative in collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. This work is
guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and
substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will
inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is providing $21 million over five years to the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis Services Canada. This
service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained
responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing stigma,
disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release
in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• I’m proud that our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from
donating blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the
deferral period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration
with Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional
research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of plasma.
• This research is ongoing. Health Canada remains open to assessing future changes to the MSM
donor deferral policy, including its elimination, provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
• To date, the department has not yet received a submission from the blood operators to
eliminate the deferral period in question.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor
screening requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without
this evidence, the current screening policies cannot be changed.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
• This matter is presently before the court and further details of Canada’s legal position will be
provided to the court.
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
Canadian Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (H-Q) were created as arm’s length organizations
responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they
are required to make submissions to HC for any changes to their policies, such as changes to donor
deferrals. These submissions must include scientific data that support the safety of the proposed
changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before they can be implemented, but has no authority
to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed, except in extraordinary situations when safety
issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing nineteen (19) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are
under evaluation for MSM.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as Austria, China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other
countries, including the Netherlands, France and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain
and Italy there is no MSM deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as
having sex with more than one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have
adopted a 3-month deferral including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and
Australia (January 2021).
More recently, on December 14th, 2020, the UK accepted changes that lift the MSM blood donation
deferral based on recommendations by the UK-wide For Assessment of Individualised Risk (FAIR)
steering group. Changes are expected to be implemented in summer 2021.
OVERDOSE CRISIS
SYNOPSIS
• The overdose crisis continues to be a serious and unrelenting public health threat. Tragically, the
COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions across the
country reporting increases in overdose deaths and harms. In addition, people who use drugs are also
facing additional barriers and risks related to the toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to
health and social services, including life-saving harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government addressing the overdose crisis in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s recent history.
• Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated long-standing challenges regarding
substance use and the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose
deaths and harms.
• Our government has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis using a public health-
focused approach, guided by our federal drug strategy – the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
We continue to support efforts to improve access to treatment services; increase access to harm
reduction services; strengthen enforcement to help reduce the toxic illicit drug supply; increase
awareness and prevention efforts; and, build the evidence base through investments in research and
surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
frontline services providers and people with lived and living experience, to advance solutions to save
lives and help reverse this national public health crisis while recognizing that problematic substance use
must be treated as a health condition.
IF PRESSED:
On COVID-19-specific measures
• The Government of Canada has taken swift action to address the unique challenges posed by
the COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have taken urgent action to enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use and avert the harms associated with the increasingly toxic
supply of street drugs and challenges associated with accessing treatment and harm reduction services.
• For example, we removed regulatory barriers to make it easier for people with substance use
disorder to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for overdose prevention sites
to be established rapidly in temporary community shelters and other locations.
• We have also provided $500 million under the Safe Restart Agreements with Provinces and
Territories to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and protection of people experiencing
challenges related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
• To build on significant funding provided in Budget 2018 and Budget 2019, our Government
provided an additional $66 million over two years to support community-based efforts in responding to
substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19 context.
IF PRESSED:
On treatment
• Our government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those
struggling with substance use lead fulfilled lives.
• That is why we have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and
facilitated their prescribing and dispensing through regulatory amendments; supported the
development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist treatment; and encouraged the
provinces and territories to increase their uptake of these evidence-based treatments.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has also provided $150 million in Budget 2018 through
the Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
IF PRESSED:
On harm reduction
• The evidence is clear, harm reduction measures help reduce harms and save lives.
• That is why, we have funded innovative pilot projects for safer supply models as an alternative
to the toxic illegal drug supply; approved 38 supervised consumption sites; passed the Good Samaritan
Drug Overdose Act to provide legal protection for people who seek emergency help during an overdose;
and increased access to naloxone, including to remote communities and isolated First Nations and Inuit
communities and to the homeless-serving sector.
IF PRESSED:
On awareness and prevention
• Our government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention efforts, including
awareness building.
• That is why we have invested in prevention campaigns to engage youth and young adults on the
facts of substance use, expanded public awareness around opioids and the harms of stigma via public
health campaigns; and supported the development of opioid prescribing guidelines and treatment
guidelines.
IF PRESSED:
On Safer Supply
• Our government is aware that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous illegal
drug supply, resulting in tragic increases in overdose-related deaths across the country.
• For this reason, we have taken a number of actions to reduce barriers to providing people who
use drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply. For example, we
have issued exemptions to pharmacists, and eased restrictions on the transportation of controlled
substances, to make it easier for people to access the medications they need during the pandemic.
• In addition, the Government of Canada is providing funding to support safer supply projects in
British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The evaluation of these innovative
projects will continue to build the evidence base and support the scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED:
On Supervised Consumption Sites
• International and Canadian evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms
and save lives.
• These sites reduce risk of overdose death and of transmission of infection. In addition, they
provide access to other health and social services for people who use drugs, including opportunities to
access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territories, people with lived and living experience,
and other stakeholders to take appropriate measures to maintain and expand access to supervised
consumption services in communities that need them.
IF PRESSED:
On enforcement/toxic drug supply
• Our government recognizes that the toxic illicit drug supply is the leading cause of opioid
overdose harms and deaths, and law enforcement must support a public health response.
• That is why, we have worked with domestic and international partners to reduce the illegal
fentanyl supply; equipped border agents with tools to intercept fentanyl; and, worked with private
sector partners to address money laundering of the proceeds of fentanyl trafficking.
IF PRESSED:
On Decriminalization
• Our Government recognizes that substance use is first and foremost a health issue.
• We have lost too many Canadians to drug overdoses, and an increasing number of stakeholders
are saying criminalizing personal drug possession is hurting, not helping.
• We are looking at ways to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system
and towards health and social supports, such as supervised consumption sites and drug treatment
services.
• The Public Prosecution Service of Canada has issued a directive to only pursue charges for
possession of illegal drugs in the most serious cases. In addition, recently announced amendments to
federal drug laws in Bill C-22 would further support actions to treat simple drug possession more as a
health issue, rather than as a criminal one.
• We will continue to work with other levels of government and stakeholders to help save lives
and better support the needs of people who use drugs during this crisis.
IF PRESSED:
On research and surveillance
• Our government recognizes that in order to have an effective response to the ever-changing
crisis, a strong understanding and evidence-base is required to make informed and timely decisions.
• That is why, we have collected and published data on opioid-related deaths and harms; used
modelling to show how the opioid overdose crisis may change as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
conducted rapid knowledge synthesis; and, developed a range of guidance documents to support
evidence-based interventions.
IF PRESSED
On the Section 56 Exemption Request from the City of Vancouver and British Columbia that would
decriminalize the personal possession of drugs
• Health Canada is working with the Province of British Columbia and the City of Vancouver. We
will continue our work to get Canadians who use substances the support they need.
• Health Canada is committed to carefully reviewing any request for an exemption under the
Controlled Drugs and Substance Act on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential benefits and
risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED:
On the Department of Justice’s Proposed Amendments to the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs
and Substances Act (Bill C-22, Introduced February 18, 2021)
• This Bill represents an important step forward in treating substance use as a health issue and
addressing systemic issues in the criminal justice system that disproportionately affect Indigenous
peoples and Black Canadians.
• We understand that many stakeholders are continuing to call for full drug decriminalization.
• We remain committed to saving lives and better supporting the needs of people who use drugs
during this crisis.
IF PRESSED:
On pain
• Our government recognizes the close links between people who live with pain, substance use
and the overdose crisis.
• That is why we created the Canadian Pain Task Force to better understand these links and to
identify potential actions to better prevent and manage chronic pain in Canada.
• We have also invested over $175M in pain-related research through the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research and close to $15M in funding for 12 initiatives focused on improving opioid prescribing
practices and pain management through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP).
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 17,602 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and June 2020. Fentanyl and its analogues are the main driver of these deaths with as
many as 75% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2020 (January to June) involving fentanyl.
While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with death most common
among males aged 20 to 49 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing increased risks related to an increasingly toxic illicit drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Available information indicate at least five provinces and
territories have observed record-breaking numbers of deaths in April to June 2020.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be the
most impacted region of the country. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,716
illegal drug toxicity deaths, a 74% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Tragically, overdose
deaths among First Nations people in BC have also surged, almost doubling between January and May
2020 compared to the same period in 2019. In 2020, Alberta also experienced a 61% increase in opioid
overdose deaths among First Nations people, as compared to the same time period in 2019.
Other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar trends. Ten provinces and territories (ON, AB,
SK, MB, QC, NB, PEI, NL, YK, and NWT) are also reporting increases in toxicity of the illicit drug supply,
overdose deaths and/or emergency department or medical service (EMS) calls.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of nearly
$700M to address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products and tools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statement (December 2020) to help support community-based
organizations responding to substance use issues address the additional challenges posted by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken regulatory action to make it
easier for people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for frontline
service providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
PHARMACARE
SYNOPSIS
• In February 2020, the NDP introduced Private Member’s Bill C-231 to implement single-payer
universal pharmacare, as well as a motion that passed with Government support in March 2020. On
February 24, 2021, Bill C-231 was defeated at second reading.
• In Budget 2019, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and the Fall Economic Statement, the
Government committed to implement national pharmacare, beginning with the creation of a Canadian
Drug Agency, a national formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare program?
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• We have done more than any government in a generation to lower drug prices.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working together with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to implement national universal pharmacare so that Canadians have the drug coverage
they need.
• We are establishing a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with public and stakeholder engagement on a national
strategy for high cost drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
• We have already taken action to improve access and affordability of medicines. For example, we
modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will save Canadians billions
over the next decade.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
• On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact
the Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative
framework for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213
was defeated on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
• On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don
Davies (Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the
Hoskins Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the
immediate initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a
new, dedicated fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be
long term, predictable, fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage,
which protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to
Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while
making life more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with
Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders
through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12,
2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national
universal pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
• Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal
investments to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote
more consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians
get better access to the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canada Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne and Fall Economic
Statement.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its mandate to
protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will
result in savings for governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years.
However, the brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns
that the amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
• On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that maintained most of the
regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information On
December 18, 2020, a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the
Attorney General of Canada. These decisions are currently being appealed.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’) to provide the PMPRB with new tools and information needed
to protect Canadians from excessive prices of patented medicines.
• On October 23, 2020, the PMPRB published its final Guidelines to operationalize the
Amendments.
• As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to challenge all stakeholders, the coming-into-force date
of the Amendments has been delayed by an additional six months, from January 1, 2021 to July 1, 2021.
This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations and familiarize
themselves with the final Guidelines.
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry have challenged the Amendments in Court, and have
expressed concerns that they could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to
medicines. The Courts ruled to maintain most of the Amendments, but struck down the collection of
confidential rebate information. The rulings are currently the subject of an appeal by the applicants and
cross-appeal by the Crown.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why does the Government insist on continuing with the amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations when it impacts Canadians’ access to new medicines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains committed to increasing the affordability and accessibility of
prescription drugs, including patented medicines, to improve the health of Canadians and better meet
health care system needs.
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices
negatively affect the ability of patients to access new medicines. These regulatory amendments will help
Canadians to afford the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are
launched in major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are well
below those in Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Norway are examples of this.
If Pressed on the Coming-into-Force Date
• The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demands on the pharmaceutical industry and we are
mindful that all stakeholders continue to be challenged with the current situation. For that reason, the
Government delayed the coming into force of the amendments by another six months—until July 1,
2021.
• This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations introduced
by these Amendments. A delay will also provide industry more time to familiarize themselves with the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines which were published in October 2020.
If Pressed on the Access to COVID-19 Patented Medicines (Drugs and Vaccines):
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its final Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to specified
patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-wide effort
to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19 diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry and Drug Access
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
If pressed on impact on pharmaceutical investments in Canada
• Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical industry investments, while having
considerably lower prices than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times more investment
dollars than Canada despite prices being 20% less.
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products, and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
If pressed on recent litigation
• The Government of Canada is pleased that the courts have upheld the majority of the
Amendments.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to these regulatory amendments and as the
matter is still before the court, no further comments will be made.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines Consultation Process
• The PMPRB has published all written submissions it received during its consultation with
stakeholders and the public on the draft Guidelines.
• The PMPRB made revisions to the final Guidelines in response to the significant stakeholder
feedback it received.
• The PMPRB published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020. In light of the second delay of the
coming-into-force, the PMPRB initiated a consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines, which closed on February 15, 2021.
BACKGROUND
• The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the
government, reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian
market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions, or hold public
hearings to determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of
excess revenues.
• The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire
into any matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister.
Additionally, the Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the
Patented Medicines Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada
Gazette, Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of
patented medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments
(e.g. rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable
consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft
Guidelines that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020
and published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed twice in response to the
increased demands and challenges on industry stakeholders due to COVID-19. On March 29, 2020,
stakeholders were informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021, and most recently, the
coming-into-force date was delayed further to July 1, 2021. These delays provide additional time for
stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final
Guidelines.
• In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, the PMPRB
initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their Guidelines. These two
proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance timelines. The
deadline to submit written comments closed February 15, 2021.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB is developing a comprehensive Guideline Monitoring and
Evaluation Plan (GMEP) to assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any future adjustments
required to ensure that they are working as intended. The GMEP will be used to monitor four different
areas: impact on prices, impact on access, impact on the ecosystem and impact on PMPRB processes.
• The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In
the Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-
name companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the
Court upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information.
• On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently
needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating
that special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against
COVID-19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim
Orders will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the
federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is refelected in
the PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
SYNOPSIS
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices which pose significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, this includes working with willing provinces, territories and stakeholders to establish a national
strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement and the Speech from the Throne referenced a rare diseases
strategy, which was previously included as a commitment in Budget 2019. Why has the Government not
delivered on this strategy while Canadians with rare diseases desperately wait?
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases.
• We have also launched an online engagement on the Health Canada website where Canadians -
especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers - can provide their views on the
national strategy. By participating in a public town hall or completing the online questionnaire, all
Canadians are invited to share their ideas before the engagement closes on March 26, 2021.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. The
recent Fall Economic Statement highlights the Government’s continued commitment in developing a
national strategy.
• Our Government has also been working with key stakeholders to improve access by encouraging
the development and availability of drugs for rare diseases for Canadians. In 2019, 16 of the 35 new
drugs Health Canada approved were drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy by 2022-2023, starting with a comprehensive engagement process
in late 2020 and continuing into early 2021.
• The online engagement is now open and all Canadians, especially patients with rare diseases
and their families, are encouraged to visit the Health Canada website to share their views on what a
national strategy might look like.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. There have been approximately 150 drugs accessed through the program
for the treatment of rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH…
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
• Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They
are often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
• Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the
world. They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a
handful of individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare
disease.
• Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of
the public health care system.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical
need. Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare
diseases.
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to protect consumers
from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for
governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could
result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and
overall quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
• Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government
drug plans, through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
• Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in
clinical trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases
where criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to
drugs that are unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for
the treatment of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on high cost drugs for rare diseases,
including on new drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national
strategy.
• To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients
taking high-cost drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other
health system partners for federal funding for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs.
affordability vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also
help manage expectations around the limits of federal funding.
• In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their
officials to establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the
national strategy.
• A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and is continuing in early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians can
also provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire. The perspectives
gathered from this process will help to inform the design of the national strategy.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting
research on rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research
initiatives, such as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate
medical breakthroughs for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22
countries.
• As of 2017, this international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies
for rare diseases.
SUICIDE PREVENTION IN CANADA
SYNOPSIS
Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across Canada.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is supporting the implementation of a fully operational pan-
Canadian suicide prevention service, which is providing 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government recognizes the impact suicide has on families and communities.
• That is why we are investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR COVID-19
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced an additional $43 million to provide further
support for the Wellness Together Canada portal and the resources it offers. To date, the Government
of Canada has invested $67 million in Wellness Together Canada.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help
Phone to provide crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing additional funding for the Canada Suicide
Prevention Service to support the increased demand for crisis support at this time.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A 3-DIGIT NUMBER FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION CRISIS
SUPPORT
• As demonstrated by the recently passed motion calling on the federal government to set up a
national 988 number, there is great interest in exploring the implementation of a 3-digit number in
Canada.
• As a first step, there is a need to gain a better understanding of the regulatory, technological
and resource implications in the Canadian context.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission is responsible for
establishing any three digit abbreviated codes and is currently conducting outreach with certain
stakeholders on the implications of providing such a number.
BACKGROUND
Over the past 10 years, there was an average of 4,000 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which
results in 10 to 12 people that died by suicide every day. Suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a
combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal
issues and loss, childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has provided proof of concept funding to Crisis Services
Canada (CSC) in the amount of $5.46 million over five years (2015/16 to 2020/21) to support the
development of the Canada Suicide Prevention Service (CSPS), a national phone, text and chat suicide
prevention service that links existing telephone and distress and crisis infrastructures throughout
Canada. Quebec is serving its residents through its provincial suicide prevention line: 1-866-APPELLE.
PHAC is providing $21 million over five years, starting in 2020-21, to the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
CAMH will lead this initiative in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) and
Crisis Services Canada (CSC).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention (Framework) was made publicly available in November
2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and
promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework were
released in 2016 and 2018 on Canada.ca, with the most recent report made publicly available in a
Minister’s Message posted December 2020.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH) and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events
(SMHSE)
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and self-
harm. The analysis will seek to estimate the prevalence of suicide ideation among the population in
Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and compare this to pre-pandemic prevalence, while also
identifying those groups that may potentially have a higher risk of suicide than the general population.
Motion 174 – A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan. On May 8, 2019,
parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174, though it is non-binding. The proposed actions
in the plan are aligned with the Framework. PHAC will facilitate the coordination and collaboration on
elements of the action plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders through its
convening role on the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. An update on M-174 was included
under the Framework progress report from December 2020.
3-Digit Suicide Prevention National Telephone Line – 9-8-8 Campaign in Canada
In line with the efforts of the U.S. and the U.K. to designate memorable 3-digit numbers for their suicide
prevention national lines, on December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of the
motion sponsored by MP Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia) calling on the federal
government to act immediately to set up a national 988 number that would consolidate all existing
suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission is responsible for establishing any
three digit abbreviated codes and is currently conducting outreach with stakeholders on the implications
of providing such a number.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
Demand for crisis support has increased significantly since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak. Through
the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada announced a $50 million investment to
bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to distress
centres in winter/spring 2021 (fiscal year 2020-21), with a portion of funds retained for a second round
of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. This second round of grants will be available for recipients with
remaining or emerging needs, or for eligible organizations not included in the first round of funding.
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic. On November 9, 2020,
media reported that some Kids Help Phone counselors are experiencing distress due to the practice of
strict performance targets (e.g. time management, unanswered calls). Kids Help Phone has indicated
that it will move away from this practice and offer more mental health support to its counsellors. PHAC’s
funding agreement does not require these performance targets. A portion of the federal investment is
supporting Kids Help Phone employees through a support and self-care program for staff and service
volunteers.
The Government of Canada recently launched Wellness Together Canada, a new portal dedicated to
mental wellness and substance use issues. The portal connects Canadians to peer support workers,
social workers, psychologists and other professionals for confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
Through its COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) is currently supporting more than 100 research projects on COVID-19 and Mental Health,
including problematic substance use ($13.5 million from CIHR and partners). These important projects
will look at mental health during and after the pandemic and will generate new evidence to inform the
Mental Health response to the pandemic. Ultimately, they will help offer new evidence-based
treatments and services to all Canadians, especially for priority populations that may be experiencing
acute mental health concerns associated with COVID-19.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
SYNOPSIS
• Minister Hajdu’s 2019 mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will
continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare and renew
health agreements. This work will include ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams,
setting national standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and palliative care. Since
then, the 2020 Speech from the Throne has confirmed these priorities, also committing $1B for safe
long-term care, and to working with PTs to set new national standards for long-term care. This
commitment and new investment build on the bilateral agreements that are in place and will be
renewed in 2022 to support improved access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services. Consistent with the FPT endorsed Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities and the long-term funding agreements agreed to by all provinces and territories, these
bilateral agreements will result in measurable improvements and public reporting on the outcomes
achieved. This work will respect the asymmetrical arrangement agreed to with the Province of Quebec.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to support provincial and territorial health care
systems in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has shown the need for resilient health care systems in Canada, and our
government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen
Medicare.
• In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers reached agreement on a Common Statement of Principles
on Shared Health Priorities supported by a targeted federal investment of $11 billion over 10 years for
provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services.
• Bilateral agreements set out details of how each jurisdiction will use federal funding, and these
agreements will be renewed starting in 2022-23 for the remaining five years of the 10-year
commitment.
• Our government is now building on this approach and is also providing $150 million for the rapid
deployment of virtual care services, and $1 billion to support safe long-term care in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• Through this work, our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories
in order to improve health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE LETTER COMMITMENT ON PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
• There are almost 90,000 physicians in Canada, a record number, but access to care is still an
issue for some Canadians.
• Our Government is committed to engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, health
professionals and experts to help make sure Canadians can access primary health care when they need
it.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
• Budget 2017 provided $11 billion in new targeted funding over 10 years to provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services,
and more recently targeted support has been announced for virtual care and safe long-term care of over
$1 billion.
• In addition to targeted funding, our Government will provide provinces and territories with over
$43 billion in 2021-22 through the Canada Health Transfer, totalling over $200 billion over the next 5
years.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home
and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $9.7 billion to Quebec in
2021-22.
IF PRESSED ON MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING
• The Government of Canada has consistently emphasized the importance of Canadians seeing
results for the investments in mental health and home care.
• In the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles, federal, provincial and territorial Ministers
of Health agreed to work collectively to develop a focused set of indicators to measure progress and
report to Canadians.
• In 2018, Ministers of Health agreed to a set of pan-Canadian indicators to measure progress.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information began reporting on the first of these indicators on annual
basis in 2019.
• In addition, provinces and territories have also included program-specific indicators in their
bilateral agreements.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE
• Our Government is committing up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care Fund, to help
provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection prevention and control.
• Provinces and territories will be able to use this investment to undertake priority activities,
including hiring additional staff (such as personal support workers) or topping up wages, infrastructure
improvements and readiness assessments for infection prevention and control.
• As a condition of funding, provinces and territories will need to provide a detailed plan, similar
to what has been provided for home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23.
• We are also working with provinces and territories to finalize virtual care agreements and to
flow funding for the Safe Long-term Care Fund.
BACKGROUND
Federal Commitment to the Health Accord (now referred to as the Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities):
In 2015, the Government committed to engage with the Provinces and Territories (PTs) to develop a
new Health Accord, including a new long-term agreement on funding. The Government also committed
to work jointly, and with Indigenous leaders, to explore areas of shared priority that will improve the
health of Indigenous Peoples.
Federal Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services as follows:
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, for better home and palliative care, and $1
billion over 4 years, starting in 2018-19, to address critical home care infrastructure requirements; and,
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, in support of mental health initiatives
This funding is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs. It
provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of
the Canada Health Act, which are: universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public
administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT.
Premiers have called for an increase to the Canada Health Transfers, and Finance officials have already
started working together with their provincial and territorial counterparts to examine the issues of fiscal
sustainability and health care spending.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-23
to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will continue to
work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare. This work will include
ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams, setting national standards for mental health
access, and supporting home care and palliative care.
Safe Long-term Care:
The Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care
Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Virtual Care:
On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
ESSURE BIRTH CONTROL
SYNOPSIS
• Essure is an implantable permanent birth control device. Complications from the device include
pain, changes in menstrual bleeding, and allergic (immune or hypersensitivity) reactions.
• The manufacturer (Bayer) voluntarily removed the device from the Canadian market in 2017.
• Media has suggested that the company and department were not transparent enough in sharing
adverse event reports.
• A story by CBC’s The Fifth Estate on March 4, 2021, alleges that the side effects of Essure were
not shared, and that more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from Bayer in
order to seek compensation for health complications they claim resulted from the birth control device.
The piece quoted an obstetrician-gynecologist who stated “many of the doctors really don't know the
definition of what an adverse event would be associated with such a procedure”.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to protect the health and safety of Canadian women who
experienced complications from the Essure permanent birth control device?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• A medical device is authorized after Health Canada completes a scientific assessment, ensuring
that it meets requirements for safety and effectiveness, and then continues to be monitored after
approval.
• When new safety concerns with the Essure device came to light, Health Canada assessed them
and issued a safety communication to inform patients and health care practitioners of the potential risks
associated with its use.
• The Department required the manufacturer to strengthen the product labelling with clear
warnings about the potential for adverse events, and to develop a patient information sheet and
checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the device.
• Even though the product is no longer available for sale in Canada, Health Canada continues to
monitor the safety of Essure devices in women that received these implants, and will take action, as
necessary, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• Women who have concerns about an implanted device should consult their health care
practitioner.
IF PRESSED…on mandatory reporting of medical device incidents
• As of December 2019, Health Canada requires hospitals to report medical device incidents and
serious adverse drug reactions.
• The reports submitted by hospitals are a valuable source of information for the monitoring of
health products.
• Health Canada is providing support and guidance to hospitals via outreach events, and online
educational modules.
IF PRESSED… what has been done to strengthen re regulation of medical devices in Canada
• Under the Medical Devices Action Plan, Health Canada has made significant strides to further
strengthen the regulation of medical devices in Canada.
• This plan lays out a three-part strategy to deliver better health outcomes for Canadians who rely
on medical devices for their health and well-being.
• The plan helps ensure the devices Canadians rely on for their health and well-being are subject
to continued safety and effectiveness requirements.
IF PRESSED… on US court proceedings
• Health Canada is unable to comment on U.S. court proceedings, and is unaware of the country
of origin for complaints made to other international regulators, or of the Canadian incidents included in
this litigation.
BACKGROUND
Essure is a birth control device implanted in the fallopian tubes of women who want permanent birth
control.
The product was licensed as a Class III medical device in Canada in 2002. All Class III and IV medical
device license applications must be supported by evidence of safety and clinical effectiveness. Health
Canada approves license applications based on the available data and on the risks and benefits of the
device.
Symptoms experienced by some Canadian women include chronic abdominal and pelvic pain, excessive
bleeding and autoimmune responses in women who have metal allergies. Thousands of injury
complaints surfaced in 2020 only after women in the U.S. filed lawsuits against Bayer. Health Canada
maintains an online registry where patients and doctors can report complications. The CBC piece
identified 98 adverse event reports associated with Essure in the Health Canada database.
The device was voluntarily discontinued by the manufacturer (Bayer) in October 2017. Bayer stated that
the decision to discontinue was based on low consumer demand of Essure worldwide and not related to
safety or effectiveness issues. Bayer sold approximately 10,000 units of Essure in Canada. The number of
patients in Canada relying on Essure for contraception is estimated to be 9,000.
Health Canada undertook two post-market safety reviews of Essure in February 2015 and April 2016. As
a result of these reviews, Health Canada identified actions to help improve awareness of the possible
risks and complications associated with its use. In 2016 and 2017, Health Canada communicated the
risks through safety alerts, public safety reviews and Health Product InfoWatch, a publication intended
for health care professionals. Bayer was required to incorporate stronger, clear warnings in the product
information materials. This included a new “boxed warning” emphasizing that Essure is a permanent
birth control system involving several steps which must be adhered to for effectiveness, and that the
device has possible complications that can be serious. The Department also required the company to
develop a patient information sheet and checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the
device.
Despite the discontinuation of Essure in Canada, Bayer has committed to fulfill their post-market
commitments to Health Canada by submitting Canadian reports as per the Medical Devices Regulations,
as well as the results of the ongoing surveillance study required by the US FDA. The estimated
completion date for that final study report is June 2025. Health Canada reviews these results, along with
any relevant new scientific or clinical information that may emerge, to assess if further measures might
be needed.
Medical Devices Action Plan (MDAP)
Examples of advances made since the launch of the MDAP:
A Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women was established to hear from patient
advocates, physicians and researchers on issues relating to women’s health and the regulation of the
medical devices and drugs that they use.
New federal regulations came into force in December 2019 that require all hospitals across the country
to report medical device incidents and serious adverse drug reactions to Health Canada. This helps
improve the reporting of valuable information about the “real world” experiences of patients and health
care professionals who are using these therapeutic products. In 2020, almost 3,500 medical device
incidents were submitted to Health Canada by hospitals.
Health Canada launched a database of medical device incident reports that is accessible to all Canadians.
Final regulatory amendments published in December 2020 establish new post-market authorities and
requirements for medical devices that are already in effect for drugs. The amendments:
• authorize the Minister of Health to order device manufacturers to conduct post-market safety
assessments;
• authorize the Minister of Health to order additional tests and studies to provide new
information on a device;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to report regulatory actions in certain foreign
jurisdictions related to their devices within a prescribed timeframe;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to periodically review device risk and benefit
information and notify Health Canada when there has been a change in the safety profile; and,
• require device manufacturers to provide an analysis of a safety and effectiveness issue in
response to a safety signal, when requested to do so by the Minister.
The Food and Drugs Act was amended in 2019 to increase Health Canada’s post-market oversight by
providing new authorities for inspectors, such as ordering a person to provide any document,
information or sample to the inspector.
Lawsuits
The Fifth Estate story alleges more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from
Bayer, the manufacturer of Essure, in order to seek compensation for health complications they claim
resulted from the birth control device. Bayer agreed to pay $1.6 billion to settle thousands of lawsuits in
the U.S. The story states Bayer has not settled any lawsuits in Canada and does not intend to.
