Created: 2024-02-23T20:02:28.143468
Name: Guidelines_for_managing_naturally_occurring_radioactive_material_(NORM)
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/health-risks-safety/radiation/occupational-exposure-regulations/guidelines-managing-naturally-occurring-radioactive-material.html
Package ID: 274cea6b-3da3-4b02-8ad8-8174ff057a76
Keywords: ['Naturally Occurring Radioactive Material', 'NORM', 'managing NORM', 'nature', 'natural sources', 'radionuclides', 'uranium', 'thorium decay chains', 'exposure to NORM']
Notes: Naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) is radioactive material found in nature due to natural sources (such as radionuclides in the uranium and thorium decay chains). Since all material found in nature contains some level of NORM, exposure to NORM is normal.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Guidelines for managing naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Health risks and safety Radiation and your health Occupational radiation exposure Guidelines for managing naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) Naturally occurring radioactive material (NORM) is radioactive material found in nature due to natural sources (such as radionuclides in the uranium and thorium decay chains). Since all material found in nature contains some level of NORM, exposure to NORM is normal. In Canada, the public and workers may be at risk for increased exposures to NORM from various industries. Guidelines designed to protect Canadians from exposure to NORM from industry are in place. Many of these industries fall under the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories, guided by the Federal Provincial Territorial Radiation Protection Committee (FPTRPC). The FPTRPC develops and aligns practices and standards for radiation protection within federal, provincial and territorial jurisdictions. It communicates these practices and standards to people living in Canada. The Canadian Guidelines for the Management of Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials are the result of the committee’s efforts. Health Canada, as an agent of the Government of Canada, acknowledges the importance of incorporating SGBA Plus principles in its guidance to promote greater health equity. These guidelines are strictly for the management of NORM in industry. They do not apply to exposures to radionuclides that may arise from nuclear power production, the nuclear fuel cycle or other artificial sources regulated by the Canadian Nuclear Safety Commission (CNSC). The CNSC does not regulate NORM except for the import, export and transport of the material. The guidelines consist of 3 volumes: Volume I: Radiation protection Guidance for industries where there’s a potential for increased NORM exposures to the public and workers as a result of work activities Volume II: Radon Guidance for industries where there’s a potential for increased radon exposures to workers Volume III: Transportation of NORM Radiation protection guidance for transporting NORM Volumes I and II are not yet published. When they are published, they will replace the Canadian Guidelines for the Management of Naturally Occurring Radioactive Materials. Until then, refer to these guidelines and Volume III for guidance on NORM. Related links Federal Provincial Territorial Radiation Protection Committee (FPTRPC) National dosimetry services Guide for radon measurements in residential dwellings (homes) Guide for Radon Measurements in Public Buildings Canadian Drinking Water Guidelines Packaging and transport of nuclear substances Regulations for the safe transport of radioactive material SGBA Plus (Sex and Gender-Based Analysis Plus) Page details Date modified: 2022-06-30 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy