Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:28.971176
Name: Profile_page_Guide_on_Mandatory_Reporting_under_Canada_Consumer_Product_Safety_Act_-_Section_14
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/legislation-guidelines/acts-regulations/canada-consumer-product-safety-act/industry/guide-mandatory-reporting-section-14-profile.html
Package ID: 2a761060-29f8-428d-8e59-06185252bb70
Keywords: ['consumer products', 'consumer-product-safety', 'mandatory reporting', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'section 14', 'reporting safety-related incidents']
Notes: Under the Act, you – as industry stakeholders - are responsible for making sure the consumer products you manufacture, import, sell or advertise are safe. You are also responsible for reporting health or safety-related incidents involving any of these consumer products.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Profile page Guide on Mandatory Reporting under Canada Consumer Product Safety Act - Section 14 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Consumer product safety legislation and guidelines Consumer product safety acts and regulations Meeting Canada Consumer Product Safety Act requirements For Industry: Canada Consumer Product Safety Act Profile page Guide on Mandatory Reporting under Canada Consumer Product Safety Act - Section 14 From Health Canada Overview Under the Act, you – as industry stakeholders - are responsible for making sure the consumer products you manufacture, import, sell or advertise are safe. You are also responsible for reporting health or safety-related incidents involving any of these consumer products. Section 14 of the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA; referred to in this guide as "the Act”) defines what an incident is and outlines the reporting timelines that you must meet in order to comply with the law. The purpose of this guide is to help you understand your obligations under Section 14 of the Act. What’s new for the 2018 industry guide? The reporting requirements in the legislation have not changed since 2011. The original industry guide on mandatory reporting was developed to coincide with the coming into force of the CCPSA in 2011. Health Canada heard from industry stakeholders that this guide was difficult to understand. In response, Health Canada issued a revised industry guide in 2015. Since 2015, through its compliance and enforcement activities, Health Canada has identified parts of the guide that would benefit from further clarification. The 2018 revised industry guide: clarifies that companies are expected to assess whether an incident has occurred using the best information available at the time and that this assessment must be carried out in a timely manner explains in more detail the information that should be included as part of a written report under subsection 14(3) provides more guidance on the process for requesting an extension to a written report under subsection 14(3) uses clearer, simpler language The core principles within the industry guide over the years have not changed significantly. Who this guide is for Industry stakeholders who sell, import or manufacture consumer products in Canada. In this guide 1. Scope of the CCPSA 2. Mandatory reporting 3. Who must report 4. When mandatory reporting is required 4.1 Paragraph 14(1)(a) – an occurrence 4.2 Paragraph 14(1)(b) – defect or characteristic 4.3 Paragraph 14(1)(c) - incorrect or insufficient information on a label or instructions 4.4 Paragraph 14(1)(d) – recalls or other measures 4.5 Serious adverse effects on health 4.6 Other Considerations 5. What to report 5.1 Section 14(2) report – preliminary information on the incident 5.2 Section 14(3) report 6. When to report 6.1 Reporting timelines 6.2 Requesting an extension to your reporting timelines 7. How to report incidents to Health Canada 7.1 Tips on using the online consumer product incident report form for industry 7.2 Provide new information on an incident 8. After you submit a 14(3) report to Health Canada 9. Some information on Confidential Business Information and Private Information under the Act 9.1 Confidential Business Information (CBI) 9.2 Personal Information View complete guide Details and history Published: May 26, 2015 Updated: October xx, 2018 Part of topic(s): Industry Recall Guide, Overview of Mandatory Reporting For assistance Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program if you need assistance: Contact us by e-mail: hc.cps-spc.sc@canada.ca Contact us by mail: By regular mail (do not send by courier) National Capital Region Consumer Product Safety Office Consumer Product Safety Program Health Canada 269 Laurier Avenue West Ottawa, ON K1A 0K9 AL 4907E Contact us by phone: 1-866-662-0666 (Canada and U.S. only. Calls will be routed to closest regional office). Related guides and help Industry Guidance - "Danger to Human Health or Safety" Posed by Consumer Products Recalling Consumer Products - A Guide for Industry Guidance on Preparing and Maintaining Documents under the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) - Section 13 Canada Consumer Product Safety Act - Information for Retailers Quick reference guide Quarterly infographic on Consumer Product and Cosmetics Reports Received Related acts and regulations Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) Privacy Act Related program Consumer Product Safety Page details Date modified: 2021-01-04 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy