Created: 2023-03-30T16:08:07.909882
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_mental_health_and_addictions_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(B)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/3304f709-4244-4c4b-9c31-0d7eb5cd6690/resource/db392b25-8536-439a-9ed8-cd9db00ea41e/download/disclosure-binder-supp-b-appearance-min.-bennett-en.pdf
Package ID: 3304f709-4244-4c4b-9c31-0d7eb5cd6690
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Health', 'House committee', 'Standing committee on health', 'budget']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions appearance before the standing committee on health on November 29, 2022 concerning the supplementary estimates B. 
The financial binder and the Minister Health's binder are available as separate resources

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Supplementary Estimates (B)
MINISTER BENNETT
Tuesday, November 29, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES B
MINISTER BENNETT
NOVEMBER 29, 2022
OVERVIEW DOCUMENTS
1. Scenario Note
2. Supplementary Estimates B Financial Notes
a. Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates B Funding Crosswalk (CFOB)
b. Health Canada Supps B Note
c. Public Health Agency of Canada Supps B Note
d. CIHR Supps B Note
e. CFIA Supps B Note
HOT ISSUES
3. Canada Mental Health Transfer
4. Health Human Resources and Health Transfers
5. 3-Digit Hotline
6. Opioid Overdose Crisis
7. Psychedelics
8. BLANK TAB
9. BLANK TAB
10. BLANK TAB
MENTAL HEALTH
11. Mental Health Tools
12. Mental Health Supports for Children and Youth
13. National Standards for Mental Healthand Substance Use Services
14. Online Harms
15. Perinatal Mental Health
16. Suicide Prevention
17. Rural Health and Mental Health
18. CIHR-Funded Mental Health and Addictions Research
DRUG USE
19. Safer Supply
20. s.56 Requests to Allow for Personal Possession
21. BC Opioid Health Care Cost Recovery Legislation
22. Substance Use Tools
CANNABIS/TOBACCO AND VAPING
23. Cannabis
24. Smoking, Tobacco and Vaping
25. Youth Vaping and Substance Use
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
26. MAID
OTHER HEALTH PORTFOLIO HOT ISSUES
27. Pediatric Analgesics Shortage (ROEB)
28. Post-COVID Condition
29. RSV
30. Dental Care
31. Abortion Access
32. ArriveCan App
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ONHEALTH (HESA)–SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES
(B), 2022-2023
November 29, 2022
MEETING SCENARIO
• You will be supported by the following officials who will appear with you at the meeting:
o Health Canada
Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
Heather Jeffery, Associate Deputy Minister
Dr. Supriya Sharma, Chief Medical Advisor
o PHAC
Dr. Harpreet Kochhar, President
Dr. Howard Njoo, Deputy Chief Public Health Officer
• Supporting you virtually will be:
o CIHR
Dr. Mike Strong, President
o CFIA
Philippe Morel, Vice-President, Operations
• The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will each have 5
minutes to deliver. You and Minister Duclos will then take questions from Committee members for the
remainder of the hour.
o The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
o In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5
minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will be the 44th time that HESA has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the 44th
Parliament. They are currently conducting the following three studies concurrently:
1. Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic
2. Canada's Health Workforce (Consideration of a Draft Report)
3. Children’s Health
• The Committee has recently taken an interest in the supply of pediatric medications, in
particular, children’s analgesics. On November 15, the Committee questioned Health Canada and PHAC
officials followed by hearings with stakeholders proposed by each party. During the meeting, a motion
moved by Conservative MP Dr. Stephen Ellis proposed that the Department provide the Committee with
weekly updates on the number of medications being imported into Canada to address the shortages.
After a period of debate and amendments, a revised motion was adopted on November 22, requiring
the Department to provide bi-weekly updates to the Committee. In the past, the Committee has taken
an interest in the proposed Canada Mental Health Transfer. In June 2022, the Committee adopted a
motion moved by the Conservatives to order Health Canada to produce all documents held by the
Department in relation to the new transfer. At other times, the Committee has indicated its desire to
undertake studies on women’s health, breast implants, and the national suicide hotline.
• At HESA, the Opposition role is led by the Conservatives, who have placed several key critics,
“shadow ministers,” on the Committee. Dr. Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health, Todd
Doherty is the Shadow Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention, Laila Goodridge is the
Shadow Minister for Addictions, and Matt Jeneroux is the Shadow Minister for Supply Chain Issues. Mr.
Jeneroux was also previously Shadow Minister for Health during the first months of the COVID-19
Pandemic.
• The Conservatives remain critical of COVID-19 mitigation measures, including masking
mandates, border restrictions, and mandatory vaccination policies.
Dr. Ellis has raised these concerns at a number of meetings, even on issues that are seemingly not
connected. For example, at a recent meeting on the Committee’s Children’s Health study, Dr. Ellis raised
concerns that masking and other measures have had a negative impacton early childhood development.
The Conservatives have also raised the ongoing shortages of pediatric medicines at a number of
meetings. Ms. Goodridge has taken a leading role on this at the Committee, raising on a number of
occasions the difficulties shehas had as a young mother to an infant. Additionally, the motion to invite
officials to discuss pediatric medicines on November 15 was an initiative proposed by the Conservatives.
• Bloc Quebecois members have responded consistently to any issue raised at the Committee by
tying it to their expressed desire for an unconditional increase in the Canada Health Transfer. Luc
Theriault, Bloc Quebecois Health Critic, is a member of the Committee. Mr. Theriault does not generally
attend the Committee’s meetings,but BQ members who have attended in his place have expressed this
position. BQ MP Jean-Denis Garon attends the Committee regularly and has repeatedly emphasized his
general skepticism about the ability of the federal government to deliver programs that may be similar
to those already existing in Quebec. During the debate on the interim Canada Dental Benefit, Mr. Garon
strongly argued for the federal government to provide the money being spent on the benefit to the
Government of Quebec.
• The New Democratic Party presence is led by Don Davies, the party’s health critic, and long
standing member of the Committee. Mr. Davies has been a Committee member since 2015. The NDP
supported the interim Canada Dental Benefit at the Committee and have raised the issue in conjunction
with their support of a national pharmacare program. NDP members attending the Committee have also
brought attention to the overdose crisis where they have been critical of the Government for not
pursuing the decriminalization of simple possession of drugs.
• The Portfolio has prepared a range of briefing products, addressing a variety of hot issues,
including, the proposed Canada Mental Transfer, the three-digit national suicide hotline, psychedelics,
and the opioid overdose crisis, amongothers. There are also notes on broader, longer-term files, for
example, medical assistance in dying, the interim Canada Dental Benefit, COVID-19, mental health,
cannabis, and other health portfolio issues.
HEALTH CANADA FUNDING CROSSWALK
Contents
Funding to improve mental health supports and services
Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022)
Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021)
Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve)
Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives
Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022)
Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022)
Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to medical
assistance in dying
Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuant to An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
From theDepartment of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide microbiological
and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health for Enterprise Service Model
reallocation
From the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the Canadian Safety and
Security Program
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint Expert
Committee on Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development Health Committee
From the Department ofHealth to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
From the Department of Health to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the pilot
water monitoring program for pesticides
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance policies that
promote science and evidence-based decision making
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate
decriminalization of personal possession of Illicit substances
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID
initiative
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the implementation of
innovative COVID-19 testing approaches for other communicable diseases
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research on a COVID-19 Outpatient
Therapeutic Study
From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the First Nations
Information Governance Centre
Health Canada’s 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
Funding to improve mental health supports and services
(Budget 2022)
Total: $69,680,465
SPB
- Key messages:
o Budget 2022 provided $140M over two years for the extension of the Wellness Together
Canada (WTC) portal until March 2024 so it can continue to provide Canadians with free
access 24/7 to services and supports for mild to moderate mental health and substance
use issues.
o Since the WTC portal was launched in April 2020, almost 3 million people across Canada
have accessed free mental health and substance use supports and services through the
portal. The portal offers immediate access to a variety of supports for different levels of
need, including self-guided resources, peer support programs, and confidential
counselling sessions with social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
o Impact data collected in 2021 and 2022 show that WTC users indicate a positive change
on all three self-assessment scales–mood, well-being and functioning–from the time
they first engage with the portal to after using any resource or accessing support.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objective is to support Canadians’ wellbeing through the continued provision of
mental health and substance use supports and services through the WTC portal.
o The portal provides an inclusive experience to all individuals in Canada and Canadians
abroad, tailored to meet the needs of varying age groups and diversepopulations.
- Expected results:
o Immediate expected results include:
o Canadians have increased awareness of the WTC portal
o Intermediate expected results include:
o WTC clients use services available on the portal (e.g., self-guided courses, telephone
counselling services)
o Ultimate expected results include:
o WTC clients are satisfied with the services available on the portal
o WTC has a positive impact on the mental health of Canadians
- Voted:
o 69,394,150
- Statutory:
o 286,315
Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic
(Budget 2022)
Total: $50,000,000
CFOB
- Key messages:
o To reprofile $50.0M from2021-22 to 2022-23 in support of Health Canada’s continued
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Given the potential for resurgences based on significant regional variability in vaccination
rates and in provincial/territorial policy approaches, Health Canada is extending funding
and maintaining criticalstaffing levels.
o To support Health Canada’s Regulatory Response and to ensure Canadians and the
health care system have timely, uninterrupted access to safe and effective health
products to combat COVID-19 as the virus continues to evolve.
- Expected results:
o This initiative would support regulatory review and approval of new products to fight
the pandemic, thereby addressing unmet health care needs.
o This initiative also supports the development of innovative ways to inform Canadians on
how they can stay safe, provide regular updates on regulatory approvals for tests and
treatments, and keep Canadians informed on the evolving conditions of the pandemic.
- Voted: 50,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022)
Total: $12,412,305
CSCB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis has become one of the
most significant public health crises in a generation.
o This $12.4 million is part of Budget 2022 that announced an additional $100 million for
the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) to support harm reduction,
treatment and prevention initiatives at the community level.
o The Government of Canada remains fully committed to addressing the overdose crisis
and working with partners to save lives. Since 2017, the federal government has taken
significant actions and made commitments of over $815M to address the overdose
crisis.
o This includes nearly $350 million in funding for innovative community-led SUAP projects
to help address the overdose crisis and broader substance use.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Health Canada’s Substance Useand Addictions Program (SUAP) provides contribution
funding for a wide range of evidence-informed and innovative substance use
prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across Canada.
o These initiatives target a range of controlled drugs and substances, including opioids,
stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
- Expected results:
o Projects funded through SUAP contribute to individual capacity and organizational,
system and community level program, policy and practice change by: preventing and
reducing harms related to substance use; facilitating treatment and related system
enhancements; and, improving awareness, knowledge, skills and competencies of
targeted stakeholders and Canadians.
o SUAP funded projects are expected in the short-term to increase access to information
on substance use and availability of harm reduction services, and in the longer-term
improve knowledge and skills and positive behavior outcomes. Ultimately, SUAP
projects contribute to reduced negative health impacts experienced by people who use
drugs and substances.
- Voted: 12,330,658
- Statutory: 81,647
Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021)
Total: $10,817,000
SPB
- Key messages:
o Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the security of
Canada’s supply of plasma-derived products (PDPs).
o Greater domestic collection of plasma provides better security of PDP supply for
patients with life-threatening and other medical conditions, especially where PDPs are
the only treatment option available.
o Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with the national blood and plasma
operator is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area for the health
and safety of Canadians.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Budget 2021 provided $20 million, which allows Canadian Blood Services (CBS) to
construct and start-up six new dedicated plasma collection sites across Canada (except
Quebec) to achieve a greater domestic supply.
o Funding supports construction and fit-upof sites, purchasing of necessary equipment,
staff training (but not staff salary) and public outreach to secure donors.
o Provinces and territories are responsible for ongoing operational costs of these sites
through their agreements with CBS.
- Expected results:
o Funding will allow three plasma collection sites to be open to public plasma donations
by the end of 2022-23, and three more will be opened in 2023-24.
o These sites are expected to help raise Canadian domestic sufficiency (outside Quebec)
from 15% in2021-22 to 22% in 2027-28, when all CBS plasma collection sites are
expected to be working at full capacity.
o This increase in plasma sufficiency equates approximately to an additional 150 000 litres
of plasma collected annually.
- Voted: 10,817,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
Total: $7,653,025
PMRA
- Key messages:
o to 2022-23 needed to support the advancement of transformation activities outlined in
the Treasury Board (TB) Submission "Strengthening the Capacity and Transparency of
the Pesticide Review Process".
o It will enable the Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) to complete necessary
activities and deliverables in 2022-23 to strengthen oversight on pesticides including the
availabilityof independent data to further support pesticide review decisions and the
transparency of decision-making.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The funding reprofile allows PMRA to double its efforts advancing work to support
transformation beyond what was originally conceived (e.g. stakeholder engagement,
long-term funding strategy, risk based prioritization framework, and IT Modernization)
o PMRA is also in a position to now bring in 10 FTEs earlier than anticipated to carryout
implementation of a pilot program on businessprocess improvements
- Expected results:
o Development and implementation of a comprehensive stakeholder engagement
strategy that is critical to inform the implementation of various proposed measures
under the Transformation agenda including potential amendments to the Pest Control
Products Act (PCPA), proposed water monitoring framework, and expanded pesticide
use.
o Development of a risk-based workload prioritization model to allocate resources based
on the classification of pesticide risk
o Digital Modernization–new IM/IT investments to enable transformation of scientific
and regulatory processes.
- Voted: 7,653,025
- Statutory:-
Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve)
Total: $5,000,000
ROEB
- Key messages:
o This funding supported the extension of theCritical Drug Reserve (CDR) for one year
into 2022-23 through a Reprofile.
o The CDR was established with Provinces and Territories (PTs) to bolster collective
pandemic preparedness in Canada and was a safety net of twelve drugs used in the
treatment of COVID-19.
o The CDR was scheduled to sunset on March 31, 2022. Given the fourth and fifth waves
of COVID-19, the unknown impacts of the Omicron variant, and the need for additional
time for PTs to absorb drugs into their health care systems, it was extended to June 30,
2022.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The $5M extension supported a small number of FTEs (12), to potentially purchase new
drugs or replenish existing drugs given the uncertainty of the pandemic, cover the costs
of contract extensions with CDR vendors, and support PSPC in the operations of the CDR
Single Window Order Desk.
o The twelve FTEs were responsible for managing the CDR governance, PT relations,
overseeing orders and inventory levels, providing technical authority for contracts,
managing vendor issues and staffing the PSPC Single Window Order Desk.
- Expected results:
o Successfully completed divestment (ordering, shipping and invoicing) of all drugs in the
Critical Drug Reserve from the vendors to provinces and territories.
o Continued to support public health measures related to Covid-19 to bolster pandemic
preparedness.
o Completed lessons learned report and CDR playbook to better position the Government
of Canada for future planning during public health emergencies or as a mitigation
measure within drug shortages management.
- Voted: 5,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives
Total: $4,100,000
CSB/CFOB
- Key messages:
o To implement a project to reduce the department’s environmental footprint in support
of the GreeningGovernment Strategy.
o The initiative will reduce HC’s custodial footprint and environmental impacts by
reducing the department’s overall green house gas emissions.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Objective to utilize funding to implement the divestiture of the Environment Health
Centre (EHC) building in support of the Greening Government Strategy (GGS) and
reduce the department’s environmental footprint.
- Expected results:
o Will contribute to the Government of Canada’s commitment to reduce its
environmental footprint by 2030 and reduce the department’s green house gas
emissions
- Voted: 4,100,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
Total: $3,844,508
SPB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada firmly believes that all people in Canada should have access
to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health care services –including abortion–that
are safe and stigma-free.
o Many longstanding factors, including stigma and discrimination, lack of specialized
trainingin meeting the needs of some populations, travel time and costs, and limitations
in availability of culturally safe and relevant health services, result in reduced access to
quality sexual and reproductive health care. This has been exacerbated by the COVID-19
pandemic, which has worsened existing gaps in sexual and reproductive health care,
stretching previously limited resources and affecting services across Canada.
o The Government of Canada supports projects that improve the availability and
accessibility of sexual and reproductive health services for all people in Canada, while
also recognizing and respecting the mandates and jurisdictions of its provincial and
territorial partners.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years,starting in 2021-22, to improve
access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information, and services for
people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
o Of this $45 million commitment, $24.9 million has been allocated to date. Nine projects,
valued at $15.3 million, are underway.
o The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created to support a wide range of
evidence-informed and innovative projects for underserved people in Canada who are
at increased risk for poorer sexual and reproductive health outcomes, including
2SLGBTQI+ people, Indigenous and racialized populations, women and youth.
o Factors contributing to the need for a reprofile were:
o The fund was established in July of FY 2021-22, and although a targeted Call for
Proposals was initiated within the same month, projects recommended for funding
were not approved until late in the fiscal year. The review process and approvals took
longer than anticipated as this is a new fund with new recipients.
o In developing the agreement with the Province of Quebec, the Province required
additional time to confer internally to determine those projects that would be best
suited to be funded under the SRHF.
- Expected results:
o Funding will help remove barriers to abortion for people who would not otherwise be
able to access abortion services, by covering travel and logistics costs.
o Funding will also contribute to health care practitioners having the knowledge, skills and
tools required to provide inclusive, respectful, relevant and culturally safe sexual and
reproductive health care for 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, and racialized populations, as well
as youth and other underserved populations.
o Underserved populations, including 2SLGBTQI+ communities, Indigenous and racialized
populations, and youth will also have knowledge, resources, and supports to address
their specific sexual and reproductive health and care needs.
- Voted: 3,844,508
- Statutory:-
Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
Total: $3,746,184
SPB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada is committed to supporting Canadian thalidomide survivors
and helping them age with dignity.
o The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program(CTSSP) application period is open
until June 3, 2024.
o The Program currently supports 123 survivors.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The CTSSP provides ongoing financial assistance, and access to an Extraordinary Medical
Assistance Fund to help pay for home or vehicleadaptations, specialized surgeries and
other ongoing costs. Newly confirmed survivors also receive a one-time ex gratia
payment to assist with immediate health needs.
o Funding will support newly confirmed thalidomide survivors. $2.99M in Vote 1 is for the
one-time ex gratia payments made to new survivors and $756K in Vote 10 is for their
ongoing annual funding.
- Expected results:
o Canadian thalidomide survivors will be able to access care, treatment, and other
supports they need.
o The CTSSP is intended to contribute to meeting the lifetime needs of eligible Canadian
thalidomide survivors so they may age with dignity.
- Voted: 3,746,184
- Statutory:-
Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022)
Total: $1,947,216
HECSB/HPFB
- Keymessages:
o Health Canada will receive $1,947,216 to implement phase two of the Zero Plastics
Waste Initiative to provide health research, scientific, program, and policy expertise to
support actions and policies on plastic pollution and waste.
o The funding will be used to advance federal action to eliminate plastic waste in two key
priority areas:
o Expanding knowledge on plastics in the economy and the environment; and
o Developing, implementing, and updating management measures.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objectives of these investments are to:
o Conduct internal research, and fund external research through a new contribution
program to evaluate the human health effects of exposure to microplastics;
o Initiate additional scientific review of recent literature on the effects of microplastics on
human health and the environment;
o Identify and prioritize action for existing chemical additives in plastics; and
o Develop options for the introduction of a mandatory food chemical safety program for
food packaging and update guidance on use of recycled plastics in food packaging
application.
- Expected results
o This funding will enable:
o A reliable body of knowledge on plastics and the zero plastic waste agenda to be
accessible to stakeholders and the public;
o Government policy-makers to make evidence-based decisions on plastics; and
o Canadians to be protected by strengthening food chemical safety of food packaging
materials made from plastics, including recycled plastics.
- Voted: 1,693,825
- Statutory: 253,391
Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022)
Total: $1,133,459
HECSB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada will receive $1,133,459 to provide health expertise for chemical
emergency management in support of enhancing marine safety, as part of the second
phaseof the Oceans Protection Plan.
o This funding will enable Health Canada to respond to marine pollution incidents, which
is a responsibility of the Minister of Health under the Emergency Management Act.
- Purpose/objectives
o The objectives of these investments are to integrate human health considerations
across three Oceans Protection Plan initiatives:
o Hazardous and Noxious Substances: to develop and implement a federal framework to
better prepare for and respond to releases of Hazardous and Noxious Substances in the
marine environment.
o Integrated Marine Response Planning: to create a new national program for marine spill
response planning based on a consistent and risk-based methodology.
o Recovery from Environmental Emergencies Involving Marine Oil Spills: to develop a
coordinated and sustainable Canadian Recovery Framework, comply with guidelines
from Public Safety Canada on emergency management, and incorporate public input.
- Expected results:
o This funding will enable:
o Integration of health considerations in national policies for industry, response partners,
government departments and agencies, as well as coastal and Indigenous communities;
o Enhancement of the Government's science and research capacity;
o Establishment of partnerships with response partners;
o Integration of federal scientific expertise and health considerations in preparedness and
in response activities; and
o Development of human health impact guidance and an inventory of key local health
authorities and subject matter experts.
- Voted: 939,617
- Statutory:193,842
Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to medical
assistance in dying
(MAID Reprofile)
Total: $576,561
SPB
- Key messages:
o Expanded access to medical assistance in dying (MAID) (as codified in the new
legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility assessments and requires the
administration of the enhanced safeguards aimed at protecting vulnerable people who
might be induced to seek an assisted death.
o Budget 2021 provides $13.2 million over six years, beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6
million per year ongoing*, to ensure that Canada’s MAID law is implemented
consistently and with all appropriate safeguards.
- Purpose/objectives:
o This item reprofiles funding from 2021-22 to 2022-23 and outer years in order to design
a policy-oriented research agenda to address existing qualitative knowledge gaps about
MAID; establish an advisory network to inform future MAID policy and research
planning; and, provide sufficient policy support.
o Factors contributing to the need for a reprofile were:
o Funds were received late in 2021 leaving only a few months in which to undertake
consultation, concept development, to launch calls for proposals and sign contribution
agreements with third-party organizations; and
o Impacts of the pandemic on timing to do sufficient consulting with
partners/stakeholders (largely clinicians and other health sector organizations).
- Expected results:
o With the increasing complexity in implementing MAID, this and other funding from
Budget 2021 will enable stronger federal leadership in supporting consistent and
evidence-informed guidance; increasing the body of knowledge on MAID; and
establishing an advisory network.
o All of these activities will lay the groundwork to support future policy decisions on
MAID.
- Voted: 576,561
- Statutory:-
Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
Total: $300,000
SPB
- Key messages:
o Budget 2021 announced an investment of $126.7 million over three years, starting in
2021-22, for Indigenous Services Canada and Health Canada to address anti-Indigenous
racism in Canada’s health systems. Of this funding, $14.9M over three years was
announced for Health Canada to establish the Addressing Racism and Discrimination in
Canada’s Health Systems Program, with $13.9M in contribution funding ($13M in
Project Stream; $900k in Engagement Stream).
o The Program was established to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination, and advances Health Canada’s overall mandate to help everyone in
Canada maintain and improvetheir health by striving to ensure high quality health
services are efficient and accessible, and by reducing health inequities.
o The Program is a part of the short-term suite of measures developed in response to the
three National Dialogues to Address Anti-Indigenous Racism in Canada’s Health Systems.
This Program is also a flagship initiative under the Federal Pathway to Address Missing
and Murdered Indigenous Women, Girls and 2SLGBTQQIA+ People.
- Purpose/objectives:
o This item reprofiles $300K originally allocated to 2021-22.
o The Program provides contribution funding for time-limited projects that address
systemic racism and discrimination in Canada’s health systems in a way that is informed
by the lived experiences of Indigenous, racialized and marginalized communities. The
Program also supports capacity development for Indigenous organizations to
meaningfully engage on their health priorities.
o The objectives of the Program are expected to result in:
o Improved access by individuals living in Canada to appropriate, effective, and culturally
sensitive health services; and,
o Better health outcomes for Indigenous, racialized and marginalized populations.
- Expected results:
o The Program’s short-term outcomes are that health system partners have increased
capacity tocreate and provide culturally safe and inclusive health services for racialized
and marginalized communities, and that Indigenous organizations have increased
capacity to engage on health priorities.
- Voted: 300,000
- Statutory:-
Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuant to An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
Total: $1,789,123,165
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Key messages:
o Bill C10 received royal assent March 4, 2022 and provided Health Canada the authority
and $2.5B in funding to procure and distribute COVID-19 tests.
o $711M was used in 2021-22 leaving a balance of $1.789B for 2022-23 and onward.
o Based on current forecasts approximately $543M will remain at the end of this fiscal
year (enough to buy approximately 77M Rapid Antigen Tests at $7/test).
- Purpose/objectives:
o Rapid tests remain an important tool to enable Canadians to take responsibility and to
manage their individual risks.
o With funding, HC will continue to support jurisdictions in their efforts to manage COVID-
19 by ensuring widespreaddistribution of tests across the country.
o More specifically, funds are used to support procurement, warehousing, and
distribution of rapid tests.
- Expected results:
o Procurement of 205,347,655 tests to date this FY, with an additional 241,008 tests
underway.
o Establishment of a federal strategic reserve of 55M tests for surge requirements.
o Distribution of rapid tests to PTs, workplaces and vulnerable populations via different
channels (PT, Canadian Red Cross, Pharmacies, etc.).
- Voted:-
- Statutory: 1,789,123,165
From the Department of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide microbiological
and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
Total: $552,497
ROEB
- Key messages:
o In collaboration with ISC in the Quebec Region, HC supports the delivery of clean, safe
and reliable drinking water to First Nations communities.
o This funding supports Health Canada in providing microbiological and physical-chemical
testing of drinking water in First Nation communities.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of the funding is to allow HC to support the delivery of clean, safe and
reliable drinking water to First Nations communities, in collaboration with ISC in the
Quebec Region through:
o Regular monitoring of all publicly accessible drinking water systems (this includes 29
public drinking water systems and 12 semi-public systems in 26 First Nations
communities in Quebec);
o Providing well water bacteriological testing services to residents, upon request and free
of charge.
- Expected results:
o The funds allows ROEB laboratories to perform microbiological and physico-chemical
analyses of drinking water to residents in First Nations Communities to ensure clean,
safe and reliable drinking water.
- Voted: 552,497
- Statutory:-
From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health for Enterprise Service Model
reallocation
Total: $406,660
DTB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada delivers IT services to thePublic Health Agency of Canada as part of a
shared services partnership.
o A number of cell phones belonging to PHAC staff were inadvertently charged to Health
Canada.
o This transfer ensures expenses are appropriately aligned to the correct department.
- Purpose/objectives
o Shared Services Canada delivers mobile services to departments.
o For fiscal 2022-23, they permanently transferred approximately $4.2 M from Health
Canada and about $500k from PHAC to SCC for a range of IT services including mobile
devices.
o On review of the detailed accounts it was determined that a portion of Health Canada’s
transfer was actually for devices used by PHAC employees.
- Expected results:
o Costs for mobile devices are charged to the correct department.
- Voted: 406,660
- Statutory:-
From the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the Canadian Safety and
Security Program
Total: $265,683
HECSB/HPFB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada will receive $265,683 from the Department of National Defence under
the scrutiny andgovernance framework of the Canadian Safety and Security Program:
o To purchase laboratory equipment such as an automated micropore and physiorption
analyzer to enhance Canada’s ability to detect and attribute radiological and nuclear
incidents and to support national security and public health emergency response.
o To purchase a digital PCR machine for the Diagnostics Lab (RDL) which has the mandate
of protecting the health of Canadians by researching new, rapid techniques for
detecting pathogens within food samples. The digital PCR machine will complement the
workflows involved in this research, enabled quantification and therefore validation of
all new techniques.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objective of these acquisitions are to:
o Enhance Canada’s ability tosupport Canada’s national security interests and mandates
through detecting and attributing radiological and nuclear incidents.
o Enhance Health Canada’s capabilities for emergency response by providing a platform
for rapid, high sensitivity pathogen detection to inform intervention, and the release of
information to the public.
- Expected results:
o This funding will strengthen federal emergency preparedness by enhancing federal
capabilities to support national security and public health emergency response.
o This funding will also help detect pathogens within a food sample, even for research
purposes, which are laborious and time-consuming. A digital PCR instrument not only
shortens these timelines, but also adds the element of quantification, which will
strengthen the quality and reliability of the work performed.
o This technology will have an important impact on the detection and monitoring of
foodborne viral, bacterial and parasitic pathogens identified as priorities by Health
Canada.
- Voted: 265,683
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint Expert
Committee on Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive
Total: ($132,604)
HPFB
- Key messages:
o Recently, the EuropeanCommission prohibited the use of titanium dioxide (TiO2), a
widely used food additive internationally, in food, based on a scientific opinion by the
European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
o The Joint WHO/FAO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) is best placed to re-
evaluate the safety of TiO2 as a food additive. JECFA intends to hold a meeting to
establish scientific advice on TiO2, however, funds are needed. Funding this initiative
will facilitate JECFA’s ability to re-evaluate TiO2 in a timely manner.
o This advice will help inform Canada’s actions and is important to help maintain
Canadians’ confidence in the Canadian and international food safety systems.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Facilitate a grant payment to the WHO which will be used to establish scientific advice
through the re-evaluation of the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive, as well as
the use of aspartame which will help inform the development and update of both
domestic and international standards.
- Voted: (132,604)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development Health Committee
Total: ($200,000)
SPB
- Key messages:
o The work of the OECD HealthCommittee supports the Government of Canada’s health
policies and programs.
o This work benefits Canada by providing internationally comparable data and policy
analysis to support improvements in the health system, and allows Canadians to more
easily measurethe performance of Canada’s health system against those of other OECD
countries.
o Funding from Canada supports participation in the Patient Reported Indicators Surveys
(PaRIS) initiative on patient-reported primary care indicators and will position Canada as
a more influential member of the Health Committee in terms of the selection of
priorities for data collection and policy analysis.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The transfer from Health Canada to the OECD Health Committee will support its work to
foster improvements in the performance of member countries’, and as appropriate,
non-member countries’ health systems, in the areas of financial sustainability and
efficiency of health and long-term care systems, and the provision of high-quality health
care to all.
o The Health Committee’s work is focused on the development of health statistics and
indicators, and providing analyses of the financial sustainability, efficiency, and quality
of health and long-term care systems in member countries.
- Expected results:
o The Government of Canada contributes to, and regularly uses, OECD reports to assess
Canada’s health system achievements. The Health Committee’s data and policy analysis
supports Canada’s health priorities such as post-COVID health system resilience and
initiatives to improve the health care system such as digital health and long-term care.
o A portion of the funding will be used to pay for Canada’s participation in a major new
survey (called PaRIS) to collect patient-reported indicators of their experience in primary
health care.
o The funding to the Health Committee would also demonstrate Canada’s support for the
OECD’s work in health, and promote Canada’s continued engagement on global health
issues related to health system strengthening and universal health coverage.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Total: ($200,000)
CSCB
- Key messages:
o Canada remains committed to implementingthe Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control (FCTC). Advancing full implementation of the FCTC, both within Canada and
abroad, will continue to be a priority for the Government of Canada.
o Canada continues to actively participate in regional and international tobacco control
fora to address the burden of tobacco use.
o Canada values the collaborative relationship it has with the WHO FCTC Convention
Secretariat, including providing support to the Secretariat via the International Health
Grants Program on a regular basis since 2015 for activities related to strengthening the
implementation of the FCTC regionally and internationally.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The project aims to support the development of efficiencies in the reporting process
under the WHO FCTC through, among others, the revision of the reporting process, and
the implementation of a quality assurance framework supporting the collection of
timely and quality data.
o The revised reporting process would seek to better serve the data needs related to the
monitoring of the indicators of the Global Strategy to Accelerate Tobacco Control:
Advancing Sustainable Development through the Implementation of the WHO FCTC
2019-2025, which was championed by Canada.
- Expected results:
o Reduced reporting burden on the Parties, allowing for a smoother analysis of data by
the Convention Secretariat, resulting in more informative global progress reports to be
submitted to the Conference of the Parties to the FCTC.
o The proposed project would not only contribute to reducing thereporting burden on
under-resourced tobacco control programs, but would also provide Parties with
informative WHO FCTC progress reports and data analysis to strategically inform their
domestic tobacco control efforts.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the pilot
water monitoring program for pesticides
Total: ($200,500)
PMRA
- Key messages:
o Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency is developing a framework for a
National Water Monitoring Program for Pesticides under the Increased Use of Real-
world Data and Independent Advice pillar of the agency’s Transformation Agenda.
o The goal is to provide data and advice to better inform pesticide regulatory decisions.
o The PMRA isimplementing a 2-year water monitoring pilot program at select sites
across Canada in partnership with Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and Environment
and Climate Change Canada to inform framework development
- Purpose/objectives
o This transfer of $200,500 funds to Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada activities will
support Year 1 of Health Canada’s two-year Pilot Water Monitoring Program for
Pesticides.
o Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and third-party contractors will collect surface water
samples from acrossCanada for laboratory analysis of pesticides.
o Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada will also complete analytical method development
work for glyphosate and its transformation products in order to be considered for Year 2
of the pilot program.
- Expected results:
o Results and lessons learned will inform the Health Canada Pest Management Regulatory
Agency’s development of a Framework for a National Water Monitoring Program for
Pesticides.
- Voted: (200,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance policies that
promote science and evidence-based decision making
Total: ($245,500)
SPB
- Key messages:
o This funding supports Dr. Cara Tannenbaum, the Scientific Director of the CIHR Institute
of Gender and Health, in her role as Health Canada’s Departmental Science Advisor
(DSA). Her role has been extended to two days a week until September 30th, 2023.
o As the DSA, Dr. Tannenbaumwill continue to provide advice on strengthening science
input to Health Canada’s priorities and signature initiatives, including policy and
regulatory development.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Dr. Tannenbaum is working to strengthen implementation of Health Canada’s science
priorities, as well as elevating the voice of science and scientists in decision-making, as
appropriate.
o Leading the Science and Research Integration Network, science priorities outlined in
Health Canada’s Framework for Science and Research Excellence will be implemented.
o Dr. Tannenbaum represents Health Canada and brings forward the department’s
progress to the Federal Departmental Science Advisors Network chaired by Dr. Nemer,
Canada’s Chief Science Advisor.
- Expected results:
o Integration of science advice will be advanced, as appropriate, across Health Canada
including in relevant policy and regulations.
o Working with colleagues, the DSA will strive to accelerate systematic integration of
science advice across Health Canada at policy, program and horizontal levels.
o Department-and government-wide horizontal science priorities including application of
sex and gender-based Plus (SGBA Plus) analysis, including with respect to disaggregated
data, will be expanded and measured.
- Voted: (245,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate
decriminalization of personal possession of Illicit substances
Total: ($332,500)
CSCB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada is committed to evidence-informedpolicy making. A strong
evidence base forms the foundation of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
(CDSS). To that end, the Government of Canada continues to invest in research and
evaluation through the Canadian Institute of Health Research (CIHR) to generate
evidence to help ensure that Canada's drug policies better protect and promote the
health and safety of Canadians.
o Funding through Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program will be
provided to the CIHR to issue grant funding for a third-party evaluation of an exemption
issued to BC under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, removing the criminal
penalties for the possession of small amounts of certain controlled substances for
personal use by adults 18 years of age and older.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of the evaluation is to rigorously assess the impact of the exemption on
people who use drugs, the general population, the criminal justice system (including
police services and correctional systems), economic consequences and return on
investment.
- Expected results:
o The evaluation will measure progress towards the objectives of the exemption, intended
outcomes, unintended consequences and other potential risks, on an ongoing basis.
Ultimately, the findings from the evaluation will help to inform next steps with respect
to the exemption as well as any potential future national approach.
- Voted: (332,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID
initiative
Total: ($741,853)
SPB
- Key messages:
o CanCOVID supports the federal COVID-19 scientific effort by fostering collaboration to
enable knowledge mobilization and science-to-policy action.
o It maintains an on-line collaboration platform, hosts Speaker Series and conducts
literature reviews to respond to targeted pandemic-related questions.
o Health Canada has an opportunity to engage CanCOVID and benefit from its research,
through an existing contribution agreement between CanCOVID and the Public Health
Agency of Canada.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Under a renewed contribution agreement, CanCOVID will research a range of topics for
Health Canada including the effectiveness of interventions as well as the broader
impacts of COVID-19 including on health systems, public health measures, and
vulnerable populations.
o All resources, including literature, social media, interviews with key informants and
expert panel discussions will be used to cover 5-6 topics of Health Canada’s choice, and
distilled into reports and rapid reviews for use by Health Canada (and in most cases
available to the public).
o The objective is to answer crucial questions where Health Canada lacks internal research
capacity.
- Expected results:
o Health Canada will leverage pandemic related information gathered by CanCOVID to
inform policy making, adjust policy positions and for future planning and preparedness
in both pandemic and non-pandemic matters.
o The reports and rapid reviews generated will inform policy discussion and ultimately
decision making at Health Canada.
- Voted: (741,853)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the implementation of
innovative COVID-19 testing approaches for other communicable diseases
Total: ($1,259,689)
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Keymessages:
o Funds used to support British Columbia Centre for Disease Control initiative on
enhancing testing across northern, remote and isolated (NRI) communities.
o Planning began in February 2022 with the objective to fund the initiative under the
COVID-19SRA Contribution Program of Health Canada.
o To increase efficiency, funds are being transferred to the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) through the Estimates process
- Purpose/objectives:
o This project is aligned with the priorities of the SRA Program, particularly its focus on
expanding access to testing across NRI communities, and its expansion of testing beyond
COVID-19 and screening for communicable diseases.
- Expected results:
o Over the course of the pandemic, COVID-19 molecular testing platforms were
implemented in health facilities in First Nations communities across British Colombia as
a means of improving access to testing and turn-around times for results in remote
communities. BCCDC plans to build upon these established community based testing
system to identify priority tests to run on these platforms for other infectious diseases.
o This initiative will help pivot community-based testing to other infectious diseases, and
will serve as a model for other community-based testing programs across Canada.
Beyond testing for Sexually Transmitted and Blood Borne Infections (STBBI), TB and
other infectious diseases, this work will form the foundation for current and future
pandemic preparedness throughout NRI communities.
o Beyond supporting the expansion of community-based testing in NRI communities, this
project will also expand the optimal use of these new testing technologies by working
hand in hand with wastewater surveillance (WWS) networks. In expanding testing in
NRIs alongside WWS, these monitoringsystems will ensure health authorities keep
apprised of viral loads and variants of concern within NRI communities.
- Voted: (1,259,689)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research on a COVID-19 Outpatient
Therapeutic Study
Total: ($5,000,000)
EXEC-Taskforce
- Key messages:
o HC and CIHR, in collaboration with PHAC, have funded a large pan-Canadian study of
COVID-19 treatments administered to non-hospitalized patients.
o This study was funded in June 2022 ($10M totalover one year-$5M each from HC and
CIHR), and was part of the Government of Canada’s continued rapid response to
address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Canada has invested substantially in COVID-19 therapeutics alongside its portfolio of
vaccines, screening approaches, and broader public health measures.
o Toward the end of 2021, the Government of Canada announced purchase agreements
to access emerging antiviral medications as treatment options for patients who present
with mild to moderate COVID-19 and who are at high risk of developing serious disease.
o To effectively roll out these new antiviral medications, there is a pressing need to
further study the outcomes, including effectiveness, comparative effectiveness,and cost
effectiveness of administering these treatments -as well as any other therapeutics
which may become available-to non-hospitalized patients in the Canadian health care
system.
- Expected results:
o Provide evidence regarding the clinical and cost-effectiveness, practical challenges, and
outcomes of administering therapeutics for COVID-19 to non-hospitalized patients in
Canadian healthcare settings
o Generate evidence on treatment effectiveness in diverse populations. These can
include: communities marginalized by race; First Nations, Inuit, Métis and Urban
Indigenous Peoples; communities historically excluded from research; those
experiencing health inequities; persons with disabilities and individuals across diverse
health status (e.g. vaccination status, high risk populations, individuals with comorbid
conditions); those experiencing gendered impacts of the pandemic; and those in life
stages that have been underrepresented in research and
o Provide rapid evidence to inform clinical and health system management and public
health response, and/or decision-making and planning within and across jurisdictions in
Canada and internationally.
- Voted: (5,000,000)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the First Nations
Information Governance Centre
Total: ($12,335,213)
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Key messages:
o Funds used to support to the First Nations Information Governance Centre (FNIGC)
o More specifically to support the Regional Health Survey (RHS) and Regional and National
COVID-19 Data Management Capacity and Infrastructure Building projects across 2021-
22 and 2022-23.
o To increase efficiency, funds are being transferred to Indigenous Services Canada (ISC)
through the Estimates process
- Purpose/objectives:
o This project is aligned with the priorities of the SRA Program, particularly its focus on
modernizing health data management,
o FNIGC is a mechanism that rights-holding First Nations can use to assert sovereignty
over their data and information.
o FNIGC supportsFirst Nations communities in building data and statistical capacities, and
assists in the provision of credible and relevant information on First Nations.
- Expected results:
o Launch of a fourth wave of the First Nations Regional Health Survey (RHS 4) which is the
only national First Nation health survey. The survey will address gaps in national-level
health data for First Nation communities.
o Development, modernization and oversight of data management infrastructure,
systems, and capacity building projectswithin FNIGC’s 10 member regions.
o Development of appropriate and consistent standards to support COVID-19 adapted
data collection, management & usage methodologies.
- Voted: (12,335,213)
- Statutory:-
Health Canada overview:
Previous estimates todate:
- Voted: 3,803,963,999
- Statutory: 163,872,352
- Total budgetary: 3,967,836,351
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers
o Voted: (19,423,019)
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: (19,423,019)
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 170,395,528
o Statutory: 1,789,938,360
o Totalbudgetary: 1,960,333,888
Proposed authorities to date:-
- Voted: 3,954,936,508
- Statutory: 1,953,810,712
- Total budgetary: 5,908,747,220
% change in proposed authorities due to these estimates
- Voted: 4,0%
- Statutory: 1,092,3%
- Total budgetary: 48,9%
% change inproposed authorities to date this year over last year
- Voted: (19,6)%
- Statutory: 948,5%
- Total budgetary: 15,8%
Health Canada has proposed a net increase of $1,940.9M in the 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B),
bringing its proposed authorities to date to $5,908.7M. These Supplementary Estimates include:
Voted Appropriations of $151M:
New Funding [$95.2M]
• $69.4M–Funding to improve mental health supports and services (Budget 2022);
• $12.3M–Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022);
• $10.8M–Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021);
• $1.7M–Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022); and,
• $0.9M–Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022).
Reprofiled Funding [$75.2M]
• $50.0M–Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic (Budget 2022);
• $7.7M–Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process;
• $5.0M–Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve);
• $4.1M–Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives;
• $3.8M–Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and
services;
• $3.7M–Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program;
• $0.6M–Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access
to medical assistance in dying; and,
• $0.3M–Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care.
Transfers [-$19.4M]
Transfers to Health Canada (+$1.2M)
• $552.5K–From the Department of Indigenous Services to provide microbiological and physical-
chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities;
• $406.7K–From the Public Health Agency of Canada for Enterprise Service Model reallocation;
and,
• $265.7K–From the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and
Security Program.
Transfers from Health Canada (-$20.6M)
• -$132.6K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint Expert Committee on
Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive;
• -$200.0K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Health Committee;
• -$200.0K–to the Public Health Agencyof Canada to support World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control;
• -$200.5K–to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the pilot water
monitoring program for pesticides;
• -$245.5K–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance policies that promote
science and evidence-based decision making;
• -$332.5K–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate decriminalization of
personal possession of illicit substances;
• -$741.9K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID initiative;
• -$1.3M–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to implement innovative COVID-19 testing for
other communicable diseases;
• -$5.0M–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for a COVID-19 outpatient therapeutic
study; and,
• -$12.3M–to the Department of Indigenous Services Canada for the First Nations Information
Governance Centre.
Statutory Appropriations of $1.8B
• $1,789.9M–Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuantto An Act respecting certain measures
related to COVID-19; and,
• $0.8M–EBP amounts related to approved Treasury Board submissions:
o $286.3K–Funding to improve mental health supports and services;
o $253.4K–Funding for advancing a circular economyfor plastics in Canada;
o $193.8K–Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan; and,
o $81.6K–Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use.
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
Public Health Agency of Canada
Authorities to date:
- Voted: 10,184,285,266
- Statutory: 79,345,305
- Total budgetary: 10,263,630,571
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers:
o Voted: (3,838,866)
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: (3,838,866)
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 1,362,767,516
o Statutory: 1,416,761
o Total budgetary: 1,364,184,277
- Total:
o Voted: 1,358,928,650
o Statutory: 1,416,761
o Total budgetary: 1,360,345,411
Proposed authorities to date:
- Voted: 11,543,213,916
- Statutory: 80,726,066
- Total budgetary: 11,623,975,982
The Public Health Agency of Canada is seeking an increase of $1.36 billion to its reference levels:
New Funding ($117.7M):
• To bolster current inventories of medical countermeasures and to enhance diagnostic and
surveillance activities of monkeypox in Canada ($102.7M);
• Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation ($8.0M);
• Special Immigration Measures for Ukrainian Nationals ($4.9M);
• Resettlement commitment for the evacuation and immigration of Afghan nationals to Canada
($1.2M);
• Government advertising programs ($500K); and
• Reinvestment of royalties fromintellectual property ($338K).
Reprofiles from 2021-22 ($1.245B):
• Medical research and vaccine developments (COVID-19) ($696.2M);
• Border and travel measures and isolation sites (COVID-19) ($400.0M);
• Logistics for vaccine distribution-medical countermeasures (COVID-19) ($61.3M);
• Stabilize core capacities for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile ($50.0M);
• Innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the pandemic (COVID-
19) ($20.4M);
• Kids Help Phone and the Centrefor Addiction and Mental Health (COVID-19) ($13.0M);
• Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework ($2.4M);
• Improve mental health supports and services (COVID-19) ($1.0M);
• Creation of a national autism strategy ($690K); and
• Prevent diabetes and improve treatments ($158.3K).
Transfers to/from Other Government Departments (-$3.8M):
• Transfer from the Department of Health to implement innovative COVID-19 testing for other
communicable diseases ($1.3M);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the CanCOVID initiative ($742K);
• Transfer from the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and Security
Program ($561K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) Health Committee ($200K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support World Health Organization Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control ($200K);
• Transfer from Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the delivery of the international
AIDS Conference ($200K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Joint Expert Committee on Food
Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive ($133K);
• Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariatto support the Capacity Accelerator Project (-$20K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support European Union Joint Programme
-Neurodegenerative Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases (-
$33K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support a health system impact fellowship
(-$47K);
• Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Canadian Aboriginal AIDS
Network (CAAN) with their Indigenous knowledge facilitation activity for AIDS2022 (-$50K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research on priorities outlined in
Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer report(-99.5K);
• Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Pan-Canadian Health
Inequalities Reporting Initiative-Mental Wellness among First Nations Peoples living on reserve (-
$200K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support policy research for health system
transformation (-$300K);
• Transfer to the Department of Health for the Enterprise Service Model reallocation (-$406K);
• Transfer to the Canada Border Services Agency for data integration on border health
surveillance (-$1.1M);
• Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to support
Indigenous early learning and child care (-$1.9M); and
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support pediatric outcome improvement
through coordination of research networks (-$3.0M).
Vote Transfers
Internal Transfers (zero impact on reference levels):
• From operating to contributions for HIV self tests, monkeypox and myocarditis ($11.7M);
• From operating to grants for the Immunization Partnership Fund ($3.0M); and
• From operating to grants for the World Health Organization’s handbook on health inequality
monitoring ($180K).
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
ADJUSTMENTS TO CIHR’S AVAILABLE AUTHORITIES (in $ millions)
Vote 1 operating expenditures:
- Authorities todate: 68
- Supplementary estimates (B): 5.3
- Proposed authorities to date: 73.3
Vote 5 Grants
- Authorities to date: 1,169.9
- Supplementary estimates (B): 99,4
- Proposed authorities to date: 1,269.3
Subtotal:
- Authorities to date: 1,237.9
- Supplementary estimates(B): 104.7
- Proposed authorities do date: 1,342.6
Statutory items
- Authorities to date: 7.7
- Supplementary estimates (B): 1.4
- Proposed authorities to date: 9.1
Total:
- Authorities to date: 1,245.6
- Supplementary estimates (B): 106.1
- Proposed authorities to date: 1,351.7
As a result of Supplementary Estimates (B), CIHR’s overall available and statutory authorities for 2022-23
will increase by approximately $106.1 million to a total of $1,351.7 million.
Adjustments from Treasury Board Submissions -Increase of$98.7 million
• $84.7 million for the Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021)
• $10.2 million for the response to monkeypox outbreaks in Canada (horizontal item)
• $1.3 million to support the study of long-term health impacts of COVID-19 (Budget 2022)
• $1.2million to support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022)
(horizontal item)
• $1.1 million to support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative to advance research
in high-priority areas of women’s health
• $0.2 million forresearch security and the Research Support Fund (Budget 2022) (horizontal
item)
• Transfers from Other Departments and Agencies –Increase of $9.6 million
o $5.0 million from the Department of Health (HC) for a COVID-19 outpatient therapeutic study
o $3.0million from the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to support pediatric outcome
improvement through coordination of research networks
o $0.5 million from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council to support the Race,
Gender and Diversity Initiative
o $0.3 million from HC to evaluate decriminalization of personal possession of illicit substances
o $0.3 million from PHAC to support policy research for health system transformation
o $0.2 million from HC to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision
making
o $0.1 million from the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Healthy Youth Initiative
o $0.1 million from PHAC to support research on priorities outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief Public
Health Officer report
o $0.05 million from PHAC to support a health system impact fellowship
o $0.03 million from PHAC to support European Union Joint Programme-Neurodegerative
Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
Transfers to Other Departmentsand Agencies–Decrease of $3.7 million
• $0.1 million to the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) to support the mobilizing
principles for equitable global health research
• $0.2 million to PHAC to support the delivery of the international AIDS Conference
• $0.2 million to IDRC to support Phase II of the Joint Canada-Israel Health Research Program
• $1.1 million to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council to explore the
development of a common grants management solution
• $2.1 million to IDRC to support women’s health and economic well-being for a post-COVID 19
recovery
Internal Transfer between CIHR's Transfer Payment Programs –Nil Financial Impact
• Internal reallocation of resources from the Grants for research projects and personnel support
($904,208) to the Institute support grants.
Statutory Authorities–Increase of $1.4 million
• $1.4 million for contributions to employee benefit plans related to New Voted Appropriations,
including $1.1 million for the Clinical Trials Fund
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Overview
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers
o Voted: 16,353
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: 16,353
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 16,128,427
o Statutory: 3,372,015
o Total budgetary: 19,500,442
- Total:
o Voted:16,114,780
o Statutory: 3,372,015
o Total budgetary: 19,516,795
% change in proposed authorities due to supplementary estimates (B)
- Voted: 2.2%
- Statutory: 2.2%
- Total budgetary: 2.2%
% change in proposed authorities to date this year over last year
- Voted: 6.1%
- Statutory: (0.2%)
- Total budgetary: 5.0%
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has proposed a net increase of $19.5M in the 2022-23 Supplementary
Estimates (B) based on:
Voted Appropriations of $16.1M:
Adjustments–increase of $16.1M
• $16.1M–Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of Canada’s
food safety system (COVID-19)
Transfers–net increase of $16.4K
Transfers to Canadian Food Inspection Agency
• $58K-From the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and Security
Program
Transfers from Canadian Food Inspection Agency
• ($16.6K)-To the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to provide support to
departmental staff located at missions abroad
• ($25K)-To the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to cost share the Market Access
Support System
Statutory Appropriations of $3.4M:
Employee Benefit Plan adjustments related to increased Supplementary Estimates (B) salary funding for
the following:
• $3.4M– Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of Canada’s
food safety system (COVID-19)
CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER (151 words)
• As the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, I am committed to ensuring that mental
health is treated as a full and equal part of our health care system.
• At the November 7-8 Health Ministers’ Meeting in Vancouver we engaged provinces and
territories on critical issues to improve health care, including addressing health workforce challenges,
health data and digital health, and integrated mental health and substance use services.
• Our health system is experiencing significant challenges and it’s important that we work
together to support better health care for Canadians. We have provided record federal investments, and
this needs to be matched with the quality of care Canadians deserve.
• Canadians deserve better access to family health services as well as mental health and
substance use services.That’s why I have been consulting with Canadians and people with lived and
living experience on how to improve our system and inform a comprehensive strategy. The discussions
at the Health Ministers’ Meeting are going to inform health funding discussionsgoing forward.
IF PRESSED ON BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDING ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS SERVICES (86
words)
• Budget 2017 committed $5 billion over ten years to support provinces and territories to increase
the availability of mental health and addictions services for Canadians.
• Budget 2022 reaffirmed our intention to engage provinces and territories on the development
of a Canada Mental Health Transfer.
• As a result of the first five years of this investment, provinces and territories have implemented
new initiatives to improve access, integrate service delivery and spread evidence-based models of
mental health and addictions services.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
access to mental health and addictions services for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS TO DATE ON CMHT RELATED ENGAGEMENT (59 words)
• Our Government is committed to engaging with provinces and territories, and a diverse range of
stakeholders, partners andindividuals with lived/living experience to inform the development of the
CMHT.
• This engagement will help us to build from the ground up a comprehensive strategy for mental
health and substance use, including actions that we can advance with provinces and territories.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the mental health of Canadians was in decline and needs were
increasing. Positive mental health declined between 2009 and 2019, especially for children and youth,
63% of whom reported excellent or very good mental health in 2019 compared to 77% in 2009. 68% of
adults reported excellent or very good mental health in 2019 compared to 73% in 2009. During this
time, there was also an increase in Canadians reporting having been diagnosed with depression or an
anxiety disorder. Foryouth, these diagnoses doubled, increasing from 7% to 15% in 2019, and for adults
they increased from 10% in 2009 to 13% in 2019.
• The pandemic has further emphasized the need for increased mental health care. Positive
mental health further declinedthroughout the pandemic, with only 60% of adults and 54% of children
and youth reporting excellent or very good mental health in 2021. In fall 2020, one in five Canadians
reported a need for mental health care in the past year. Of those, 45% reported that their needs were
either unmet or only partially met. A delay in mental health support is linked to decreased positive
health outcomes, therefore timely support is particularly important.
• Among other priority populations, Canadian youth, Indigenous and those identifying as
LGBTIA2+ report greated need for mental health care than adults, non-Indigenous Canadians and those
not identifying as LGBTQIA2+. Of those who need care, these groups are also more likely to report that
their needs are unmet or partially met.
The mental health needs of Canadians and priority populations (e.g., youth, Indigenous populations,
racialized and LGBTQ2S+ communities), which were increasing pre-pandemic, have been further
exacerbated by the pandemic. Moreover, persistent barriers to care remain and have worsened during
this time. Some of these barriers include variability in service availability, fragmented care (i.e., lack of
integration between mental health care/primary care/other services), lack of equitable access to care,
including virtual care options, lack of culturally sensitive/appropriate services, lack of capacity and
stigma.
These barriers have put increased strain on the healthcare system (e.g., increase in number of
individuals in mental health crisis going to Emergency Departments for care). The pandemic is not yet
over and experts predict that its impact will be felt for many years, if not decades to come.
Ongoing and pandemic-response measures while generally effective are not sufficient to address the
increased demand and barriers. More support is needed to ensure that the mental health needs of
Canadians are addressed while the strain on the health care system is lessened. Given this the
government appointed the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions. She is working to ensure that
mental health is treated as a full and equal part of the universal healthcare system and that health
equities are understood and addressed.
Ongoing Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health and addictions services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread
proven models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to
primary health services.
Agreements outlining how provinces and territories applied federal investment over the first five years
expired in March 2022. Work has begun to implement one-year extensions of the agreements, which
provide provinces and territories the opportunity to evaluate current needs and adjust priorities as they
plan for the remaining four years of targeted funding.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP). The Government has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and peoplewith other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada. 2023, this service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of
their choice (voice, text or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts of COVID-19 on Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals.Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 indealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
HEALTH WORKFORCE CRISIS (88 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada recognizes the immense contributions health professionals make
every day and we share their concerns about thehealth workforce crisis we are facing.
• The Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health Workers that is
composed of health system experts who will identify concrete actions to drive pan-Canadian progress on
addressing the crisis, informed by real world perspectives.
• The federal government is actively working with our provincial and territorial counterparts,
regulators, health workers and Canadians to advance concrete actions to address the crisis.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH TRANSFERS(86 WORDS)
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our Government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• OurGovernment will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
• Canadians deserve high quality health care and our Government is confident we can build on
ourstrong partnership with provinces and territories to transform health care.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES CRISIS INVOLVING CHILDREN AND YOUTH (121
WORDS)
• COVID-19 has put Canada’s health systems under enormous strain, leading to staffing shortages
and backlogs in services, including for children and youth.
• The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and
territorial health systems address pandemic-related backlogs to health services.
• These investments are supporting provinces and territories to reduce backlogs and ensure that
Canadians, including children and youth, have more timely access to the services they need.
• To further strengthenhealth care, the federal government is committed to advancing the
priorities of Canadians, including for children and youth, with a focus on better access to primary and
mental health care, dental care, home and community care, and the effective use of high quality data
and digital systems.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY (81 WORDS)
• The federal government is committed to working with key partners on efforts to bolster
recruitment and retention of the health workforce.
• Recognizing that immigration plays an essential role in addressing the chronic human resource
needs in health care, Budget 2022 announced an investment of $115 million over five years, with $30
million ongoing, to expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000
internationally trained health professionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in
their field.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SUPPORT FOR HEALTH WORKERS (90 WORDS)
• The Government is very concerned about the mental health and well-being of Canadians, and of
frontline workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
• In the previous 2 years the federal government has invested more than $290 million in funding
to support the mental health of Canadians.
• This includes investments specific to addressing PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential
workers, and the Wellness Together Portal, which features a distinct text line that health workers access
by texting FRONTLINE to the number for immediate access to supports.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO PROTECT HEALTH WORKERS AGAINST HARASSMENT (82 WORDS)
• We have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have been
threatened and intimidated, in personand online. This behavior is completely unacceptable.
• Our government took action to protect health workers, through amendments to the Criminal
Code (under the former Bill C-3), in order to ensure health workers are safe and free from threats,
violence and harassment.
• All Canadians, and especially health workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe working
environment, free from violence and threats.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH TRANSFERS (GENERAL) (154 WORDS)
• From the beginning, the Government of Canada has been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight COVID-19
and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2021-22, the Government of Canada provided $43.1 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and by over 9%
to $49.3 billion in 2023-24. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to billions in pandemic support
for provincial and territorial health care systems committed over the course of the pandemic (e.g. $4 B
to help address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government has
committed billions in direct health investments to support the fight against COVID-19, including public
health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH TRANSFERS (SPECIFIC) (127 WORDS)
• Between2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-
19 spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to provinces and territories
through the Safe Restart Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups tothe CHT and over 40 billion in
direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER–PLATFORM COMMITMENT (123 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring Canadians have access to mental health
and substance usesupports when and where they need them. That is why it is so important to assist
jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health and substance use
services.
• The Government of Canada has already made significant investments in this area, including $5B
to support mental health and substance use services through its bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories. The Government of Canada is committed to make significant additional investments,
with accountability and data to demonstrate results for Canadians. We want to ensure that Canadians
get the services and supports they need and that our investments have a positive impact on their mental
health.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC (160 WORDS)
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreements will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support
home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our Government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec also received $450 million and $902.4 million as part of its share of the $2 and $4 billion,
one-time top-ups to the CHT, and a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS (106 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to transfer $5 billion in targeted funding
for home care and mental health from 2017-18through 2021-22.
• In 2021-22, these agreements were amended to accommodate a $1 billion for Safe Long-term
Care Fund.
• Our Government is working with provinces and territories on negotiate new agreements to
enable access to the remaining 5 years of funding.
• In addition, as per the Budget 2021 commitment a further $3 billion over five is available to
support provinces and territories in applying LTC standards and making permanent changes.
BACKGROUND
HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES
Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic has amplified many of the challenges facing the health workforce and it is well understood
that the path forward must address the root causes of this crisis. It will require transformative and
innovative solutions to problems that have existed for years, with new and different levels of
collaboration required across governments and stakeholders.
FPT Collaboration
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
territorial jurisdictions and their regulators. The federal government has had ongoing engagement with
provincial and territorial counterparts on the health workforce crisis. This work has included:
• Better understanding the challenges facing the health workforce through a Health Human
Resource symposium convened by Health Canada in May 2022 which included participation from
provinces and territories.
• Collectively identifying key areas for action (e.g., recruit, retain, plan and innovate)
• Considering approaches for accelerating pathways for internationally educated health
professionals
• Studying vacancy rates for key health occupations to better understand current state and trends
related to health workforce.
Health Canada will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to drive concrete
steps necessary to address health workforce situation.
Recent Federal Investments
The Canada Health Transfer continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories in the
delivery of health care. In 2023-24, the Canada Health Transfer is forecast to provide $49.3 billion in
support—an increase of 9.1 per cent over 2022-23.
In addition to this ongoing funding, in the previous two years, the federal government has provided
provinces and territories with $6 billion in top up funding through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system
pressures, including reducing medical backlogs caused by COVID-19.
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years to develop national standards for mentalhealth and
substance use services, which will provide tools to support mental health providers in delivering high-
quality care.
Budget 2021 also provided $960 million over three years to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program to help connect Canadians with the
training they need to access jobs in high-demand sectors, such as healthcare.
Budget 2022 reiterated federal government’s commitment to reduce barriers to internal trade and
labour mobility through targeted investments, including:
• $115M over 5 years to expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to
11,000 internationally trained health care professionals per year get their credentials recognized and
find work in their field
• $26.2 million to enhance student loan forgiveness for providers who practice in rural and
remote communities and expand the program beyond physicians and nurses
The Government of Canada continues to provide surge support, including nurses and physicians, where
needed across the country to address critical pandemic needs.
Other Federal Government Actions
The federal response to the HHR crisis is focused on sustainably increasing the supply of health workers
and helping create healthier workplaces to support retention and the mental health of health workers.
Other recent federal actions and investments include:
• On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition will focus its efforts on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian action and
progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives.
• The Coalition comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities will report to the
Deputy Minister of Health.
• On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced Dr. Leigh Chapman as the federal Chief Nursing
Officer (CNO). Dr. Chapman will bring nursing issues in focus federally, while working closely with
provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments, provinces and
territoriesand health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce challenges.
Mental Health
In September 2022, a Report from the Mental Health Commission noted that it remains critical to break
down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in health care organizations and prioritize psychological
health and safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and territorial
health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes investments through
Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion over 10 years to improve Canadians’ access to mental health
services. The establishment of a Canada Mental Health Transfer will build on these agreements to
provide a permanent and ongoing source of funds for mental health services.
On June 28, 2022 the Government of Canada, announced an investment of $28.2M for nine projects to
address PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential workers, and others whose mental health has been
significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• These projects will help to deliver and test interventions, develop resources for affected or at-
risk populations, and create resources and guidance for service providers and organizations.
• The investment will also facilitate a Knowledge Development and Exchange Hub, which will use
data from these projects to help inform mental health interventions and enhance Canadian public
health policy and practice.
HEATLH TRANSFERS AND AGREEMENTS
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
cause the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, an increase of $31 billion from its current level of $45 billion in
2022-23, or an increase from its pre-pandemic 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also
called for the CHT to grow by an annual escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and has continued to
reiterate its demand for 35%, most recently with a “public awareness “campaign consisting of radio,
print, online and billboard ads that was launched on 24 October 2022.
In July 2022, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $2 billion one-time
top-up to the Canada Health Transfer, to further help them to address pandemic-related health system
pressures, particularly the backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health
care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of
procedures caused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to
support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address
infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that
also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable
funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are:
universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs
will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and to $49.3 billion in
2023-24.
Pandemic Funding:
Throughout the pandemic, the federal government has provided billions of dollars, beyond the Canada
Health Transfer, in pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems to support the
fight against COVID, as well as, billions in direct federal spending to support public health and purchase
vaccines and tests and other equipment.
Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to provinces and territories through
theSafe Restart Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over 40 billion in direct federal
spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all provinces and territories and posted to
Health Canada’s website. New agreements will berequired for provinces and territories to access the
remaining five years of this funding (2022-23 to 2026-27).
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additionalstaff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic hasshone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The Government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the qualityof life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
3-DIGIT NUMBER (9-8-8) FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION(101 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada welcomes the determination from the Canadian Radio-television
and Telecommunications Commission to adopt 9-8-8 as the number to call or text for Canadians in need
of immediate mental health crisis and suicideprevention support effective November 30, 2023.
• The Government of Canada announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health will
lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada.
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring this service has the quality and capacity to
meet the demand, connecting people to effective crisis support when they need it the most.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING FOR THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A THREE-DIGIT NUMBER FOR SUICIDE
PREVENTION CRISIS SUPPORT (84 words)
• The CRTC announced the 9-8-8 number will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• In preparation, the Public Health Agency of Canada contracted a firm to analyze service volumes
associated with launchinga three-digit number, and estimated that service volumes may increase four
to six-fold by 2027. This analysis will help identify the resources required to support the service.
• The Agency is also engaging with a range of stakeholders, experts and representatives from
provincial and territorial governments for their perspectives on what a successful roll-out will require.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT SERVICE PROVIDERS NEED TO IMPLEMENT 9-8-8 (74 words)
• As highlighted in the CRTC’s decision, telecommunication service providers will need to
implement 9-8-8 dialing across Canada. This includes:
• Introducing ten-digit local dialing in areas where seven-digit dialing is still the default; and
• Making the necessary changes to their networks to enable callers to dial or text 9-8-8.
• The objective is to ensure that everyone in Canada will be able to use the 9-8-8 number, and
these important steps will help get us there.
IF PRESSED ON U.S. EXPERIENCE IMPLEMENTING A THREE-DIGIT NUMBER (87 words)
• In the United States, preparations for a three-digit number took place over a four-year period.
• The choice to assign 9-8-8 in Canada and the United States is due to the unavailability of a three-
digit number ending in 11 (e.g., 411, 911).
• We are working closely with ourcounterparts in the United States, and learning from their best
practices, to help guide Canada’s approach to implementing a three-digit number.
• Our goal is to be ready for a safe and seamless rollout so that calls do not go unanswered.
BACKGROUND
In the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction’s Mandate Letter, the Minister was directed to
implement a three-digit suicide prevention number. On December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted
unanimously in favour of a motion sponsored by MP Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia)
calling on the federal government to act immediately to set up a national 9-8-8 number to consolidate
all existing suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, and People with Lived Experience on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which estimated a fourfold to tenfold increase in
call volumes for their service when it launched on July 16, 2022, after over 4 years of preparation.
This initiative builds upon the Government’s current support of a pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service. PHAC is currently investing $21 million over 5 years ($4.2 million per year) for CAMH, with their
partners, to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. In addition, $800,000 per year is allocated to
PHAC to cover the oversight, administration, reporting and evaluation activities associated with the
Contribution Agreement with CAMH. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service provides people across
Canada with suicide crisis support from trained responders via phone (1-833-456-4566), in English and
French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Calls to the service are answered by trained responders from
a network of 11 community-based distress centres across Canada and a back-up hub of responders.
As highlighted in Budget 2021, the government is committed to ensuring funds are available to support
the creation of this three-digitnumber.
OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS (108 words)
• Our Government recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s history.
• Substance use is a public health issue, not an issue for the criminal justice system.
• The pandemic has highlighted the gaps that exist in our health system and social safety net.
• That is why we are exploring new ways to ensure that Canadians receive the life-saving
substance use and health supports that they need, and that the health systems that underpin these
important supports are robust.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to working with national partners on a whole-
of-society approach toaddress the opioid overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE ALBERTA’S OVERDOSE DEATH NUMBERS (90 words)
• The opioid overdose crisis affects each part of the country differently. While Alberta’s latest
data points to recent improvements, it is important to acknowledge that that the number of deaths in
Alberta remains above pre-COVID levels.
• It is too early to say what the actual trends will be over a longer period of time and it is difficult
to attribute changes to deaths and harms to one specific factor.
• That is why the Government of Canada’s strategy takes a comprehensive evidence-based
approach that includes harm reduction, treatment, prevention, and enforcement.
IF PRESSED ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO B.C.’S OPIOID DAMAGES AND HEALTH CARE COSTS
RECOVERYACT (89 words)
• We are aware of the proposed amendments to the Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs
Recovery Act.
• The Government of Canada continues to support and work collaboratively with the provincial
and territorial governments in British Columbia’s proposed legal action against opioid manufacturers
and distributors.
• We are exploring all appropriate options to hold industry accountable for its role in the opioid
crisis.
IF PRESSED ON CHANGES TO ALBERTA’S MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES PROTECTION REGULATION (89
words)
• Our Government is taking a wide range of actions, including prevention, treatment and harm
reduction, to help people who use drugs get the supports they need.
• We support lower-barrier approaches that can help to save lives due to the significant risks
posed by the highly toxic illegal drug supply in Canada, including enhancing access to safer supply.
• We are aware of the policy change in Alberta.
• We are committed to working with provinces, territories, and key stakeholders, to continue
sharing the evidence on innovative practices that can save lives.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS (122 words)
• The overdose crisis is a public health issue and increasing access to evidence-based treatment
and life saving services is a key priority of the Government of Canada.
• Through the Substance Use and Addictions Program, we have committed nearly $350 million
since 2017 to pilot and build the evidence-base for promising community-based interventions, such as
providing medication as alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• We provided $150 million to provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
• Moving forward, we will continue to work with partners and stakeholders to address barriers to
accessing services, the inconsistent quality of services, and limited front-line workforce capacity. These
challenges make it more difficult for people in Canada to get the substance use services that they need.
BACKGROUND
On April 14, 2016, BC first declared a public health emergency due to the rise in opioid-related deaths.
Since then, two other PTs have also declared emergencies: Alberta declared a public health crisis in May
2017 and the Yukon declared a substance use health emergency in January 2022.
Most recent national data indicates that 30,843 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and March 2022. Toxicity of supply continues to be a major driver of the crisis with as
many as 85% of accidental apparentopioid toxicity deaths in 2022 thus far (January to March) involving
fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with death most
common among males and individuals aged 20 to 59 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing higher risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Several jurisdictions have observed unprecedented numbers
and rates in relation to the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be
highly impacted. In 2021, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 2,267 illegal drug toxicity
deaths, a 28% increase from 2020 and a 130% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. There have
been 1,468 deaths in the first eight months of 2022 in BC, a decrease of 1 over the same time period in
2021 (1,469 deaths)
Data released by Alberta in November 2022 indicated that in 2021 the province reported 1,824 deaths
from all substances, the highest number per year since the province began tracking such deaths in 2016.
Of these deaths, 1,614 were related to opioids. The highest opioid-related death count was in Edmonton
(620) followed by Calgary (501).
A dynamic and complex set of factors influence who is most at risk, including but not limited to: gender,
age, being part of a racialized or Indigenous community, and having a history of criminalization,
discrimination or trauma. So far in 2022 (January to March), males accounted for the majority (76%) of
accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths. Among both males and for females, the majority of
accidental apparent opioidtoxicity deaths were among individuals aged 20 to 59 years.
Among youth 0-19, between January 2016 and March 2022, the total number of opioid and stimulant-
related poisoning hospitalizations among girls was consistently higher compared to their male
counterparts. Between 2018 and 2021, girls aged 0-19 years experienced fewer accidental apparent
opioid toxicity deaths compared to boys of the same age; however, preliminary data from 2022 (January
to March) shows higher numbers of deaths among girls over boys in that age category (11 and 7 deaths,
respectively).
Data points to people commonly dying of overdoses alone and mostly indoors. In Ontario, from March
to December of 2020, 73% of fatal overdoses occurred where no one was present to intervene. In BC, in
2021, 83% of fatal overdoses occurred indoors, more specifically, 56% occurred in private residences.
Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people have also surged. First Nations people in BC died
of an overdose at 5.4 times the rate of other BC residents in 2021. In Alberta, First Nations people died
of an accidental opioid overdose at seven times the rate of other residents between January and June of
2020. In Saskatchewan, almost three times as many First Nations females died from accidental deaths
involving opioids than Caucasian females did in 2021.
The impact of the crisis is not measured in deaths alone and, in particular, the healthcare system has
also been impacted by marked increases in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations and calls for
emergency medical services (EMS) since the start of the pandemic. Compared to the two-year period
before the pandemic (April 2018–March 2020, 9,470 hospitalizations) there was a 24 percent increase
in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations during the first two years of the pandemic (April 2020–
March 2022, 11,760 hospitalizations).
COLLECTION OF NATIONAL OPIOID-AND STIMULANT-RELATED DATA
The Public Health Agency of Canada publishes quarterly data on opioid-and stimulant-related harms on
behalf of the Special Advisory Committee (SAC) on the Epidemic of Opioid Overdoses. Data on opioid-
and stimulant-related deaths is provided by Chief Coroners and Chief Medical Examiners. The time
required to complete an investigation into the cause of death for someone suspected of an overdose
can range from approximately three to 24 months.
PHAC also conducts modelling to understand potential trajectories of opioid-related deaths as the crisis
evolves.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS
To reflect the Government of Canada’s comprehensive approach to addressing the overdose crisis,
targeted funding of $815M have been allocated across federal departments and agencies (including
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, the CanadianInstitutes of Health Research, Public
Safety Canada, the Canada Border Services Agency, and Statistics Canada) to address key, interrelated
priorities:
• Over $656M allocated or committed to increase access to evidence-based treatment and life-
saving services, such as harm reduction;
• Over $43M allocated for awareness, prevention, and stigma reduction activities;
• Over $74M allocated for data, research, and surveillance initiatives;
• Over $42M allocated for collective law enforcement efforts to enhance safety and security.
To effectively deliver on the federal response to the overdose crisis, federal departments and agencies
require salary and operational costs for staff, and other necessary resources. These are standard costs
associated with delivering policies and programs in the federal government, and are thoroughly
reviewed on an ongoing basis. For example, operational costs have been allocated to support, but are
not limited to:
• Health Canada’s Drug Analysis Service (DAS), in which employees provide scientific and technical
services to help Canadian law enforcement agencies in their activities involving illegal drugs, including
helping police forces safely dismantle illegal drug laboratories;
• Border control agents disrupt the flow of illegal substance into Canada; and
• The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) analysts that receive and review applications
to ensure funding is disbursed to communities for quality projects in a timely manner.
Of the $656M for increased access to evidence-based treatment and life-saving services, such as harm
reduction, $157M is allocated for operational costs since 2017. Of the $43M for awareness, prevention,
and stigma reduction activities, $18M is allocated for operational costs since 2017.
The Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on Substance Use in March 2021 that provided
expert advice on Canada’s federal drug policy, including examining potential alternatives to criminal
penalties for personal drug possession. The Task Force provided its final advice on alternatives to
criminal penalties in May 2021, and on federal drug policy in June 2021. Both reports of the Task Force
have been made publicly available and can be found online at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-
force-substance-use/reports.html.
LITIGATION AGAINST OPIOID MANUFACTURERS CANADA
On October 17, 2022, the Province of British Columbia announced that it would be introducing
amendmentsto its Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act that would allow the federal
government to join a B.C.-led class-action lawsuit against opioid manufacturers and permit the
expansion of the number of defendants.
Amendments to the B.C. legislation will enable the governments of British Columbia and Canada to
pursue recovery from opioid manufacturers, wholesalers and other potential defendants in a class-
action lawsuit that is in progress. The amendments will strengthen the act by ensuring directors and
officers of corporate defendants may also be held accountable.
In 2018, B.C. commenced a class-action lawsuit against over 40 manufacturers and distributors of
opioids on behalf of provincial and territorial governments in Canada and enacted the Opioid Damages
and Health Care Costs Recovery Act to support the class action. The aim of the class action and
legislation is for governments to recover costs for health care provided to patients that resulted from
wrongful conduct of opioid manufacturers, distributors and their consultants. The class action is
expected to be certified in 2023.
On June 29, 2022, Purdue Pharma Canada agreed to a proposed $150 million settlement with provinces
and territories for the recovery of health care costs related to the sale and marketing of opioids.
PSYCHEDELICS (85 words)
• While the therapeutic use of psychedelics like MDMA and psilocybin [sai·luh·sai·bn] have shown
promise in clinical trials, further research is needed. At this time, with the exception of ketamine, no
psychedelic drugs have been approved in Canada or elsewhere.
• Clinical trials are the most appropriate and effective way to advance research with unauthorized
drugs while protecting the health and safety of participants.
• The number of authorized clinical trials with psilocybin has increased significantly over the past
year–a trend our government is hoping will continue.
IF PRESSED ONILLEGAL “MAGIC MUSHROOM” STORES (77 words)
• The production, sale and possession of magic mushrooms are illegal in Canada.
• Currently, no therapeutic products containing psilocybin, one of the controlled substances in
magic mushrooms, have been approved in Canada or elsewhere.
• Storefronts or online vendors selling magic mushrooms are illegally supplied and provide
products that are untested, unregulated and that may be unsafe. The Government of Canada supports
law enforcement actions to address illegalstorefront or online distribution and sale of magic
mushrooms in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA’S ANNOUCEMENT TO REGULATE THE USE OF
PSYCHEDELIC DRUGS (75 words)
• Health Canada is responsible for authorizing drugs; provinces and territories are responsible for
regulating the practice of medicine and delivery of health services within their jurisdiction.
• Ketamine is currently the only psychedelic drug in Canada approved for therapeutic use.
• Alberta has announced that its new regulations are intended to provide additional safeguards
and oversight for how psychedelic health services are delivered in their province.
• Health Canada will closely follow the implementation of these new regulations.
IF PRESSED ON PSILOCYBIN EXEMPTIONREQUESTS FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS (52 words)
• The use of psilocybin is being studied in clinical trials by researchers in Canada and
internationally, but there are no approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin in Canada or
elsewhere.
• Clinical trials are the most appropriate mechanism for health care professionals who wish to use
psilocybin to improve their knowledge of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
If PRESSED ON PATIENT PROTECTION IN CLINICAL TRIALS (68 words)
• It is important thatCanadians have access to safe clinical trials.
• Health Canada’s role includes a rigorous, science-based review of all clinical trial applications in
Canada, and subsequent inspection activities to help ensure compliance.
• Research Ethics Boards help toensure the protection of participants, while provincial regulatory
colleges ensure quality care is provided by their members.
• When clinical trials include psychedelics, additional safeguards are implemented to protect
participants.
BACKGROUND
USE OF PSYCHEDELICS FOR THERAPEUTIC PURPOSES
Interest in the potential therapeutic use of psychedelics –particularly MDMA and psilocybin–for the
treatment of various mental health and substance use disorders is on the rise. Psychedelics are typically
being studied in combination with psychotherapy (i.e., psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy).
Most psychedelics (also known as hallucinogens) are controlled as “restricted drugs” under the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). Restricted drugs do notcurrently have approved
therapeutic uses and can only be used for research or scientific purposes, including in authorized clinical
trials. With the exception of ketamine, no psychedelic drugs have been approved for sale in Canada or
elsewhere. Psilocybinand MDMA have received “breakthrough-therapy” designation from the United
States Food and Drug Administration in an effort to help bring these drugs to market more quickly.
Advocates continue to push Health Canada to increase access to psychedelic drugs,especially psilocybin
(“magic mushrooms”), for therapeutic purposes. Some stakeholders are advocating for the creation of a
separate medical access pathway for psilocybin, similar to cannabis. In addition, some stakeholders and
Indigenous partners are requesting access to psilocybin for traditional, spiritual, and/or ceremonial uses.
LEGAL ACCESS PATHWAYS
There are times when access to unauthorized drugs may be appropriate. In some circumstances, with
the support of a regulated health care practitioner,it may be possible for individuals to legally access
psilocybin through one of three pathways: 1) through participation in an approved clinical trial; 2)
through the Special Access Program; and 3) through a subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA.
Clinical trials and Health Canada’s Special Access Program are existing regulatory options through which
a legal source of psychedelic restricted drugs may be accessed. Both clinical trials and the Special Access
Program have safeguards and requirements in place to protect the health and safety of patients, help
ensure the quality of the drug, and provide for administration and oversight by a qualified professional.
These pathways should generally be pursued instead of an individual exemption under the CDSA, unless
it can be demonstrated that access is not possible or suitable through these existing legal routes. The
Special Access Program and individual exemptions from the CDSA are not mechanisms to encourage the
early use of unauthorized drugs, nor are they meant to be used as a means of circumventing clinical
development or the established drug review and approval process.
Government of Alberta’s Regulatory Amendments Related to Psychedelics
On October 5, 2022, the Alberta Government announced amendments to the Mental Health Services
Protection Regulation that will come into force on January 16, 2023. These Regulations set out new
requirements for the use of psychedelic drugs in the treatment of psychiatric disorders in Alberta. While
some stakeholders initially interpreted this announcement to mean that psychedelic drugs would be
more broadly accessible in Alberta, Alberta has since clarified that its Regulations are intended to
increase oversight of psychedelic-assisted therapy in the province to ensureits safe and effective use.
Charter Challenge
In August 2022, seven patients and one health care practitioner filed a Charter challenge against the
Government of Canada regarding access to psilocybin. They assert that the current avenues of accessing
psilocybin are insufficient and a violation of Section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
which guarantees the right to life, liberty, and security of the person. While it is too early to predict how
this case will progress, Charter challenges can take years to work their way through the courts.
Legal Challenge for Exemption Requests from Health Care Professionals
On July 11, 2022, a group of Applicants filed an application that challenges decisions made by the
Minister on June 9, 2022, refusing their applications for exemptions under ss. 56(1) of the CDSA to
possess, transport, consume and destroy psilocybin to be used as part of an experiential training module
(psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy).
The constitutionality of the CDSA is not challenged in this matter. As with the Charter challenge, this
matter is still in its very early stages.
Clinical trials
Health Canada has authorized several clinical trials with psilocybin and MDMA since 2018 (most of the
psilocybin clinical trials havebeen authorized within the past year). These include clinical trials to assess
the efficacy of psilocybin in patients with depression or treatment-resistant depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder, alcohol use disorder; the safety of low doses of psilocybin; and the safety of psilocybin
for health care providers enrolled in a psychedelic training program. In Spring 2022, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research launched a funding opportunity that will provide up to $3 million to
support clinical trialsto assess the therapeutic efficacy and safety of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy
for the treatment of substance use and mental health disorders.
Safety Requirements for Clinical Trials
To date, Health Canada has received two complaints related to the conduct in clinical trials investigating
MDMA-assisted therapy and one complaint related to ketamine-assisted therapy as treatment for
certain mental health conditions. In these cases, Health Canada quickly took appropriate compliance
and enforcement actions to investigate allegations of non-compliance with the FDA and its associated
regulations.
Current Status (ROEB input)
In June 2022, Health Canada conducted two MDMA clinical trial inspections The MDMA clinical trial in
Montreal, sponsored by MAPS, received a compliant rating. The MDMA clinical trial in Toronto,
sponsored by the Remedy Institute, received a non-compliant rating (NC) and a notice of immediate
suspension. The Department has received and reviewed the corrective actions from Remedy and
deemed the sponsor’s response satisfactory. The clinical trial authorization was reinstated on
September 23, 2022.
In July 2022, Health Canada participated in a joint inspection with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), of MAPS in San Jose, California (headquarters). There were no major findings identified by Health
Canada and the FDA after conducting a full sponsor inspection.
Ketamine Clinical Trials (ROEB input)
Health Canada has authorized a number of clinical trials involving the use of ketamine for the treatment
of mental health disorders. In October 2021, a complaint was received alleging issues with the general
oversight of the ketamine clinical trial sponsored by the University of Ottawa -Institute of Mental Health
research.
Current status (ROEB input)
Starting in February 2022, Health Canada conducted inspections at the three sites of the clinical trial
sponsored by the University of Ottawa-Institute of Mental Health Research. One trial site received a
compliant rating. The other two sites each received a non-compliant rating. One of these two sites has
since submitted a satisfactory responseof corrective actions and the Department has informed them
that they can proceed with their trial at this site. Health Canada is currently reviewing the corrective
actions for the second site.
Special Access Program (SAP)
On January 5, 2022, regulatoryamendments came into force which allow health care practitioners, on
behalf of patients with serious or life-threatening conditions, to request access to restricted drugs
through the SAP when other therapies have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable in Canada.
Individual subsection 56(1) exemptions
Many factors are considered when reviewing and making a decision on a request for a subsection 56(1)
exemption to use psilocybin in relation to a medical condition. These factors may include but are not
limited to (as per Health Canada web page):
• The availability of clinical trials or other regulatory pathways, such as the Special Access
Program, to request access to the substance;
• The medical condition for which the psilocybin is requested to be used;
• The existing scientific evidence to support the use of psilocybin for the treatment of the
condition;
• Whether other conventional therapies have been considered;
• Whether the use of the substances is supported by a health care practitioner;
• Publichealth and public safety objectives of the CDSA;
• Other federal, provincial, and/or municipal laws or regulations that may apply to the proposed
activity; and
• Risks, including risk of diversion.
BLANK TAB
BLANK TAB
BLANK TAB
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS
• In response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create Wellness Together
Canada, providing 24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance-use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed in excess of $280 million for a suite of
measures to support the mental health needs of marginalized and disproportionately impacted
Canadians, while also investing in health systems improvements.
• Moving forward, our Government is committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of our universal health care system. This is reflected in B2022’s reaffirmation of
engaging provinces and territories on the development of a Canada Mental Health Transfer, which
would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
IF PRESSED ON POCKETWELL (84 words)
Supportingthe mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government. In January
2022, Wellness Together Canada launched a companion app called PocketWell, which will help increase
awareness and accessibility of available mental health and substance use resources.
Through PocketWell, individuals can link to the portal to access resources ranging from self-assessment
to customized support based on their assessment. Via the app, individuals can connect seamlessly to
WTC for free and confidential virtual sessions with social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE (83 words)
The Government of Canada is working with the Standards Council of Canada –a Federal Crown
Corporation with demonstrated expertise in developing national standards –to develop an integrated
suite of national standards to support the delivery of mental health and substance use services,
leveraging significant work done to date in this field.
Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and equitable mental
health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is provided.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR DIVERSE POPULATIONS … (84 words)
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal to ensure inclusivity.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in over 200 languages
and dialects, including 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness (for Indigenous peoples), and
supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote areas, facing stigma or
financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• The Federal Government is currently funding Kids Help Phone close to $15 million over 36
months, from 2020-23.
• We are investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
• The Promoting HealthEquity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
• The Government is currently investing $21M over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. This service provides 24/7 suicide
crisis support via the phone (1-833-456-4566) and via text (45645) in both English and French.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada provided $100 million over three years to
support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government provided $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19
pandemic.
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtaincredible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts of COVID-19 on Canadians’ Mental Health
2021 Mandate Commitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health andsubstance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
•
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness TogetherCanada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP). The Government has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 millionis being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada.
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on PosttraumaticStress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of its release (by February 2025).
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural
disorders research.
CIHR is leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with PHAC
and Health Canada. This initiative supports 101 research projects, representing a total investment of
$13.7 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of
leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated through these
projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
Between 2016-17 and 2020-2021, CIHR invested more than $146 million to address various issues
related to substance use.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
ResearchInitiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). In 2022, the Government of Canada renewed its
investment in CRISM with a total investment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to
build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phaseby increasing the number of Regional
Nodes to enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for the Atlantic region)
while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity (including the creation of an
Indigenous Platform and a Coordinating Centre).
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (with a third cycle in development) to better
understand the wider impacts of the pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of
research articles based on the first cycle of data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Journal on September 27, 2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also
resumed in September 2020. The Canadian Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of
mental health indicators, and has been collected for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for
ongoing measurement of changes in mental health of the Canadian population as the pandemic
continues and as Canada recovers.
Mental Illness Surveillance
As part of its mandate, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is pursuing ongoing surveillance of
mental illness in the Canadian community. It uses multiple data sources to provide the most up to date
evidence available, including the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System (CCDSS), the Canadian
Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) and the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS).
The CCDSS is a collaborative network of provincial and territorial chronic disease surveillance systems,
supported by PHAC. It identifies chronic disease cases of allresidents who are eligible for provincial or
territorial health insurance, and contains aggregated data that can be stratified by age, gender and
geographical locations. In 2010, the CCDSS was expanded to track and report on health services use for
mentalillness overall, as well as for mood and anxiety disorders in the Canadian population.
The 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) is a national, cross-sectional survey
that provides health-related information on Canadian children and youth. The survey is representative
of the Canadian population aged 1 to 17 years as of January 31, 2019, living in private dwellings in
Canada's ten provinces and three territories.
As well, to help address data gaps around the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals, families,
and communities in terms of their mental health (including symptoms of anxiety and depression, and of
post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), PHAC partnered with Statistics Canada in the development of the
Survey on COVID-19 and mental health. The survey contains information on the proportion of Canadians
who screened positive for these conditions by age group and gender, and look at the more at-risk
groups. These surveys were conducted at various times during the COVID-19 pandemic and provide
timely information on the impact of the pandemic on the mental health and well-being of Canadians.
Mental Health and Substance Use Research (CSCB)
The Government of Canada recognizes the intersection between mental health and substance use.
Approximately 20% of Canadians with a mental illness have a co-occurring substance use disorder, and
approximately 50% of those engaged in treatment for substance use are also living with mental illness.
In October 2020, recognizing the intersection between mental health and substance use, Canadian
Centre for Substance use and Addiction (CCSA) and the Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC)
signed a Memorandum of Agreement to work on joint initiatives in this area.
Currently the two pan-Canadian Health Organizations are working on an evidence review on promising
practices, interventions and policy recommendations to screen and assess suicide risk among individuals
with higher risk substance use.
They are also exploring the development of pan-Canadian operational guidelines for integrated mental
health and substance use service delivery, with the goal of providing concrete and actionable guidance
for the implementation of an integrated approach formental health and substance use.
Public surveys from the CCSA and the MHCC found that mental health symptoms and substance use
have increased since March 2020.They also found that those with a history of mental health or
substance use concerns were disproportionately impacted by stresses related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH (159 words)
• The Government is committed to supporting the mental health and substance use needs of
children and youth.
• We are workingto increase access to mental health and addictions services, such as the Budget
2017 commitment of $5 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories, which included a priority to
expand access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth (age 10-
25).
• In April 2020 and in response to the pandemic, Health Canada launched Wellness Together
Canada, a portal that offers online mental health and substance use supports. Through the portal,
children and youth (ages 5 to 29)can have free access to a range of resources, including Kids Help
Phone. Budget 2022 provided $140 million over two years for the Portal to continue to provide supports
for Canadians.
• The Government will work across departments to ensure children and youth have access to
mental health supports as they recover from the pandemic and in the long-term.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH… (88 words)
• In addition to Wellness Together Canada, which provides online, phone and text based support
to young people who are dealing with mental health issues, $15M is being invested in Kids Help Phone
from April 2020 to March 2023, so that it can continue to provide mental health support to youth in
need during the pandemic.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is also investing approximately $100M over 3 years to
support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, including youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PREVENT CHILD-AND YOUTH-BASED VIOLENCE… (64 words)
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) funds programming to prevent teen and youth
dating violence, including community and school-based initiatives that teach skills for healthy and safe
relationships based on respect and consent.
• In addition, PHAC funds initiatives to prevent and address family-and gender-based violence
and its health impacts including trauma-and violence-informed physical and mental health promotion
for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FORINTEGRATED YOUTH SERVICES … (102 words)
• The Government continues to work with provinces, territories, and stakeholders to help spread
and scale Integrated Youth Services (IYS) models of care.
• This builds on work to increase access to mental health andaddictions services for children and
youth, which includes the Budget 2017 commitment of $5 billion over 10 years to provinces and
territories through bilateral agreements.
• All 13 provinces and territories have developed or are developing an IntegratedYouth Services
(IYS) network in their regions. Additionally, there is an Indigenous IYS network in progress.
• In total, there are approximately 50 operational integrated youth hubs across Canada and 60
under development.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS… (86 mots)
• The Government remains committed to ensuring that mental health is treated as full and equal
part of the universal healthcare system.
• The Government will deliver on a broad range of mental health commitments, which includes
ensuring mentalhealth supports are accessible to children and youth as they recover from the impact of
the pandemic.
• In addition, the Government will work with provinces, territories and other stakeholders to
establish a Canada Mental Health Transfer (CMHT) to help expand the delivery of high-quality and
accessible mental health services.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• Almost two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25, and nearly half do
before 18. It is estimatedthat over 800,000 Canadian children and youth use health care services for
mental illness of and alcohol/drug induced disorders annually.
• Children and youth are among the highest users of Emergency Department (ED) for mental
health and substance use services.
• In 2020, suicide was the second leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children and youth.
The percentage of youth reporting “excellent” or “very good” mental health fell from 73% in 2019 to
67% in 2020 and was even lower in fall 2021/winter 2022 (61%). Furthermore, the percentage of youth
reporting that their mental health was “somewhat worse” or “much worse” now compared to before
the pandemic rose from14% in September 2020 to a high of 35% in March/April 2021.
• Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the prevalence of self-reported diagnosed mood and/or anxiety
disorders in youth aged 12-19 years increased from 4.5% in 2005 to 11.5% in 2017 (controlling for age).
In 2017, a greater percentage of girls than boys self-reported diagnosed mood and/or anxiety disorders
(14.4% among girls vs. 8.6 among boys).
Mental illness health issues can impact any population and children and youth are no exception. In fact,
almost two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that mental
health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually.
Youth disproportionately visit the Emergency Department (ED) seeking mental health/substance use
services. For example, between 2008-2009 and 2018-19 there was a 61% increase in visits made by
youth to the ED for such services. During this time, hospitalizations for mental health disorders also
increased by 60%.
This cohort is also affected by suicide. In 2020, suicide was the second leading cause of death among
individuals aged 15 to 34. In 2020, among individuals aged 15 to 24 years, males accounted for 68% of
suicide deaths; and among individuals aged 25 to 34 years, males account for 75% of suicide deaths.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children and youth.
Concerns about the virus itself have been compounded by impacts on school and routines, social
activities, isolation, and decreased access to services and supports.
Results from 2022 showed that youth were less likely to report excellent or very good mental health as
compared to older Canadians. Most Canadians were less likely to report excellent or very good mental
health during the COVID-19 period, and the difference between 2019 and 2022 was particularly evident
for younger adults. Only 50.9% of those aged 18 to 34 reported excellent or very good mental health in
2021-2022 during the pandemic, compared to 60.8% before the pandemic in 2019. In children aged 12-
17 years, 61.2% reported that their mental health was very good or excellent in 2021-2022, compared to
73.0% in 2019.
More recent survey results from early 2021 showed that younger Canadians persistently indicate the
highest anxiety and depression of all age groups. For example, almost 30% of 16 to 17 year olds
reported high levels of anxiety and depression, and one in three reported suicidal ideation in the past
year. Conversely, this group reported a lower incidence of diagnosis of a mental health issue, suggesting
they do not have access to diagnostic services and care.
Additionally, in a Statistics Canada survey of perceptions of personal safety, 11% of Youth aged 15 to 24
reported that harassment or attacks on the basis of race, ethnicity, or skin colour have increased in their
neighbourhood since the start of the pandemic.
Government Actions and Investments to Support the Mental Health Needs of Children and Youth
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments and Integrated Youth Services
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services (2017-2027). The investment is being provideddirectly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateral agreements, informed by the 2017 Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health. In it, Ministers of Health agreed to prioritize
expanded access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth as
one of three priorities for the federal funding.
All 13 provinces and territories have developed or are developing an Integrated Youth Services (IYS)
network in their regions. Additionally, there is an Indigenous IYS network in progress. These hubs are
easily accessible community-based “one stop shops” that provide an integrated suite of services, which
can include peer support, mental health and primary care support and employment counselling, as well
as support for navigating these systems of care.
There are approximately 50 operational integrated youth hubs across Canada and 60 under
development. Three of the most developed networks are in British Columbia (Foundry), Ontario (Youth
Wellness Hubs Ontario), and Quebec (Aire Ouverte), with British Columbia and Ontario specifically
identifying the use of bilateral funding to support these networks. This demonstrates how the federal
government can work constructively with provinces and territories to spread and scale evidence-based
practices in the mental health and substance use space.
The development of an Indigenous IYS network was driven by the participation of Indigenous
communities across Canada. These First Nations andInuit communities led efforts to shift youth mental
health towards culturally competent care through the Access Open Minds Indigenous Council. Several
Indigenous communities are currently participating in an emerging Indigenous IYS network.
2021 MandateCommitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP), which includes Integrated Youth Services. The Government has emphasized the
importance of engagement with diverse stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which
have been incorporated into thedevelopment process.
Mental Health Promotion and Teen Dating Violence
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple riskand protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC also funds programming to prevent teen and youth dating violence, including community and
school-based initiatives that teach skills for healthy and safe relationships based on respect and consent.
In addition, PHAC funds initiatives to support the health of survivors of family violence, including
trauma-informed physical and mental health promotion for youth.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agencyof Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566),in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada. By 2023, this service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of
their choice (voice, text or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Children and Youth
Under the Health Care Policy and Strategies Program (HCPSP) at Health Canada, the federal government
is providing funding to the following projects:
• $2M from 2021-2024 to the Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) to develop and pilot a
national specialized peer support certification program for use by post-secondary institutions to support
student mental health.
• $6.8M from 2019-2024 to Foundry to help organizations implement integrated models of youth
mental health care. This complements $9M in funding to Frayme from 2019-2024 to promote broader
implementation of integrated youth services in Canada.
• $2M from 2021-2026 to the Children’s Hospital of Eastern Ontario (CHEO) to increase the
spread of the Aaniish Naa Gegii: the Children’s Health and Well‐being Measure (ACHWM), co-developed
with Indigenous partners to help measure the health and wellbeing of Indigenous children.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-2022 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
healthand substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years, beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential onlin0e mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access.
There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide immediate access to
support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that can assist with
finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial and territorial
services, and does not replace them. In January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched PocketWell,
which is a companion app to the online Portal.
Through the Portal and the app, children and youth (ages 5 to 29) are able to access mental health and
substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone, which provides online, phone and text based
support to young people who are in crisis or dealing with mental health issues.
Additional resources are being invested in Kids Help Phone ($14.8M over 36 months from April 2020 to
March 2023) provide mental health support to youth in need during the pandemic.
As of November 14, 2022, almost 3 million individuals across all provinces and territories have accessed
the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 8 million web sessions. The new PocketWell mobile app
has been downloaded a total of 30,792 times. Additionally, approximately 45% of registered clients of
the portal are under 30, an age group that tends to underutilize traditional mental health services.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those most
affected by the pandemic, including youth. Funded projects began in spring 2022 and are reaching
diverse populations across Canada. Projects will support mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention interventions, in addition to initiatives that build the capacity of service providers to deliver
programming in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence to Underpin Initiatives
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $413
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research.
CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS Open Minds, a national
project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care by developing and
testing evidence-informed approaches into IYS. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7 provinces and
one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways based on local
context. For example, in Ulukhaktok, a remote community in the Northwest Territories where
professional service providers are not always available, the site is evaluating a model where lay health
workers are trained to provide support to youth in distress.
The IYS Network of Networks Initiative ($1M over 1 year), was also launched by CIHR in April 2022 to
create a Canada-wide network of provincial and territorial learning health systems for Integrated Youth
Services for mental health and substance use.
In addition, CIHR committed $6.25M over 5 years to the Mental Health in the Early Years funding
opportunity in March 2022, with a focus on mental health initiatives for young children (ages 0-5),
Indigenous Peoples, as well as transforming mental health with integrated care.
CIHR isalso leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative supported 101 research projects, of $13.5 million from CIHR and
partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of leading Canadian experts in
mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to
ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for theSurvey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (with a third cycle in development) to better
understand the wider impacts of the pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of
research articles based on the first cycle of data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Journal on September 27, 2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also
resumed in September 2020. The Canadian Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of
mental health indicators, and has been collected for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for
ongoing measurement of changes in mental health of the Canadian population as the pandemic
continues and as Canada recovers.
Additionally, the 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth, with a second cycle planned for
2023, explores issues that have an impact on the physical and mental health of children and youth (aged
1-17 years). As well, the 2022 Mental Health and Access to Care Survey, focuses on the mental health
status of Canadiansaged 15+ years and their access to and need for services and supports. This survey
also intends to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on population health as well as evaluate
changes in patterns of mental health, service use and functioning in the last ten years.
Mental Illness Surveillance
As part of its mandate, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is pursuing ongoing surveillance of
mental illness in the Canadian community. It uses multiple data sources to provide the most up to date
evidence available, including the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System (CCDSS), the Canadian
Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) and the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS).
The CCDSS is a collaborative network of provincial and territorial chronic disease surveillance systems,
supported by PHAC. It identifies chronic disease cases among all residents who are eligible for provincial
or territorial health insurance, and contains aggregated data that can be stratified by age, sex and
geographical locations. The CCDSS enables to track and report on health services use for mental illness
overall and alcohol/drug induced disordersfor mood and anxiety disorders in the Canadian population,
as well as for schizophrenia.
The 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) is a national, cross-sectional survey
that provides health-related information on Canadian children and youth. The survey is representative
of the Canadianpopulation aged 1 to 17 years as of January 31, 2019, living in private dwellings in
Canada's ten provinces and three territories.
As well, to help address data gaps around the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals, families,
and communities interms of their mental health (including symptoms of anxiety and depression, and of
post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), PHAC partnered with Statistics Canada in the development of the
Survey on COVID-19 and mental health. The survey contains information on the proportion of Canadians
who screened positive for these conditions by age group and gender, and look at the more at-risk
groups. These surveys were conducted at various times during the COVID-19 pandemic and provide
timely information on the impactof the pandemic on the mental health and well-being of Canadians
NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICES (99 words)
• Budget 2021 provided $45 million to develop national standards for mental health and
substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key
stakeholders.
• National standards will help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of
services, while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery that Canadians can rely on,
no matter where they live or access services.
• Standards development will be informed by consultation and engagement processes, so that the
diverse perspectives of Canadians are incorporated, such as Indigenous and racialized populations,
gender-diverse people, and people with lived and living experience.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IT IS IMPORTANT FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA TO SUPPORT THE
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS (79 words)
• Significant progress has been made to develop and advance wise practices in mental health and
substance use treatment, supported by significant federal, provincial and territorial investments.
• This has provided opportunities to build on and integrate wise practices in provinces and
territories to develop national standards, through consensus-based processes that address shared
mental health and substance use priorities.
• Standards help to provide a framework for mental health and substance use service delivery
across Canada, no matter where a person lives.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THESE NATIONAL STANDARDS WILL IMPACT THE MENTAL HEALTH AND
SUBSTANCE USE SERVICES RECEIVED BY CANADIANS (87 words)
• Mental health and substance use services can vary across the country and some people
experience barriers in accessing services. Where services are available, they may also not meet the
needs of diverse populations.
• Standards are tools for helping to ensure that mental health and substance use services,
including those who provide such services, meet a consistent level of care and are sensitive to a wide
range of needs.
• This work will help to ensure that when Canadians access services, they are of high quality,
evidence-based and equitable.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARTNERSHIP WITH STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA (SCC) (72 words)
• On March 14, 2022, the Government of Canada announced plans to work with SCC and
stakeholders to develop national standards for mental health and substance use services.
• As Canada’s leadingstandardization body, SCC has extensive experience in leading national
standardization initiatives of this scale.
• SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental
health and substance use services, leveraging significant work completed to date in this field.
IF PRESSED ON THE STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT PROCESS (54 words)
• Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is coordinating the development of standards that are
evidence-based and developed through consensus-based processes that engage experts, health
organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other key stakeholders.
• Standards will seek to achieve the highest level of consensus possible, while adhering to SCC’s
strict guidelines for standards development.
IF PRESSED ON THE PRIORITY AREAS FOR STANDARDS (85 words)
• Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is currently leading the development of standards in priority
areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities (CSOP), developed
by federal, provincial and territorial governments in 2017.
• The integrated suite of standards will help address a range of mental health and substance use
needs and are tools for promoting consistency of service delivery across Canada.
• TheGovernment of Canada and SCC will explore opportunities for standards development in
additional priority areas with input from stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDS WILL PROMOTE EQUITY (88 words)
• We know that in order for standards to support all Canadians, they must be developed through
an equity lens that considers the needs of diverse populations.
• The Government of Canada has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
• It is the Government of Canada’s intention to use the standards development process to
advance equity in the delivery of high-quality mental health and substance use services for diverse
populations that face barriers to care.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA (SCC) WILL ENGAGE STAKEHOLDERS (59 words)
• SCC is engaging a diverse range of key stakeholders to inform their work, such as provinces and
territories, Indigenous partners, health organizations, and people with lived and living experience.
• SCC has established a National Mental Health and Substance Use Standardization Collaborative
to facilitate stakeholder engagement as well as consensus-based processes, which includes a steering
committee and various working groups.
IF PRESSED ON THE STEERING COMMITTEE THAT WILL GUIDE THE STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA
(SCC) BODY OF WORK (56 words)
• The Steering Committee includes a diverse range of key mental health and substance use
stakeholders that will provide advice and direction to the work of the Collaborative.
• Membership includes representatives from the federal government, Indigenous partners, pan-
Canadian health organizations, experts, professional associations, health organizations, Standards
Development Organizations, non-governmental organizations, and people with lived and living
experience.
IF PRESSED ON HOW PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES WILL BE ENGAGED IN STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT
(57 words)
• Provinces and territories are key stakeholders thatwill be consulted throughout this process.
• A Government Advisory Table has been established to provide a dedicated forum for provinces
and territories that choose to participate in the standards development process.
• Representatives from the provinces and territories have also been invited to join the various
working groups within the Collaborative.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STAKEHOLDERS AND THE PUBLIC CAN PARTICIPATE IN THE PROCESS (56 words)
• Canadians have access to updates on this work through a dedicated webpage for the initiative
hosted by Standards Council of Canada (SCC).
• SCC will also launch a series of public consultations on the priority areas for standards to help
inform the development process.
• Stakeholders can also contact SCC for more information by accessing their dedicated webpage.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDS WILL BE IMPLEMENTED (48 words)
• Standards will be available for voluntary implementation by provinces and territories, health
organizations and other service providers that have responsibility for the delivery of mental health and
substance use care.
• Standards Council of Canada will develop guidance and related resources to support the uptake
and implementation of standards.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• Through Budget 2021, the government provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22,
to develop national standards for mental health.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has emphasized the need for increased access to high quality,
evidence-informed, andequitable mental health and substance use services. Positive mental health
declined throughout the pandemic, with only 60% of adults and 54% of children and youth reporting
excellent or very good mental health in 2021, compared to 68% of adults and 63% of children and youth
in 2019. In fall 2020, one in five Canadians reported a need for mental health care in the past year. Of
those, 45% reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met. A delay in mental health
support is linked to decreased positive health outcomes, therefore timely support is particularly
important.
• Approximately one in five Canadians will experience a substance use disorder in their lifetime.
Substance use and mental illness are closely linked. People with a mental illness are twice as likely to
have a substance use disorder compared to the general population. At least 20% of people with a
mental illness have a co-occurring substance use disorder. For people with schizophrenia, this number
may be as high as 50%. Similarly, people with substance use disorders are up to three times more likely
to have a mental illness. More than 15% of people with a substance use disorder have a co-occurring
mental illness.
• Among other priority populations, Canadian youth, Indigenous and those identifying as
LGBTQIA2+ report greater need for mental health care than adults, non-Indigenous Canadians and those
not identifying as LGBTQIA2+. Of those who need care, these groups are also more likely to report that
their needs are unmet or partially met, highlighting the need to reduce barriers to care.
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government provided $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to develop national standards for mental health, in collaboration
with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access
timely care, treatment, and support. This language was interpreted broadly to include standards for
substance use due to its close relationship with mental health.
Of the $45 million, $37.5 millionover two years was provided to Health Canada to develop the
standards, $4.5 million over two years was provided to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) for knowledge mobilization activities to inform standards development, and $3 million over two
years went to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to develop disaggregated population-based
and system level indicators to monitor the impact of national standards.
National standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based processes that
engage a range of experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other key
stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. The Government of Canada has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process. National standards will be available for voluntary implementation in provinces,
territories and health organizations, and will help to support an evidence-based framework for service
delivery in priority areas.
Standards Background
“Standardization” refers to the development and application (conformity assessment) of standards
publications that establish accepted practices, technical requirements and terminologies for product,
process and service, for management systems and for certification of persons.
Standards are documents, established by consensus and approved by a recognized body that provide,
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at
the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given context. They are based on the consolidated
results of science, technology and lived and living experience, and aimed at the promotion of optimum
community benefits.
While there are a breadth of clinical and professional guidelines, frameworks, and other resources
currently available with a national scope, these documents have a specific focus and intended purpose
separate from national standards for health services or have otherwise not been developed through a
formal standardization process.
Partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC)
Health Canada signed a Memorandum of Agreement with SCC on November 25, 2021 to develop
national standards for mental health and substance use services. This partnership was announced by the
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions on March 14, 2022.
Established in 1970 through the Standards Council of Canada Act, SCC is a non-agent Federal Crown
Corporation. Oversight for the SCC is provided by its Governing Council, who are appointed by the
federal government and who report to Parliament through the Minister of Innovation, Science, and
Economic Development. As set out in the Act, SCC’s mandate is to promote efficient and effective
voluntary standardization in Canada, where standardization is not expressly provided for by law and, in
particular, to:
a. promote the participation of Canadians in voluntary standards activities,
b. promote public-private sector cooperation in relation to voluntary standardization in Canada,
c. coordinate and oversee the efforts of the persons and organizations involved in the National
Standards System,
d. foster quality, performance and technological innovation in Canadian goods and services
through standards-related activities, and,
e. develop standards-related strategies and long-term objectives in order to advance the national
economy, support sustainable development, benefit the health, safety and welfare of workers and the
public, assist and protect consumers, facilitate domestic and international trade and further
international cooperation in relation to standardization.
SCC coordinates and provides leadership to the National Standards System, which refers to the network
of organizations and individuals who contribute to standardization in Canada. This includes SCC-
accredited organizations that develop standards (Standards Development Organizations or SDOs) as well
as SCC-accredited conformity assessment bodies that verify compliance to standards. SCC also facilitates
connections between the National Standards System and the international standardization system.
As Canada’s National Standards Body, SCC leads and provides a strategic approach to national
standardization, ensuring that national objectives and needs are served by the National Standards
System. SCC collaborates with SDOs to lead and facilitate the development of standards, and serves as a
convener and leader for the standards system, as well as the rules-setting body for standards
development in Canada.
Priority Areas for Standards Development
SCC will lead the development of an integrated suite of national standards products in six
priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities (CSOP):
• Children and youth:
1. Integrated Youth Services: increase access to youth mental health and substance use supports
that are integrated with physical health, sexual health and social services
• Primary Health Services Integration:
2. Primary Care Integration: increase access to quality, integrated mentalhealth and substance use
supports in primary care settings
3. Digital Mental Health and Substance Use Apps: improve access to high-quality, safe and
effective apps to help Canadians make better-informed app choices
• People with complex needs:
4. SubstanceUse Treatment Centres: improve access to high-quality, evidence-based care and
promote an integrated and coordinated treatment system
5. Substance Use Workforce: increase substance use workforce capacity to provide evidence-
based care and stepped-care approaches
6. Integrated Services for Complex Health Needs: improve integrated treatment approaches for
individuals with concurrent mental health and substance use disorders and complex health needs
SCC will develop standard products with the highest level of consensus possible within the short period
available for development.
Once published, all products can be implemented, applied, tested, and later revised or upgraded (if
applicable) to other standardized document types, such as NSCs.
SCC Governance Model for the Development of National Standards for Mental Health and Substance
Use Services
SCC is using a National Standardization Collaborative model to lead standards development through a
consensus-based process. This model includes in-depth stakeholder involvement, national
standardization strategy advancement processes, and subject matter expertise for each topic area, to
identify needs and gaps that will inform the scope and content of standards. The Collaborative’s
governance involves a tiered committee structure that includes a Steering Committee and working
groups with specific areas of focus.
The Collaborative will be composed of key stakeholders and implementation partners, including
representatives from: SCC, governments, Indigenous partners,Pan-Canadian Health Organizations,
experts, professional associations, service providers/organizations, Standards Development
Organizations, other non-governmental organizations, and persons with lived and living experience. The
selection of specific participants will be guided by GBA+ considerations, to ensure an inclusive, equity-
driven approach.
The Collaborative will also include a Government Advisory Table to provide a dedicated forum for PT
and Indigenous representatives to share their perspectives as the work progress. The Co-chairs of this
Table will be invited to join the Steering Committee of the Collaborative. Representatives can also join
the working groups of the Collaborative.
SCC has also established a dedicated webpage for this initiative to provide Canadians with more
information.
Complementary Role of the Canada Mental Health Transfer (CMHT)
Service standards are tools for promoting the delivery of high-quality and appropriate mental health and
substance use care in specific service areas. The focus of standards development is on how care is
delivered, where standards implementation lies within the jurisdiction of PTs that deliver care.
The suite of standards is not inclusive of all mental health and substance use services and will continue
to evolve over time with the emergence of new priority areas ready for standards development.
The new CMHT would serve as a permanent source of funding to PTs to expand their capacity to deliver
high-quality and accessible mental health services, for both prevention and treatment.
The government of Canada is committed to engaging with PTs on the development of a CMHT.
As a source of funds, the CMHT would play an important complementary role in supporting PTs to
implement standards by bolstering their capacity to deliver high-quality care.
Standards will be made available for voluntary implementation in PTs, health organizations and other
service providers responsible for the delivery of mental health and substance use care.
Progress in Other Areas ofStandards Development
Existing standards work funded by the federal government is already contributing to the advancement
of this mandate commitment.
• Health Canada is funding Health Standards Organization’s (HSO) Improving Integrated Care for
Youth (IICY) Initiative, to develop an effective integrated care network to address gaps in access to child
& youth mental health services and continuity of care. This work includes standards development in the
areas of youth mental health and addictions services and suicide prevention.
• Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC) jointly developed with Canadian Standards
Association (CSA) and Bureau de normalisation du Québec (BNQ), the Psychological Health and Safety in
the Workplace NSC, which was published in 2018. The MHCC continues to promote and support
implementation of the standard through education, guidance and training.
o This standard was adapted by the Paramedic Association of Canada to develop the Psychological
Health and Safety in the Paramedic ServiceOrganization NSC, published in 2018.
• MHCC jointly developed with CSA, the Mental Health and Well-Being for Post-Secondary
Students NSC, which was published in 2020. MHCC continues to promote and support implementation
of the standard through education,guidance and training.
ONLINE HARM (78 words)
• Online harm through technology-facilitated violence (TFV) is a serious public health issue that
can have lasting impacts on people’s physical and mental health.
• Canadians should be able to express themselves freely and openly without fear of harm online.
Our Government is seized with the particular challenges facing youth, women and the 2SLGBTQI+
community online.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working to prevent online harm by increasing awareness
of cyberbullying and supporting projects to address technology-facilitated violence.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO IS DOING TO PREVENT AND ADDRESS CYBERBULLYING
(91 words)
• The Government of Canada is committed to preventing cyberbullying and mitigating the
significant impact it can have on the health and well-being of children, youth and their families in
Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is taking action on this issue by investing in awareness
activities, and building the evidence base to support children and youth in developing healthy
relationships with their peers.
• The Agency is also investing in interventions and resources that provide children, youth, parents
and educators with the tools they need to effectively respond to cyberbullying behaviours.
BACKGROUND
Social media services are increasingly central to participation in democratic, cultural, and public life.
However, they can also be used to threaten, intimidate, bully, and harass people and can lead to mental
healthissues, especially in teens.
Technology-facilitated violence (TFV) refers to a range of behaviours whereby technology is used to
facilitate virtual and/or in-person harm. Also referred to as online violence, it can be extremely
emotionally harmful and can reach victims anywhere. Forms of TFV include harassment, publicly
revealing personal information about an individual (i.e., doxing), hate speech, non-consensual sharing of
intimate images and non-consensual creation of sexual images through artificial intelligence (i.e., sexual
deepfake videos or virtual reality pornography).
In Canada, 33% of women aged 15-24 reported experiencing at least one instance of online harassment
in the past 12 months. According to data from the 2018 Health Behaviour in School-aged Children study,
girls are more likely to be cyberbullied than boys. For example, among grade 10 students, 16% of girls
reported being cyberbullied compared to 9% of boys.
Impacts of technology-facilitated violence can be physical, psychological, emotional, and/or financial.
According to the United Nations, cyberviolence worldwide is as harmful to women and girls as physical
violence. Victims of cyberbullying have reported a multitude of emotional, social, and academic
problems, including poor physical health outcomes, absenteeism, depression, anxiety, eating disorders,
chronic stress, low self-esteem, isolation, poor relationships, aggression, and even self-harm or suicide.
Technology-facilitated violence can negatively impacta person’s ability to exercise free expression,
disrupt a person’s sense of security, violate their human rights, violate their privacy, and impact their
ability to fully participate in economic, social and democratic life. Technology-facilitated violencecan
also have an adverse impact more broadly by increasing needs for health care, judicial, and social
services.
Legislative and Regulatory Framework
While Canada’s Criminal Code has no specific cyberbullying offence, cyberbullying behaviour is
addressed through several existing offences depending on the circumstances and the specific behaviour
that formed part of the cyberbullying incident, including child pornography (s. 163.1), criminal
harassment (s. 264), uttering threats (s. 264.1), and blackmail(s. 346), among others. Also, in 2015, an
offence relating to the non-consensual distribution of intimate images (s. 162.1), typically known as
“revenge porn”, was added to the Criminal Code.
The Minister of Canadian Heritage’s mandate letter in December 2021 directed him to continue efforts
with the Minister of Justice to develop and introduce legislation to combat serious forms of harmful
online content. The Department of Canadian Heritage convened an Expert Advisory Group over the
summer, and the Minister of Canadian Heritage is conducting roundtables on online safety to listen to
and understand the perspectives of those who would be most impacted by the legislation. Roundtables
will conclude this fall and the Minister of Canadian Heritage intends to table legislation in Parliament
thereafter to hold platforms accountable for the content they host. Canadian Heritage will continue to
engage Canadians, stakeholders, and affected groups every step of the way on the road to tabling
legislation as soon as possible.
Health Portfolio Efforts to Prevent and Address Online Harm
PHAC funds a variety of projects to prevent family and gender-based violence, including TFV, through
Preventing Gender-Based Violence–the Health Perspective and Preventing and Addressing Family
Violence–the Health Perspective. Some notable projects include:
• Supporting Réseau Femmes Colombie-Britannique to develop, deliver, and test a school-based
violence prevention program to address the needs of Francophone youth, grades 9-12, inBritish
Columbia. The curriculum includes content on online violence.
• Supporting MediaSmarts to develop, deliver, and evaluate a digital literacy program for family
violence survivors living in transition homes to build survivor’s resilience and well-being by helping them
develop the skills and confidence to become informed digital citizens.
• Supporting Raison d’art to develop, deliver, and evaluate the effectiveness of a school-based
prevention program that integrates technology and art therapy tools to teach adolescents how to
identify and prevent gender-based violence, including online violence.
• Supporting Queen University’s Promoting Relationships and Eliminating Violence Network to
develop and disseminate online tools to build capacity for educators to prevent dating violence,
including cyberbullying victimization and perpetration, and promote healthy relationships.
Canada is collecting data on bullying and cyberbullying to inform policy development and interventions
through the Health Behaviourin School-aged Children Survey (HBSC). The HBSC is a World Health
Organization collaborative, cross-national research study of youth aged 11 to 15 that collects data every
four years and currently has over 50 participating countries. Participating in the HBSC enables Canada to
monitor trends in the percentage of youth reporting bullying victimization and perpetration from 2006
onwards, as well as enabling direct international comparisons with participating HBSC countries. In
Canada, the 2022 cycle of the HBSC is expanding the collection of bullying data to include being bullied
based on gender identity, sexual orientation, religion and race or skin colour.
Government of Canada Efforts to Prevent Cyberbullying
The Government of Canada is committed to preventing cyberbullying and mitigating the significant
impact it can have on the health and well-being of children, youth and their families in Canada.
As part of the Federal Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence and the National Crime
Prevention Strategy, Public Safety is supporting the implementation of multi-year projects that prioritize
youth aged 12-24 years and aim to reduce cyberbullying and cyberviolence.
As part of a cyberbullying awareness campaign, Public Safety has launched a cyberbullying website
(www.Canada.ca/cyberbullying), which contains information for parents, caregivers, educators, and
youth. Targeted, age-appropriate booklets and factsheets that can be used in various ways, such as
shared in schools, or printed at home, canbe found on this site
In addition, Public Safety is working to increase knowledge of what works to prevent cyberbullying and
has recently published two reports on its website: Cyberbullying Research in Canada: A Systematic
Review; and Cyberbullying Programs–An Environmental Scan.
Government of Canada Efforts to Address Online Child Sexual Exploitation
The Government of Canada is committed to protecting children and to preventing online sexual
exploitation through the National Strategy for the Protection of Children from Sexual Exploitation on the
Internet.
Public Safety Canada (PS) has been leading this Strategy since 2004, in partnership with the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, Justice Canada and the Canadian Centre for Child Protection, a not-for-profit
organization.
Ongoing investments under the National Strategy total over $18 million per year. Key initiatives include:
contributing to increased public awareness of this crime, supporting the Canadian Centre for Child
Protection’s operationofCybertip.ca; and supporting the development of Project Arachnid, a web-
crawling technology solution to identify and increase the rate of removal of online child sexual
exploitation material. The National Strategy has also helped to expand the RCMP’s National Child
Exploitation Crime Centre’s investigative capacity.
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $20.7 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for the RCMP to
enhance its ability to pursue investigations, identify victims and remove them from abusive situations,
and bring offenders to justice, including those who offend abroad.
PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH (84 WORDS)
• Our Government is committed to promoting the mental health and wellbeing of mothers and
children.
• We have made significant investments in programs that support the mental health of pregnant
and postpartum individuals, including funding for improving community-level access to supports, and
$26.5 million annually for the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP), which serves approximately
240 projects with over 45,000 participants.
• Through such investments and the development of health promotion resources, we are
ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, when and where needed.
IF PRESSED ON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS (88 words)
• The mandate of the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions is to ensure that mental health
care is treated as a full and equal part of our universal health care system, working in close collaboration
with provinces and territories, and to lead a whole-of-society approach to address problematic
substance use in Canada.
• Our Government is committed to ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, and
remains committed to establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS CURRENTLY AVAILABLE TO ADDRESS PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH AND
SUBSTANCE USE CHALLENGES (97 words)
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government.
• In April 2020, our Government launched an online mental health and substance use support
portal, Wellness Together Canada (WTC), which provides free, credible information and supports
available 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official languages to help address their mild to
moderate mental health and substance use issues.
• In addition, via PocketWell, the WTC companion app, and individuals can access resources
ranging from self-assessment to customized support based on their assessment and can link seamlessly
to the supports and services on the portal.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE TOWARDS PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH COMMITMENT (93 words)
• Health Canada has been working closely with Canada’s leading experts in the field to gain a
better understanding of wise practices, gaps and opportunities with respect to perinatal mental health
services in Canada.
• On March 9th, 2022, a roundtable was held with a range ofdifferent stakeholder groups, to
encompass multiple perspectives, including clinical experts and practitioners, individuals with lived and
living experience, policy-makers and researchers/academics.
• This session will help inform further policy development and stakeholder engagement by the
Health Portfolio as we considers approaches to make progress in this important policy area.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• According to a 2018/2019 Government of Canada survey, almost one quarter (23%) of mothers
who recently gave birth reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety
disorder. These reports varied across provinces, ranging from 16% in Saskatchewan to 31% in Nova
Scotia. Studies conducted in Ontario and Quebec show that about one-fifth of pregnant and/or
postpartum women use mental health services.
• Covid-19 has exacerbated the problem; as the rates of perinatal mental health issues and the
need for services has increased, the availability of services has decreased due to shutdowns.
The perinatal period includes both pregnancy and the postpartum period. Perinatal mental health is a
state of well-being in which a pregnant or postpartum person realizes their own abilities, can cope with
the normal stresses of life and work productively, care for themselves and their newborn, and is able to
make a contribution to their community and society.
Perinatal mental illness refers to mental health conditions experienced “around” pregnancy. This
includes pre-existing mental health conditions, but can also refer to new or different mental health
concerns arising around this period.
Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significant public health issues, increasing the risk of poor
mental and physical health outcomes for mothers alongwith potential impacts for children and families.
If untreated, consequences include prolonged maternal depression, paternal depression, partner
relationship dissatisfaction and conflict, impaired parent-infant interactions and attachment, risk for
impaired cognitive or psychosocial development for the child (and increased risk of later child
psychopathology) and, in extreme situations, maternal suicide or infanticide. Maternal deaths with a
mental health component, by suicide or drug toxicity, are increasingly recognized as making up a
significant proportion of all maternal deaths.
Current national data collection surrounding mental health does not allow identification of individuals in
the perinatal period. However, it is possible to identify currently pregnant females.
Among pregnant females overall, self-rated mental health was higher than the self-rated mental health
of non-pregnant females (2019-2021). This holds for all age groups with the exception of teen
pregnancies (15-19), where the self-ratedmental health among those who were pregnant was slightly
lower than for those who were not. Pregnant teens were also significantly more likely to report anxiety
than their non-pregnant peers.
Pregnant females 20 to 44 were significantly less likely to report anxiety or depression than their non-
pregnant peers. In contrast, pregnant women 45-54 were significantly more likely to report anxiety or
depression than their non-pregnant peers.
The 2018/2019Survey on Maternal Health provided a snapshot of the mental health of new mothers (5
to 13 months after giving birth) in Canada. The survey found that almost one-quarter (23%) of new
mothers reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depressionor an anxiety disorder. A
higher proportion (30%) of mothers under the age of 25 reported feelings consistent with depression or
an anxiety disorder compared to mothers aged 25 and older (23%). The survey also found that nearly
one-third (31%) of mothers who reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an
anxiety disorder had previously been told by a health professional that they had depression or a mood
disorder prior to being pregnant.
The literature suggests that additional research is needed to determine the long-term mental health
experiences of teenage parents, particularly studies controlling for confounding effects of demographic,
socioeconomic, environmental, and health related variables. One Canadian study identified that among
Indigenous mothers, social and health factors were more important for predicting long-term mental
health outcomes than experiencing teen pregnancy.
In recent years, some stakeholders have called for greater federal action in the area of perinatal mental
health. On May 13, 2020, a petition was brought forward to create a national perinatal mental health
strategy that would provide direction, policy, and funding to develop specialized, comprehensive
perinatal mental health care services. This includes universal screening and timely access to treatment
for all people during pregnancy and the postpartum period.
On May 5, 2021 (World Maternal Mental Health Day), various MP’s offices sent a request to the former
Minister of Health’s Office on behalf of their constituents regarding a National Perinatal Mental Health
Strategy. It was brought forward by MP Heather McPherson (Edmonton-Strathcona).
On June 3, 2021, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-306, which calls for a National
Perinatal Mental Health Strategy that includes mental health screening and treatment services during
the full perinatal period. This Bill died on the order paper when Parliament was dissolved in August
2021.
On March 31, 2022, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-265, which again called for
a National Perinatal Mental Health Strategy Act that includes measures to provide perinatal mental
health screening and services and reduce barriers to care, as well as measures to increase perinatal
mental healthawareness, training and research.
2021 Mandate Commitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
Wellness Together Canada
In response tothe global public health challenge of COVID-19, in April 2020 the Government of Canada
launched an online mental health and substance use support portal, Wellness Together Canada (WTC).
The portal provides free, credible information and supports available 24/7 to individuals across Canada
in both official languages to help address their mild to moderate mental health and substance use
issues.
WTC offers a variety of resources to support the mental health of pregnant and postpartum individuals.
A few examples of relevant resources include general information and healthy coping mechanisms for
common mental health concerns, such as depression, anxiety, stress and eating disorders.
WTC offers information and support on sexual and family abuse and informationon self-harm and
suicide.
WTC offers peer to peer support communities and counseling services for pregnant and postpartum
individuals who want to exchange with other individuals or with a counsellor.
WTC users have access to more in-depth materials whenthey create an account, including a 2-week
session course on choosing a major or occupation, a 5-week program on anxiety and stress, and a 65-
minute course on handling disappointments.
Perinatal Surveillance
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC)Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System monitors and
reports on maternal, fetal and infant health outcomes while conducting targeted epidemiological
research to address emerging issues. This program has focused largely on indicators of physical health,
someof which can be associated with maternal mental health (e.g., fetal/infant mortality, maternal
chronic diseases, smoking,). However, formal indicators concerning risk and protective factors for
maternal mental health have yet to be established, as there are presently no routinely used national
sources of data on maternal mental health or maternal access to/use of mental health services.
Budget 2022 will bring significant investments towards developing the evidence around the perinatal
period, including perinatal mental health. PHAC will be investing approximately $4.5 million over three
years to support the development and collection of a national parental experiences survey, with a focus
on mental health during the perinatal period as well as other key issues such as breastfeeding,
substance use, etc. This survey will address a critical data gap, particularly around parental mental
health and access to mental health services.
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care’s guideline on screening for depression during
pregnancy and the postpartum period
The Canadian Task Force on Preventive Healthcare (Task Force) is an independent arms-length body of
up to 15 clinicians and methodologists established and funded by PHAC. In 2022, the Task Force
published “Recommendation on instrument-based screening for depression during pregnancy and the
postpartum period” in the Canadian Medical Association Journal.
The Task Force’s guideline on screening for depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period is
based on the best available scientific evidence. The guideline considered the benefits and harms of
screening for Canadian individuals who are pregnant and up to one year postpartum. The Task Force
recommends against screening using a questionnaire with a cut-off score and advises clinicians to
inquire about the mental health and well-being of pregnant and postpartum patients as part of usual
care during visits.
PHAC Policy and Program Activities
The Health Portfolio undertakes a number of activities to promote maternal and child health, which
includes supporting positive maternal mental health during the perinatal periods. PHAC makes
significant investments to support perinatal mental health through programs aimed at improving
community-level access to supports for prenatal and recently postpartum people, new parents and
young children facing barriers to health equity. In particular, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program
provides $26.5 million annually to improve the health of at-risk pregnant individuals,with a focus on
mental health, nutrition, and the promotion of positive health behaviours during pregnancy. Through
approximately 240 funded projects, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program serves more than 45,000
participants across Canada each year.
PHACalso supports the development of several resources promoting the positive mental health of
pregnant/postpartum individuals. These resources provide guidance and advice for both healthcare
professionals and individuals that may face poor mental health during the perinatal period, including
Family-Centred Maternity and Newborn Care National Guidelines; the Mothers’ Mental Health Toolkit;
and ‘Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy’.
To provide rapid support for new parents during the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada and PHAC have
recently developed resources to support the mental health of those who are pregnant or have recently
had a baby.
SUICIDE PREVENTION (124 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance for all Canadians to have access to
critical mental health resources and suicide prevention services, particularly in regions like our North
that are facing high suicide rates and mental health challenges.
• The federal government is leading the development of the National Suicide Prevention Action
Plan, formerly M-174, aimed at reducing suicide rates and improving mental well-being based on best
practices and innovations in suicide prevention and life promotion.
• The federal government is investing $21 million to develop Talk Suicide Canada and $57.5
million to support crisis services during the pandemic, including $2 million to develop resources for
distress centres that are tailored to meet the needs ofdiverse populations such as Inuit, First Nations
and Métis communities.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS ON 9-8-8 IMPLEMENTATION (80 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada welcomes the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications
Commission’s decision to adopt a 9-8-8 phone and text service for Canadians in need of immediate
mental health crisis and suicide prevention support. This service will be launched across Canada on
November 30, 2023.
• To prepare for this launch, the Government of Canada has announced that the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) will lead the coordination of 9 8 8 service delivery, building on its
experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FRAMEWORK FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION ACTIVITIES (84 words)
• As part of our work to address stigma, the Government of Canada has developed a resource for
Safe Messaging about suicide to help people in Canada talk safely about suicide. This resource is
available in both English and French on theCanada.cawebsite.
• We have also helped to connect people, including those in the North, to crisis resources by
supporting Talk Suicide Canada and we are accelerating research by working with suicide experts to
identify key knowledge gaps that would benefit from further research.
IF PRESSED ON THE REVIEW OF THE FEDERAL FRAMEWORK FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION (52 words)
• The Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology launched a study of
the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention on September 29, 2022.
• We welcome the recommendations of the Committee to help inform our plans to evolve the
Framework and implement a National Action Plan based on thebest available evidence.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS ON THE NATIONAL SUICIDE PREVENTION ACTION PLAN (36 words)
• Engagement on the priorities for the National Suicide Prevention Action Plan is expected to
proceed over the coming months with federal departments, provincial and territorial governments,
Indigenous organizations, stakeholders and People with Lived and Living Experience.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS (79 words)
• The Government is providing over $14.8 million over 36 months to KidsHelp Phone to deliver
mental health crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres across the country.
• This includes new investments such as $2.0 million to Talk Suicide Canada to support resources
for the increased demand on distress centres, and approximately $1.8 million towards 14 distress
centres in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONTINUED NEED FOR COVID-19 MENTAL HEALTH CRISIS SUPPORTS (134 words)
• Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement investment, PHAC provided grant funding to 71 local
distress centres across Canada in 2020-21 and 2021-22, however the demand for crisis lines continues to
increase.
• Local-level crisis supports are struggling to meet the demand and needs of their communities,
and may not be aware that there is support available to them. The Government is working with national
organizations, such as Kids Help Phone and Talk Suicide Canada, to leverage administrative capacity to
hire new responders in local distress centres across the country.
• This work will also allow expansion of the Talk Suicide Canada network of local distress centres
to better meet demand as well as support Kids Help Phone to bolster its capacity to address the
heightened demand for their crisis services for children and youth across Canada.
BACKGROUND
Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across Canada.
Between 2017 and 2019, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which is
equivalent to 12 people dying by suicide every day. In 2019, suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries. According to preliminary data, there were 3,839 deaths by suicide reported in
2020. The 2020 data is provisional and incomplete, and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the
next year. This delay is due to the length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes
require to complete their investigations. At this time, caution should be used in drawing any conclusions
regarding suicide trends during the pandemic. There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts
suicide; a combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health,
personal issues and loss, childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
Three-Digit Number for MentalHealth Crisis and Suicide Prevention: The Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it will adopt 9 8 8 for Canadians to call
or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide prevention support. This will be
launched across Canada on November 30, 2023. In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
is preparing for implementation of a three-digit number for suicide prevention from a service delivery
perspective. On August 31, 2022,PHAC announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
(CAMH) was selected to lead coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering
Talk Suicide Canada.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in CAMH to implement and sustain a
fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada
currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via phone (1-833-456-4566) in English and French, 24
hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645) in English and French in the evenings to people in
Canada. This investment includes $2 million to develop resources for distress centres that are tailored to
meet the needs of diverse populations, including Inuit, First Nationsand Métis communities.
When a person reaches out to Talk Suicide Canada, their call or text is routed to the closest available
distress centre that is a member of the network. If a responder is not available in that centre, the call is
automatically routed to the next available responder, with the back-up hub responding to interactions
when responders in a member distress centre are not available. This approach allows for support from a
local centre where responders have a better understanding of resources available locally. All calls to Talk
Suicide Canada are answered by a trained suicide prevention responder.
In 2021-22, almost 89,000 interactions took place, representing approximately 65% of incoming calls,
and 76% of incoming texts (i.e. over this period, approximately 35% of incoming calls and 24% of
incoming texts were unanswered). The service continues to struggle to meet demand. Incoming
interactions continue a steady increase: there were 12,081 incoming interactions in June 2022,
compared to 10,378for June 2021. The voice answer rate for the service has declined over the past
year. This is a challenge for all crisis services through the pandemic. PHAC is working with crisis services
to help address these issues. There is potential for this volume to increase further as announcements in
Canada and the USA create awareness of the existing service and prompt additional people to reach out.
COVID-19 Mental Health Supports: Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of
Canada announced a$50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC
administered an initial round of funding grants to 57 distress centres in 2021-22, and is currently
distributing grants to 14 other distress centres in 2022-23 (following a second solicitation reaching
organizations not included in the first round of funding). In addition, $2 million of this funding is
supporting CAMH as it curates resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of priority
populations.
PHAC is also administering time-limited funding of $150 million, provided in Budget 2021 to support the
mental health of those most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. $1 million of this $150 million in
funding is being reprofiled in 2022-23 to allow PHAC to support additional projects and activities, and
ensure equitable reach to priority populations.
Motion 174–A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-
James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the Government to establish a National Suicide
Prevention Action Plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174,
though it is non-binding. The proposed actions in the plan are aligned with the Federal Framework for
Suicide Prevention. Activities in progress across the Government of Canada include the development of
resources and tools to reduce stigma and raise public awareness about suicide and its prevention,
research and knowledge translation (i.e. the synthesis, dissemination, and exchange of evidence-based
information to improve the health of Canadians), and the implementation of a Pan-Canadian suicide
service prevention service (Talk Suicide) and 3-digit number (988). An update on M-174 was included in
the December 2020 Progress Report on the Framework. Efforts to develop the Action Plan will be
included in the December 2022 Progress Report as part of legislated reporting on the Framework. PHAC
is starting to facilitate coordination and collaboration on elements of the Action Plan with relevant
federal departments, provinces and territories, agencies and key stakeholders, including those from First
Nations, Inuit and Metis organizations, through its convening role on this Action Plan.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events: PHAC is
currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and mental health.
The Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health showed that 2.4% of adults in Canada reported suicidal
ideation since the pandemic began in 2020, which is not significantly different from the 2.7% before the
pandemic in 2019; however, the percentage increased significantly in spring 2021 to 4.2%. Risk factors
of reporting suicide ideation during the pandemic included being under 65, Canadian-born, a frontline
worker, reporting pandemic-related income/job loss or loneliness/isolation, experiencing a highly
stressful/traumatic event during one's lifetime, and having lower household income and educational
attainment. Continued surveillance ofsuicide and risk/protective factors is needed to inform suicide
prevention efforts.
SUPPORT FOR VIRTUAL AND RURAL MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES (89 words)
• Our Government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health services.
• With COVID-19 creating stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians, our Government is
investing in virtual mental health care available to all Canadians through the Wellness Together Canada
portal and companion smartphone app Pocketwell, which has more than 30,000 downloads.
• Moving forward, the federal government has committed to developing a permanent, ongoing
Canada Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health
services.
DISPARITIES IN RURAL HEALTH–CHILDREN MENTAL AND PHYSICAL ASPECTS (113 words)
• The Government of Canada recognizes that Canadians living in rural communities, including
children, have a harder time accessing timely high-quality family health services and mental health care
and that rural communities face unique challenges in delivering these services.
• We are committed to addressing these barriers and ensuring that children across Canada have
equitable access to care. To that end, we are making targeted investments to increase the number of
doctors and nurses in rural communities.
• These include increasing the maximum amount of Canada Student Loans for rurally-based
doctors and nurses by 50%, and investing $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of
those most affected by the pandemic, including youth.
IF PRESSED ON MINISTERIAL MANDATE COMMITMENTS (84 words)
• The government committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a full and equal part
of our universal health care system. As an integral part of this commitment, the government will be
exploring pathways to increase the accessibility of mental health services in rural areas.
• In an effort to expand access to mental health services for Canadians, particularly for individuals
who experience marginalization and/or face barriers to accessing care, our government is committed to
establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FORVIRTUAL CARE (84 words)
• Over the last two years, our Government has worked with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by over $240M in funding.
• Expanding virtual care in Canada provides Canadians with new ways to access the primary care
services on which they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health services.
• As noted in Budget 2022, in future conversations with provinces and territories, the federal
government will remain focused on delivering better health care outcomes, including increased access
to primary care.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO CARE IN RURAL AND REMOTE SETTINGS (85 words)
• Canadians living in rural communities have a harder time accessing timely high-quality primary
and mental healthcare, and rural communities face unique challenges in delivering these services.
• We are committed to addressing barriers and ensuring equitable access to care. We are making
investments to increase the number of doctors and nurses in rural communities.
• These include increasing the Canada Student Loan maximums for rural-based doctors and
nurses, and investing $100M over three years to promote the mental health of those most affected by
the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL BARRIERS TO ACCESS CARE IN RURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES (169
words)
• Budget 2022 commits to provide $26.2 million over four years and $7 million ongoing to
increase the maximum amount of forgivable Canada Student Loans for doctors and nurses who work in
underserved rural and remotecommunities.
• This will mean up to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses and up to $60,000 for doctors
working in underserved or remote communities.
• Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada has announced a $2.75 billion Universal
broadband fund to support high-speed internet projects in rural and remote communities throughout
Canada.
• Increased broadband access can have an incredibly positive impact in these parts of Canada,
particularly for Indigenous communities, where digital health technologies that rely on stable internet
connections, such as virtual care, can make a significant difference in people’s lives.
• Going forward, the Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces and territories,
providing targeted support as theybolster their own family health services and mental health systems,
particularly those for children in rural communities, following the disruption caused by the COVID-19
pandemic.
IF PRESSED SPECIFICALLY ON MENTAL HEALTH (113 words)
• In response to the global public health challenge of COVID-19, in April 2020 the Government of
Canada launched an online mental health and substance use support portal, Wellness Together Canada.
• As a virtual tool, the portal provides access to all individuals living in Canada regardless of their
location.
• Recognizing that many Canadians do not have reliable internet access, confidential chat sessions
with social workers, psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text, including
for children aged 5 and older
• The Government of Canada is also providing funding to Integrated Youth Services Networks (IYS-
Net), a pan-Canadian initiative that builds health implementation tools to improve the integration of
youth mental health services.
BACKGROUND
Family health services form the backbone of high-performing health care systems. They serve a dual
function in the health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination
function to ensure continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians, including children,
continue to struggle to access family health services. In 2021, 14.5% of Canadians 12 years and over
lacked a regular health care provider. These disparities are felt more acutely by rural Canadians, with the
distribution of family physicians to rural communities decreasing over time (13.1% in 2016; 12.8% in
2020), while it increases slightly in urban environments (86.7% in 2016; 86.9% in 2020). Additionally,
Indigenous people living in both rural/remote and urban communities, on and off reserve, have been
shown to be less likely to be attached to a family health services provider. In Canada, Jordan’s Principle
commits that all First Nations children living in Canada should have access the services and supports
they need, including health services, when they need them.
Mental health issues can impact any population and children and youth are no exception. In fact, two
thirds or more of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that mental
health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually. The COVID-19 pandemic has
had significant impacts of this population. For example, the percentage of Canadians aged 12-17 who
reported their mental health as “very good” or “excellent” decreased from 74.1% in 2018, to 61.2% in
September 2021/February 2022. Moreover, rural populations are in a particularly vulnerable position
due to the lack of availability and accessibility of mental health services and supports, and family health
services within their communities.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance family health
services and mental health priorities, with a particular focus on rural communities.
Health Canada has been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify ways in
which the family health service system could be strengthened to:
• Ensure every Canadian has timely access to a family doctor or family health team, and
• Leverage virtual care to support access to and delivery of high-quality health care, including
within the context of family health services.
Timely access to family health services for all Canadians, including children, is a Government of Canada
priority:
• The 2021 Liberal platform promised $3.2B to provinces and territories (PTs) for hiring 7,500 new
family doctors and nurse practitioners, and $400M for virtual care.
The fall 2021 Mandate Letter to the Minister of Health included directives to:
• Support provinces and territories to hire newfamily doctors, nurses and nurse practitioners;
• Expand virtual care, helping to cover digital infrastructure and other system improvements so
that Canadians can access virtual medical consultations or remote monitoring;
• Expand the number of family doctors and family health services teams in rural communities and
work to give rural communities greater access to a full suite of health and social service professionals;
and
• Invest in the study of the long-term health impacts of COVID-19, including theeffects of long
COVID on different groups, including children.
Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those most
affected by the pandemic, including youth. Funded projects are expected to begin in spring 2022 and to
reach diverse populations across Canada. Projects will support mental health promotion and mental
illness prevention interventions, in addition to initiatives that build the capacity of service providers to
deliver programming in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
Budget 2022 committed to strengthening the health care system and ensuring it delivers the care that
Canadians deserve by:
• Increasing the number of doctors and nurses; and,
• Building on the success of increased virtual care;
In March 2022, Minister Duclos outlined five pillars for health to address systemic challenges to
enhancing access to high-quality, integrated care. These include:
• Better access to family doctors and teams;
• Reducing backlogs and growing our health workforce;
• Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
• Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
• Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS (131 words)
• Ourgovernment continues to recognize the importance of funding innovative and timely
research that will improve health outcomes for people experiencing challenges related to mental health
and substance use.
• That is why, over the last five years, through theCanadian Institutes of Health Research, or CIHR
we have invested over $496 million in mental health and behavioural disorders research, over $22
million in research related to Post Traumatic Stress Injury, and approximately $180 million in research
on addictions.
• This includes investments of $13.5 million in the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative,
supporting research to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19.
• Additionally,in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to develop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
BACKGROUND
Mental Health
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested over $496 million in mental health and behavioural
disorders research. This represents more than 2300 projects led by experts across the country.
Children and Youth: CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS
Open Minds, a national project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care
by developing and testing evidence-informed approaches. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7
provinces and one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways
based on local context by providing Integrated Youth Services (IYS). For example, in Ulukhaktok, a
remote community in the Northwest Territories where professional service providers are not always
available, the site is evaluating a model where lay health workers are trained to provide support to
youth in distress. Additionally, the first phase of the IYS Network-of-Networks (IYS-Net) initiative ($1M
over 1 year), was launched in April 2022 to help inform the development of pan-Canadian create a
Canada-wide network of provincial and territorial learning health systems for Integrated Youth Services
for mental health and substance use.
In addition, CIHR committed for $6.25M over 5 years to the Mental Health in the Early Years funding
opportunity in March 2022, with a focus area on mental health initiatives for young children (ages 0-5),
Indigenous peoples, as well as transforming mental health with integrated care.
National Standards for Mental Health Services: Budget 2021 committed $45 million over two years, to
help develop national mental health service standards, in collaboration with PTs, health organizations,
and key stakeholders. CIHR will support research and KM to inform standards development and
evaluation.
Suicide Prevention: Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR investedover $31 million dollars in research
related to suicide prevention. This research will lead to the discovery of new, effective solutions for
better prevention.
Post Traumatic Stress Injury: CIHR, in partnership with the Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research
and Treatment (CIPSRT) work to address PTSI in public safety personnel. Budget 2018 invested $20
million over five years, which has led to several funding opportunities, including the establishment of
research and coordination hubs for public safety, as well as crisis line and app, to help inform the
evidence base on PTSI for public safety personnel.
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative (CMH)
• The mental health of Canadians has worsened during the pandemic. In April 2020, CIHR
launched the CMHinitiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and
substance use responses in the context of COVID-19. CIHR launched four funding opportunities under
this initiative, supporting a total of 101 projects for a total investment of $13.7M from CIHR and
partners.
Substance Use
CIHR supports researchers across Canada that aim to address various issues related to substance use
and has invested approximately $180 million in the area between 2017-18 and 2021-22.
In 2014, CIHR establisheda national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM was originally composed of four large regional
nodes (British Columbia, Prairies, Ontario, Québec/Atlantic) that connected researchers, service
providers, decision makers and people with lived experience from across Canada. CRISM is recognized as
a critical network that responds to the policy and evidence needs of decision-makers. CRISM activities
include:
• The OPTIMA Study (2016-2022)–a national multi-site clinical trial involving over 270
participants recruited from all four CRISM Nodes to compare and evaluate two models of care for the
treatment of opioid use disorder. (~$4.4 million over 4 years).
• National Treatment Guideline–CRISM has developed a National Guideline for the clinical
management of opioid use disorder, which was published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal
on March 5, 2018.
• Implementation Research Program –On September 14, 2017, CIHR announced a new
investment of $7.5 million over six years for CRISM to conduct a national research program for effective
implementation of evidence-based interventions into clinical and community.
In 2022, CIHR renewed its support for CRISM with an investment of $17 million over 6 years. Phase II of
CRISM looks to build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number
of Regional Nodes to enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for the Atlantic
region) while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity. The renewed investment
also includes $5 million for a national study on methamphetamine use disorder.
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, in 2019 CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use, totaling
$700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing treatment
options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and epidemiology of
methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
In November 2020, CIHR hosted the ‘Innovations in Virtual Care for Mental Health and Substance Use’
BBE in collaboration with the British Columbia Ministry of Health, British Columbia Ministry of Mental
Health and Addictions, and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. This BBE brought together
provincial policy and decision makers, researchers and implementation experts, non-governmental
organizations and other key stakeholders to gain an understanding of how virtual care can meet the
unique and evolving mental health and substance use service needs of British Columbia’s diverse
population during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
SAFER SUPPLY (90 words)
• Our Government is taking a number of actions to address the overdose crisis, including
supporting safer supply pilot projects to build evidence around this promising practice.
• Safer supply involves the use of prescribed, regulated pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to the highly toxic and unpredictable illegal drug supply.
• Safer supply aims to prevent overdoses and save lives by providing prescribed, regulated drugs,
as part of a range of prevention, treatment and harm reduction services.
• We are working with partners and stakeholders, to help expand safer supply to help save lives.
IF PRESSED ON WHY TO SUPPORT SAFER SUPPLY (95 words)
• People with lived and living experience with drug use and community organizations have
explained the importance of access to safer supply as one additional tool to help save lives.
• Safer supply services involve the use of prescribed, regulated pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to the toxic and unpredictable illegal drug supply. These services are overseen by an
authorized health professional.
• These services can help improve health outcomes for people who use drugs, reduce reliance on
the illegal drug supply, and connect them to other health and social services, including treatment for
those who are ready.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA’S SUPPORT FOR SAFER SUPPLY (104 words)
• Enhancing access to safer supply is one part of the Government of Canada’s public health
response to the overdose crisis among a wide continuum of care options that includes prevention,
treatment and harm reduction.
• The Government has made significant investments in safer supply pilot projects including
supporting assessments, evaluation and knowledge transfer projects to help build the evidence and
share knowledge around effective models.
• Changes have been made to federal drug control regulations tohelp improve access to
medications used in the treatment of substance use disorder and by safer supply services.
IF PRESSED ON THE REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION FROM DRUG USER LIBERATION FRONT (DULF) ET
VANCOUVER AREA NETWORK OF DRUG USERS (VANDU) (95)
• On August 31, 2021, Health Canada received a request from DULF in coordination with VANDU
for a subsection 56(1) exemption to operate a Safe Supply Fulfillment Centre and Cocaine, Heroin and
Methamphetamine Compassion Clubs. This model would involve the sale of tested illegal drugs
purchased from illegal vendors on the dark web.
• Supplying drugs from illegal vendors is not a viable option for advancing the objectives of the
CDSA, namely the protection of public health and the maintenance of public safety. For this reason,
Health Canada issued a letter of refusal on July 29 2022.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL PROCUREMENT OF DRUGS USED IN SAFER SUPPLY PROGRAMS (64 words)
• The provision of health care services is, with a few exceptions, a provincial and territorial
responsibility.
• There are a number of prescription drugs approved by Health Canada that provinces, territories,
and authorized health practitioners can access for substance use disorder treatment and safer supply
programs.
• Provinces, territories, and individual medical prescribers are best placed to determine the
demand for and use of these medications.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE FOR SAFER SUPPLY (114 words)
• Safer supply builds on the evidence from medication-assisted approaches to the treatment of
substance use disorder.
• Safer supply services are being assessed and evaluated by a number of experts across Canada.
• Our Government is supporting third-party assessment of safer supply projects, and is also
funding a long-term evaluation.
• Promising early outcomes include reductions in overdose rates and in the use of illegal drugs
and criminal activity.
• We will continue to monitor the public health and public safety outcomes of safer supply, so
that our response to the overdose crisis is evidence-based and focussed on saving lives.
BACKGROUND
The overdose crisis continues to have devastating impacts on individuals, families, and communities.
According to the latest national data, there was a total of 30,843 apparent opioid toxicity deaths
between January 2016 and March 2022. A total of 1,883 apparent opioid toxicity deaths have occurred
so far in 2022 (January–March). This is approximately 21 deaths per day. The COVID-19 pandemic has
also contributed to the worsening overdose crisis, with some communities reporting record high
numbers of overdose deaths, hospitalizations, and emergency medical service calls.
The illegal drug supply contains strong opioids, such as fentanyl, and other toxic substances such as
benzodiazepines, which are causing high rates of overdoses and deaths. Many stakeholders are calling
for greater access to pharmaceutical-grade medications as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply
to help save lives–a practice often referred to as safer supply.
Current safer supply programs in Canada provide prescriber-led access to medications for people at risk
of overdose, primarily as a harm reduction measure, as part of a continuumof care that may include
other treatment and harm reduction services. Currently, these services must operate within the
legislative and regulatory framework for controlled substances in Canada (i.e., the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act (CDSA) and Food and Drugs Act).
At this time, a number of safer supply programs exist in Canada, mainly in British Columbia (BC) and
Ontario. Existing programs range from more medicalized models (e.g., requiring multiple daily site visits
to a clinic) to lower-barrier models (e.g., “MySafe” model in which prescribed medications are dispensed
directly to program clients through a secure machine).
Health Canada has funded 27 safer supply pilot projects through the Substance Use and Addictions
Program (SUAP). This includes supporting a range of service delivery projects in British Columbia,
Ontario, Quebec and New Brunswick, research/knowledge transfer and exchange projects, and a
National Safer Supply Community of Practice to help share knowledge amongst stakeholders. There are
also a number of safer supply services operating without SUAP funding, mostly in BC.
Health Canada is supporting two assessment and evaluation projects related to federally-funded safer
supply projects. This includes an independently-conducted preliminary assessment of ten safer supply
projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick. Health Canada is also supporting an arms-
length evaluation of eleven safer supply pilot projects funded through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR).
Health Canada has taken a number of actions to reduce regulatory barriers to accessing medications
used in both safer supply programs and medication-assisted drug treatment programs. In 2019,
diacetylmorphine was added to the List of Drugs for an Urgent Public Health Need, and Health Canada
approved a new indication for injectable hydromorphone as a treatment option for adults with severe
opioid use disorder. In 2020, Health Canada issued a temporary exemption to the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Actto facilitate prescribing with flexible treatment options (e.g. allowing prescribers to use
verbal prescriptions for narcotics and allowing pharmacists to extend and renew prescriptions). In 2022,
Health Canada approved diacetylmorphine as a new treatmentoption for adult patients with severe
opioid use disorder.
SECTION 56(1) REQUESTS TO ALLOW FOR PERSONAL POSSESSION (134 words)
• The opioid and toxic drug supply crisis is heartbreaking and has taken a tragic toll on the
families, loved ones and communities of all those we have lost to opioid overdoses across Canada.
• We recognize that substance use is a health issue and are working to divert people who use
drugs away from the criminal justice system and towards supportive and trusted relationships in health
and social services.
• Subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) gives the Minister of
Mental Health and Addictions and the Associate Minister of Health discretionary authority to grantan
exemption from the CDSA or its regulation to allow activities involving controlled substances, if the
Minister is of the opinion that it is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or if otherwise in the
public interest.
IF PRESSED ON THE RATIONALE FOR THE DECISION (120 words)
• British Columbia requested an exemption related to the personal possession of small amounts
of certain illegal drugs as one part of the province’s comprehensive approach to address the overdose
crisis.
• Canada is treating substance use as a health issue, not as a criminal one. Stigma related to
substance use can lead people to hide their drug use, use in riskier ways, and prevent them from
accessing services and supports.
• Throughout the exemption period, the federal government will be monitoring and evaluating
the implementation of BC’s exemption very closely to help ensure it is contributing to the
comprehensive approach to reduce stigma and harms related to substance use and increase access to
health and social services for people who use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON THRESHOLDS (134 words)
• In assessing this exemption request, the dual objectives of the CDSA -to protect public health
and maintain public safety–needed to be considered.
• This is a novel approach in Canada and data and evidence on the impact of effective threshold
amounts is limited, especially in the context of the increasingly toxic drug supply in Canada and
internationally.
• In making the decision to grant an exemption in BC with a 2.5 grams cumulative threshold of the
listed drugs, several sources of data were carefully considered, including purchasing and use patterns,
public health data, and law enforcement data including drug seizures.
• As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, its implementation will be rigorously monitored and
evaluated to measure progress toward objectives and intended outcomes, and to identify unintended
consequences and other potential risks.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONCERNS ABOUT THE THRESHOLD AND FENTANYL (148 words)
• This exemption is one tool within a comprehensive response to the public health crisis that must
also include evidence-based prevention efforts, a focus on disrupting drug trafficking, and improved
access to treatment and harm reduction services including pharmaceutical-grade alternatives (safer
supply) for those at risk of overdose.
• Rigorous monitoring and evaluation of this exemption will be critical, particularly in the face of
an increasingly toxic drug supply. The composition and purity of the drug supply varies, including the
presence of strong opioids such as fentanyl. Further, the amount of a drug a person may possess does
not necessarily equate to the amount they will use at one time.
• Should concerns arise, there are various tools available to address them, up to and including
revocation of the exemption.
• Anyone who uses illegal drugs should continue to engage in harm reduction measures to reduce
the risk of overdose and death.
IF PRESSED ON NEW REQUESTS FOR EXEMPTIONS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS (140 words)
• Health Canada will carefully and thoroughly review any request for an exemption to allow for
the personal possession of controlled substances on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential
benefits and risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
• The Department will continue to work with provincial and municipal officials on options to
address the overdose crisis that respond to local and regional needs and help people who use
substances get the support they need.
• While it is not Health Canada’s practice to comment on requests that are currently under
review, I can confirm that Health Canada has received a request from Toronto Public Health for a
subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA so that individuals would not be subject to criminal
penalties for the personal possession of drugs. Health Canada is engaged in an iterative review of
Toronto’s request.
BACKGROUND
The overdose crisis is one of the most significant public health crises in Canada in decades. More than
29,052 people in Canada died from opioid-related overdoses between January 2016 and December
2021. This situation has led to increased calls from a range of stakeholders, including chiefs of police,
medical officers of health, health organizations, and municipalities, for a comprehensive approach that
includes:
• Decriminalizing the personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances;
• Increasing access to pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply;
• Investing in a robust system ofcare for people with substance use disorders; and,
• Monitoring and evaluating to inform an evidence base and identify best practices.
In response to the current context, and a number of calls to take this health-focused approach to
substance use further, the Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on Substance Use in
2021. The Task Force had a mandate to provide independent, expert advice and recommendations on:
• The federal government's drug policy; and,
• Potential alternatives to criminal penalties for the simple possession of controlled substances.
In May 2021, the Task Force published its report on alternatives to criminal penalties, unanimously
recommending an end to criminal penalties for the personal possession of controlled substances. Most
members also recommended an end to coercive measures such as drug treatment courts.
The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) is one of Canada's federal drug control laws. It provides
the legislative framework for the control of drugs thatcan result in harm when misused or diverted to
an illegal market. Under the Act, activities with controlled substances are generally prohibited, unless
specifically authorized through the Act’s regulations or an exemption granted under the Act. Section 4(1)
of the CDSA makes it a criminal offence to possess most controlled substances.
Given the urgency of the crisis, some stakeholders are seeking an exemption from the CDSA as the
fastest mechanism to remove criminal penalties for the personal possession of small amounts of
controlled substances and demonstrate action to reduce stigma and increase the likelihood that
individuals will seek help without fear of a criminal penalty.
Subsection 56(1) of the CDSA provides the Minister with the authority to exempt persons or substances
from the application of any provision of the CDSA or its regulations, if, in the opinion of the Minister, the
exemption is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest. Each
exemption requestreceived is considered on a case-by-case basis, based on the dual public health and
public safety objectives of the CDSA.
Factors considered in assessing requests include:
• Scope of the exemption, including definition of personal possession andpossession by minors
• Consultations with key populations, including indigenous communities, people who use drugs,
partners, law enforcement and stakeholders
• Measures to redirect people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system and towards
health and social services
• Readiness and capacity of health and social systems
• Public education and communications plan
• Law enforcement readiness, including the development of training and guidelines
• Operational considerations, such as how key risks will be mitigated
• Monitoring and evaluation plan, including a focus on the impact on populations at increased
risks of substance use harms
On May 31, 2022, the Federal Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
granted the province of BC’s request for a subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA. To date, Health
Canada is in receipt of two other similar exemption requests from the City of Vancouver and Toronto
Public Health.
Background on British Columbia’s (BC) Exemption Request
On February 3, 2021, Minister Malcolmson sent a letter to the Minister of Health asking whether the
Minister would consider a section 56 exemption for BC to decriminalize the possession of small amounts
of controlled substances for personal use. Marking five years since the declaration of the overdose
public health crisis, BC publicly announced their intent to submit an official request for a federal
exemption to decriminalize personal possession, on April 14, 2021. Consultations were planned with
Indigenous partners, peers, law enforcement, municipalities, and public health officials. On November 1,
2021, BC submitted an official subsection 56(1) exemption request to Health Canada. An exemption was
granted on May 31, 2022.
Background on the City ofVancouver’s Exemption Request
On December 8, 2020, Kennedy Stewart, Mayor of the City of Vancouver, wrote to the Federal Minister
of Health to request an exemption from federal drug control laws to decriminalize personal possession
of small amounts of controlled substances in Vancouver. On January 27, 2021, Mayor Stewart
announced that the city had begun “formal negotiations” with Health Canada around a possible
exemption. On March 1, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted a preliminary request to Health Canada
outlining a “Vancouver Model” to substance use that embraces a health-focused approach to save lives.
On April 12, 2021, the City of Vancouver provided its second request to Health Canada with an outline
proposing threshold limits on what would constitute personal possession. The submission details
specific amounts for personal possession amounts of cocaine, opioids, crack cocaine, amphetamines,
and other controlled substances. On May 28, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted its final request to
Health Canada. On June 20, 2022, Vancouver asked that consideration of their request be suspended for
the time being. As a result, Health Canada has paused its review of this request.
Background on Toronto Public Health’s Exemption Request
In August 2021, Toronto Public Health (TPH) launched an online consultation on Toronto’s Submission to
Health Canada for an Exemption from the CDSA. The preamble states that “Toronto Public Health has
initiated a process to request an exemption from the CDSA for the possession of all drugs for personal
use (also referred to as decriminalization).” On December 6, 2021, the Toronto Board of Health
reiterated its call to request the Federal Minister of Health to use their authority under the CDSA to
develop a national frameworkto permit the possession of certain amounts of controlled substances for
personal use; and support the immediate scale up of prevention, harm reduction and treatment
services. On January 4, 2022, TPH submitted its preliminary request for a subsection 56(1) exemption
under the CDSA related to the personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances within the
city’s boundaries.This request remains under review.
BC’S OPIOID DAMAGES AND HEALTH CARE COSTS RECOVERY ACT (80words)
• Canada is pleased with B.C.’s proposed amendment to add Canada to the Opioid Damages and
Health Care Costs Recovery Act.
• If Canada is added to B.C.’s legislation, Canada would, in addition to B.C., have a statutory basis
for claiming damages from the pharmaceutical industry with respect to the opioid crisis.
• This proposed amendment is an example of the significant cooperation that exists between
Provinces and Territories and the Government of Canada as they work together to address the overdose
crisis.
BACKGROUND
The current overdose crisis in Canada continues to be one of the most serious public health crises in
recent history.
In collaboration with all levels of government, partners, stakeholders, people with lived and living
experience with substance use, and organizations in communities across the country, the Government
of Canada is addressing substance use and addiction.
Provinces and territories, which primarily deliver healthcare in Canada, are best placed to bring civil
action against the pharmaceutical industry due to the costs they have incurred.
B.C. filed a class action lawsuit in August 2018 related to the alleged inappropriate marketing and
dispensing of opioids by pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors to recover their health care
costs.
Provincial and territorial governments, along with the Government of Canada, are part of B.C.’s
proposed class action against opioid companies that allegedly acted inappropriately in the marketing
and distribution of opioids.
In October 2018, B.C. passed the Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act to support its
legal action. This legislation creates a statutory cause of action and right for B.C. to recover from opioid
manufacturers and distributors opioid related health care costs incurred by the B.C. government.
On October 17, 2022, B.C. announced proposed amendments to its Opioid Damages and Health Care
Costs Recovery Act. One of the proposed amendments is to add Canada to that legislation.
Since 2018, the Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with all provincial and territorial
governments as part of B.C.’s litigation against opioid manufacturers, distributors and marketing
agencies.
The Government of Canada is providing technical assistance and support to the B.C. litigation.
The proposed amendment to add Canada to this legislation is one example of the significant
cooperation that exists in B.C.’s litigation between all Canadian governments and the Government of
Canada, as they work together to address the overdose crisis.
The Purdue settlement was another example of the collaboration amongst Governments as we work
together to address this crisis.
SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS
• In response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create Wellness Together
Canada, providing 24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance-use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed in excess of $280 million for a suite of
measures to support the mental health needs of marginalizedand disproportionately impacted
Canadians, while also investing in health systems improvements.
• Moving forward, our Government is committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of our universal health care system. This is reflected in B2022’s reaffirmation of
engaging provinces and territories on the development of a Canada Mental Health Transfer, which
would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR DIVERSEPOPULATIONS (84 words)
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal to ensure inclusivity.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in over 200 languages
and dialects, including 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness (for Indigenous peoples), and
supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote areas, facing stigma or
financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
• The Federal Government is currently funding Kids Help Phone close to $15 million over 36
months, from 2020-23.
• We are investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
• The Government is currently investing $21M over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. This service provides 24/7 suicide
crisis support via the phone (1-833-456-4566) and via text (45645) in both English and French.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada provided $100 million over three years to
support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government provided $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD)and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19
pandemic.
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtaincredible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts of COVID-19 on Canadians’ Mental Health
2021 Mandate Commitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental healthand substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address substance use in Canada; and in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration withprovinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP). The Government has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholdersand promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support to address the mental health needs of populations disproportionately
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to support interventions that promote
protective factors and address risk factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults
and their caregivers, with a focus on populations susceptible to mental health inequities (e.g., low-
income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, LGBTQ2+).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories,Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada.
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
reportplanned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020, and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of its release (by February 2025).
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested approximately $180 million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research.
CIHR is leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with PHAC
and Health Canada. This initiative supports 101 research projects, representing a total investment of
$13.7 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of
leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated through these
projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested approximately $180 million to address various issues
related to substance use.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in substance use called the Canadian Research
Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). In 2022, the Government of Canada renewed its investment in
CRISM with a total investment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to build and
expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number of Regional Nodes to
enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for the Atlantic region) while
maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity (including the creation of an Indigenous
Platform and a Coordinating Centre).
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR is supporting five grants to evaluate program
implementation and short-term impact of safer supply pilot projects (SSPPs), as well as supervised
consumption sites (SCS) across Canada. This represents a total investment of over $2.2 million (plus a
supplement of $900K).
CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in
response to the opioid crisis through the Evaluation of Interventions to
Address the OpioidCrisis Funding Opportunity.
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (with a third cycle in development) to better
understand the wider impacts of the pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of
research articles based on the first cycle of data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Journal on September 27, 2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also
resumed in September 2020. The Canadian Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of
mental health indicators, and has been collected for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for
ongoing measurement of changes in mental health of the Canadian population as the pandemic
continues and as Canada recovers.
On a quarterly basis, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and Health Canada collaborate to
publish the most recent data available on opioid-and stimulant-related harms in Canada. This includes
apparent opioid-and stimulant-related acute toxicity deaths and hospitalizations, and Emergency
Medical Services responses to suspected opioid-relatedoverdoses. Recognizing that harms related to
opioids, stimulants, and other substances extend beyond overdoses (poisonings) and deaths, PHAC and
Health Canada continue to work with federal, provincial and territorial partners to build a broad
understandingof harms and substances involved to better respond to this public health crisis.
Health Canada conducts the Canadian Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CADS), a general population survey of
alcohol and drug use among Canadians aged 15 years and older. Health Canada also conducts the
Canadian Student Tobacco Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) to collect information on tobacco use,
alcohol and drug use, as well as information on bullying, mental health, and school connectedness
among students in grades 7 to 12 (secondary I through V in Quebec) in ten Canadian provinces.
Understanding Canadian trends in alcohol and drug use is vital to the effective development,
implementation and evaluation of national and provincial strategies, policies and programs.
Launched in2019, Health Canada’s Canadian Postsecondary Education Alcohol and Drug Use Survey
(CPADS) collects data on the prevalence and patterns of substance use and associated harms among
postsecondary (college and university) students aged 17–25 across Canada.Surveys like the CPADS
provide governments and non-governmental organizations with valuable information that can inform
substance use policies and programs that support youth and young adults.
Additionally, with evidence showing that street-involved youthare among the most at risk for drug
harms, in 2021, Health Canada developed the People With Lived and Living Experience Survey (PWLLES)
to gain a better understanding of the situation of street-involved youth aged 14-24 years in Canada who
used substancessuch as alcohol, tobacco, cannabis or other drugs in the past 12 months.
Mental Illness Surveillance
As part of its mandate, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is pursuing ongoing surveillance of
mental illness in the Canadian community. It uses multiple data sources to provide the most up to date
evidence available, including the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System (CCDSS), the Canadian
Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) and the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS).
The CCDSS is a collaborative network of provincial and territorial chronic disease surveillance systems,
supported by PHAC. It identifies chronic disease cases among all residents who are eligible for provincial
or territorial health insurance, and contains aggregated data that can be stratified by age, sex and
geographical locations. The CCDSS enables to track and report on health services use for mental illness
and alcohol/drug induced disorders overall, for mood and anxiety disorders, as well as for schizophrenia
in the Canadian population.
The 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) is a national, cross-sectional survey
that provides health-related information on Canadian children and youth. The survey is representative
of the Canadian population aged 1 to 17 years as of January 31, 2019, living in private dwellings in
Canada's ten provinces and three territories.
As well, to help address data gaps around the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals, families,
and communities in termsof their mental health (including symptoms of anxiety and depression, and of
post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), PHAC partnered with Statistics Canada in the development of the
Survey on COVID-19 and mental health. The survey contains information on the proportion of Canadians
who screened positive for these conditions by age group and gender, and look at the more at-risk
groups. These surveys were conducted at various times during the COVID-19 pandemic and provide
timely information on the impact of the pandemic on the mental health and well-being of Canadians.
Mental Health and Substance Use Research (CSCB)
The Government of Canada recognizes the intersection between mental health and substance use.
Approximately 20% of Canadians with a mental illness have a co-occurring substance use disorder, and
50% of those engaged in treatment for substance use are also living with mental illness.
In October 2020, recognizing the intersection between mental health and substance use, Canadian
Centre for Substance use and Addiction (CCSA) and the Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC)
signed a Memorandum of Agreement to work on joint initiatives in this area.
Currently the two pan-Canadian Health Organizations are working on an evidence review on promising
practices, interventions and policy recommendations to screen and assess suicide risk among individuals
with higher risk substance use.
They are also exploring the development of pan-Canadian operational guidelines for integrated mental
health and substance useservice delivery, with the goal of providing concrete and actionable guidance
for the implementation of an integrated approach for mental health and substance use.
Public surveys from the CCSA and the MHCC found that mental health symptoms and substance use
have increased since March 2020.They also found that those with a history of mental health or
substance use concerns were disproportionately impacted by stresses related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
CANNABIS (94 words)
• Since 2018, the Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping
cannabis out of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and regulated
supply, while reducing the illicit market.
• Since legalization, youth consumption patterns have not changed significantly, and more and
more Canadians who consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
• Health Canada has launched an independent review of the legislation to examine the progress
made towards achieving the Act's objectives, and identify priority areas for improvement. An Expert
Panel will lead this credible and inclusive review.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT (92 words)
• The Act requires a legislative review to start three years after coming into force, and a report to
be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 18 months after the review begins.
• On September 22 Minister Duclos and I launched an independent legislative review, which will
assess the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives.
• The review will focus particularly on the health and cannabis consumption habits of young
persons, the impact of cannabis on Indigenous persons and communities, and the impact of the
cultivation of cannabis plants in a housing context.
IF PRESSEDON INCLUDING THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW (58 words)
• The Government actively monitors the medical access program and has committed to evaluate
the framework within 5 years of the coming into force of the Cannabis Act.
• There has been significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for medical purposes
framework and this legislative review presents an opportunity to hear the views and perspectives of
these stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE MEDICAL ACCESS FRAMEWORK (71 words)
• Our Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis for medical purposes
for individuals who have the support of their health care practitioner.
• Health Canada is committed to actively monitoring and evaluating patients’ reasonable access
to cannabis for medical purposes.
• Health Canada is working to reduce the potential for abuse of the medical access framework
together with the provincial and territorial regulators of health care professionals, law enforcement and
municipalities.
IF PRESSEDON LIMITED NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED HEALTH PRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIS (93
words)
• Prescription drugs containing cannabis, such as Sativex, remain subject to appropriate
requirements of the Cannabis Act and the Food and Drugs Act, and require oversight by a health care
practitioner to ensure appropriate use.
• In July 2022, a Science Advisory Committee provided a final report tothe government that
outlined their independent scientific advice on safety, efficacy and quality standards for potential health
products containing cannabidiol (CBD).
• The Committee’s report is one of many sources of input that will inform a potential pathway for
health products containing cannabis that would not require physician oversight.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITH A HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION (98 words)
• Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse
• Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
healthor public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
• As of September 30, 2022, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 1,400 registrations,
including over 700 for reasons of public health and publicsafety.
• The Department continues to work with partners to inform them of the actions being taken and
to achieve joint goals of reducing misuse of the program.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES GRANTED TO INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO
CRIMINALINVESTIGATIONS (81 words)
• Our Government remains committed to ensuring patients have access to cannabis for medical
purposes, while providing safeguards to reduce the risk of abuse of the system.
• Health Canada actively supports law enforcement by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a
day and seven days a week to assist with active investigations.
• When law enforcement has been taken against individuals, Health Canada reviews the
information to determine if compliance and enforcement actions are warranted, and registrations for
cannabis production could be revoked.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS RESEARCH (137 words)
• Our Government understands that ongoing research is fundamental to understand the health
and safety effects of cannabis use. That is why wehave made investments to support research on
cannabis use and increase knowledge of the harms associated with cannabis and how to reduce and/or
mitigate them.
• Since 2017, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research has also invested almost $30M in
research on cannabis, including through its Integrated Cannabis Research Strategy.
• The Government also made investments of $20 million over five years for the Canadian Centre
on Substance Use and Addiction and Mental Health Commission of Canada to support research and
assess the impacts of cannabis use on mental health of Canadians.
• To further support cannabis research, Health Canada is also proposing to create a new
framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate non-therapeutic research on cannabis.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE IN PEDIATRIC CANNABIS POISONINGS (130 WORDS)
• Health Canada continues to have concerns about the potential harms to children who
accidentally consume cannabis.
• This is why, in December 2022, the department issued a public advisory to help raise awareness
of this ongoing issue. The advisory, which was updated in April 2022, provided guidance on how to
properly store cannabis and tips for recognising legally sourced cannabis.
• Health Canada continues to educate Canadians through public education campaigns, to
encourage adults to store all cannabis securely and out of reach of children and youth. The department
also continuously monitors public awareness and reports of adverse reactions to cannabis and cannabis
products.
• The department will continue to monitor this issue closely and will continue to educate the
public and Canadian parents about ways to help avoid pediatric cannabis poisonings.
BACKGROUND
Cannabis
On October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act came into force, legalizing,strictly regulating and restricting
access to cannabis in Canada. The Act implements a new comprehensive public health approach that
will be more effective in protecting youth and keeping profits out of the pockets of criminals and
organized crime.
The Cannabis Act creates a legal and regulatory framework for controlling the production, distribution,
sale and possession of cannabis in Canada. This framework was informed by the recommendations of
the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation.
TheAct restricts youth access to cannabis; prohibits promotions that are designed to encourage youth
to use cannabis; imposes serious criminal penalties on people who break the law, especially those who
import or export cannabis illegally, or provide cannabis to youth; establishes strict product safety and
quality requirements; reduces the burden on the criminal justice system; provides for the legal
production of cannabis; allows adults to possess and access regulated, quality-controlled, legal cannabis;
and,enhances public awareness of the health risks associated with cannabis.
Implementation is a shared responsibility between the federal, provincial and territorial governments.
Subject to provincial or territorial restrictions, adults may legally: purchase limited amounts of fresh
cannabis, dried cannabis, cannabis oil, cannabis seeds, or cannabis plants from retailers authorized by
the provinces and territories; possess up to 30 grams of dried legal cannabis or equivalent in non-dried
form in public; consume cannabis in locations authorized by local jurisdictions; grow up to four cannabis
plants per household (not per person) for personal use, from licensed seeds or seedlings from licensed
suppliers; share up to 30 grams of dried cannabis or equivalent with other adults; and, make legal
cannabis-containing products at home, such as food and drinks, provided that dangerous organic
solvents are not used in making them.
Possession, production, distribution and sale outside the legal system remains illegal and subject to
criminal penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the offence, ranging from ticketing up to a
maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment.
To further protect youth, the Cannabis Act prohibits anyone from selling or providing cannabis to any
person under the age of 18 years. The Cannabis Act creates two new criminal offences, with maximum
penalties of 14 years in jail for: giving or selling cannabis to youth; and, using a youth to commit a
cannabis-related offence.
To prevent youth from usingcannabis, the Cannabis Act also prohibits: products, promotions, packaging
and labelling that are appealing to youth; the sale of cannabis through self-service displays or vending
machines; promotion of cannabis, except in narrow circumstances where the promotion could not be
seen by a young person; and, false, misleading or deceptive advertising, sponsorships, testimonials and
endorsements or other forms of promotion that could entice young people to use cannabis.
Driving while impaired by cannabis, or any other drug, is illegal. Law enforcement officers are trained to
detect and deter drug-impaired drivers using Standardized Field Sobriety Testing and Drug Recognition
Experts.
Border rules have not changed. Taking cannabis, or any product containing cannabis, across Canada’s
international borders, whether you are leaving or entering Canada, remains illegal and can result in
serious criminal penalties both at home and abroad. Cannabis is illegal in most countries. Previous use of
cannabis, or any substance prohibited by local law, could result in a traveller being denied entry to his or
her destination country.
Legislative Review
The Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its administration three
years following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and that a report of the
review’s findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of the start of the
review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of the
Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young
persons in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of
cannabis plants in a dwelling-house.
On September 22, 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
launched the legislative review of the Act. An Expert Panel, chaired by Morris Rosenberg, will lead the
review, and a report including findings or recommendations resulting from the review will be tabled in
both Houses of Parliament within 18 months.
On September 22, 2022, an online engagement process to gather perspectives from the public,
stakeholders and Indigenous groups on the cannabis framework was launched. The results will inform
the Panel’s work.
The Government of Canada has made progress toward the implementation of the cannabis framework
by putting in place measures aimed at protecting children and youth from accessing cannabis;
establishing a strictly regulated, legal supply chain for cannabis, and by making significant investments in
public education, awareness, research, monitoring and surveillance efforts.
The review provides an initial and early opportunity to assess progress towards achieving the objectives
of the Act, and to help ensure that the legislation is meeting the needs and expectations of Canadians
through a credible, evidence-driven review process.
Medical Access Framework
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers the medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
As of August 31, 2022, there were more than 233,000 patients registered with federally licensed sellers
(Note: these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than one
licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of September 2022, there were more than 21,000 individuals registered with Health Canada for
personal and designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis products,
including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties on
cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Canadians who have been authorized by their health care practitioner can access cannabis for medical
purposes by producing cannabis or by designating someone to produce it for them.
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements, which are designed to
ensure that cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized
health care practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in excess
of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate, and may not sell cannabis to any person.
Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized to
produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for them, can
tend to the plants.
Health Canada appreciates that, as in any regulatory framework, there will be instances where
individuals choose to operate outside of the law. Health Canada supports law enforcement
representatives on a daily basis by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a day and seven days a week
to confirm, when necessary, that specific individuals are authorized to produce cannabis for medical
purposes.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure it is
abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
Health Products Containing Cannabis
Within this cannabis legislative framework, two prescription drugs containing cannabis and one
synthetic cannabinoid have been approved for sale. Sativex contains tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD), and Marinol contains THC. Sativex is available to Canadian patients, but Marinol was
voluntarily withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer in 2012.
Health Canada currently has a submission under review for a drug containing THC (dronabinol).
Drugs containing the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone have also been approved. Nabilone, a synthetic
cannabinoid which does not exist in nature, is not captured by the definition of cannabis in the Cannabis
Act, and remains scheduled under the CDSA as a narcotic.
There are currently no authorized veterinary drugs containing cannabis.
Non-Therapeutic Research with Cannabis
Since the Cannabis Act and its regulations first came into force, stakeholders have indicated that the
clinical trial framework has resulted in challenges in conducting non-therapeutic research on cannabis.
Currently, most non-therapeutic research on cannabis involving human participants is considered a
“clinical trial” under the Food and Drug Regulations. Many researchers have had difficulty securing
authorization under the Food and Drug Regulations using legal, regulated cannabis products available
for purchase by adult consumers. These difficulties have led to missed opportunities to advance the
knowledge and evidence base about cannabis, including its effects and uses in a non-therapeutic
context.
Health Canada is proposing to create a new framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate
research on cannabis in humans for non-medical purposes to increase the knowledge about cannabis
and the risks of using cannabis products and to reduce the regulatory burden on stakeholders. The
proposed amendments would facilitate such research by solely regulating them under a cannabis
research licence issued under the Cannabis Regulations.
Research with cannabis for therapeutic purposes will continue to be regulated under the clinical trial
framework under theFood and Drugs Regulations will continue to be conducted with the same level of
rigour and concern for patient safety.
President Biden Pardoning all Federal Offenses of Simple Cannabis Possession
On October 6, 2022, U.S. President Biden announced that he is pardoning all prior federal offenses of
simple cannabis possession, and called on state Governors to do the same at the state level. This does
not apply to charges for trafficking.
The White House estimates that 6,500 people with prior federal convictions and thousands of such
convictions under Washington, DC law could benefit from this relief.
This decision does not legalize or decriminalize cannabis in the US, but it does represent a shift away
from the War on Drugs approach to cannabis at the federal level.
In the U.S., cannabis is currently a Schedule 1 drug, the same schedule as heroin, fentanyl and other
dangerous narcotics. The review by the FDA could take years and reclassification of cannabis is not
guaranteed.
On August 1, 2019, Bill C-93,An Act to provide a no-cost expedited record suspension process for simple
possession of cannabis, which received royal assent on June 21, 2019, came into force. The Act modifies
the Criminal Records Act to waive record suspension application wait periods and application fees for
those convicted only of simple possession of cannabis. The Act creates an administrative review process
where the application is considered by a Parole Board of Canada (PBC) staff member as opposed to a
discretionary review by PBCBoard Members. The record suspension will be ordered so long as the
individual can show that their only convictions are for simple possession of cannabis.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA (96 words)
• Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and people who do not smoke.
• Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death, and we are
working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Health Canada is updating tobacco labelling requirements to reflect the latest scientific
evidence. We will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke
from becoming addicted and to provide Canadians with information on the health hazards of tobacco
use.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE (85 words)
• We urge Canadians who smoke to consider quitting. When you give up cigarettes, your body
starts to renew itself as early as the first day, reducing your chance of developing heart disease, cancer,
breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help.
• Canadians can contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitlinewhere trained specialists can help
them develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community where available.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW (112 words)
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of the Act on a two
year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The first review assessed whether the Act is making progress in achieving its vaping-related
objectives, particularly those related to protecting young people.
• Input from Canadians was sought in March and April 2022 to inform this review and over 3,000
submissions were received.
• With this first review, we wanted to hear from a wide range of stakeholders. The final report
was delayed to ensure ample time for public engagement.
• The final report will be tabled in Parliament this Fall and will be made public onCanada.ca.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO COST RECOVERY (68 words)
• The tobacco industry is responsible for the leading preventable cause ofdisease and premature
death in Canada.
• That is why my mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobacco manufacturers to pay
for federal public health investments in tobacco control.
• Health Canada is working with partners within the federal government to examine options and
determine next steps.
• I look forward to engaging external stakeholders to realize this commitment.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS (110 words)
• The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the devastating harms of tobacco use.
• That is why we are proposing to update health warning messages and to extend them to all
tobacco product packages to maintain their effectiveness.
• We are also proposing that Canada become the first country to introduce written health
warnings on certain individual tobacco products, like cigarettes, so it would be virtually impossible to
avoid health warnings altogether.
• We held a 75-day consultation which ended on August 25, 2022, to seek input from Canadians
on these proposed measures. We are currently reviewing all the comments received and will take them
into consideration as the proposal moves forward.
IF PRESSED ON FLAVOURS REGULATIONS (67 words)
• On June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the proposed order to amend the Tobacco and
Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes
Regulations.
• The proposal would implement a complementary three-pronged approach to restricting the
flavours of vaping products.
• The consultations closed on September 2, 2021. Health Canada received over 25,000
submissions and is currently reviewing the input it received from Canadians.
YOUTH VAPING AND SUBSTANCE USE (126 words)
• Protecting the health andsafety of youth is a top priority. Our Government is pleased to see
that vaping rates among Canadian youth have stabilized, according to a recent survey.
• Nonetheless, we remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and is taking
comprehensive action.
• Regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can
be seen or heard by youth.
• New regulations are also now in force setting a maximum nicotine concentration for all vaping
products, and Health Canada has consulted Canadians on proposed regulations to restrict flavours in
vaping products to make them less attractive.
• Our comprehensive evidence-based approach to substance use-related harm prevention helps
communities promote protective factors in order to create healthy, supportive environments and build
resiliency among youth.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS (158 WORDS)
• A key objective of the Cannabis Act is to protect young persons and others from inducements to
use cannabis.
• Since the enactment of theCannabis Act, the consumption patterns among youth have not
changed significantly.
• The Cannabis regime includes provisions to reduce the appeal of cannabis to youth, including
strict promotion restrictions, child-resistant plain packaging, and THC limits in specific products.
• The Department continues to monitor research and evaluate potential measures that could be
taken to better achieve the Act’s public health and public safety objectives.
• The Government of Canada invested in public education priorto legalization and regulation with
campaigns to educate youth and young adults, promote informed decision-making, and educate on the
health risks of cannabis and road safety.
• In Spring 2022, Health Canada launched the revamped teacher-led “Pursue YourPassion”
campaign for youth 13-15 as well as added cannabis content into the existing “Consider the
Consequences” high school vaping education campaign for youth aged 13-18.
IF PRESSED ON ILLEGAL CANNABIS PRODUCTS TARGETED AT YOUTH (113 WORDS)
• The Cannabis Act includes requirements to protect youth from the risks of cannabis. These
include restrictions on promotion; prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and THC
limits in specific products.
• Illegal cannabis products have no controls and are more likely to lead to negative health effects.
Illegal products often mimic common snacks and candy, and may contain dangerous contaminants or
high THC.
• The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting
youth.
• Health Canada continues to educate Canadians about the risks of illegal cannabis, and how to
recognize the difference between legal and illegal cannabis, launching the “Reduce your risk: Choose
legal cannabis” campaign in May 2022.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO AND VAPING USE (92 WORDS)
• Our Government is pleased to see that smoking rates among Canadian youth are at an all time
low, and that vaping rates have stabilized, according to a recent survey.
• Nonetheless, our Government remains concerned aboutsubstance use, including youth vaping,
and is taking action, including its Consider the Consequences of Vaping youth prevention campaign,
investing more than $14 million to date.
• We will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke from
becoming addicted to nicotine and tobacco and provide Canadians with health information on tobacco
use.
IF PRESSED ON OPIOID USE AMONG YOUTH (89 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the opioid overdose crisis is one of themost serious
public health threats in Canada.
• To support awareness, the Know More Tour, launched in 2018, engages with teens and young
adults on the health risks associated with opioid use, as well as the harms of substance-use stigma.
• The Governmentof Canada remains committed to leading a whole-of-society approach to
address the opioid overdose crisis. Our approach seeks to ensure that all Canadians can access the life-
saving substance use and health supports they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN (155 words)
• We have invested in prevention campaigns to educate youth and young adults on the risks and
harms of substance use, including vaping to provide guidance to reduce those harms, and to reduce
substance-use stigma.
• In 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping youth prevention
campaign, investing more than $14 million to date.
• The campaign has included in-print and online advertising, as well as an interactive learning tour
in schoolsand community venues or virtually. Vaping awareness kits were provided to all middle and
high schools, and information resources sent to health care professionals.
• In 2021-22, the campaign focused on reaching youth with new advertising framed with
empowerment messaging.
• As of June 2022, the interactive learning tour has reached over 158,000 youth in over 968
schools across the country. Starting in the winter of 2023, an online resource adapted from the learning
tour will be available for teachers tohost their own sessions.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES (88 words)
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and promotions.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove lifestyle advertising from
television and in-store displays, and online content from social media influencers.
• Between August 2021 and March 2022, Health Canada inspected more than 1,400 vaping
retailers and seized non-compliant vaping products at over 250 establishments.
• Between December 2021 and February 2022, Health Canada conducted inspections of 30 online
vaping-product retailers and issued 24 Warning Letters.
BACKGROUND
Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to
address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and enforcement of
existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. To date, Health Canada has invested more than $13
million, and an additional $1 million is planned to continue the campaign this year.
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The VapingProducts Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On July 8, 2021, new Nicotine Concentration in Vaping Products Regulations came into force, which set a
maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products sold to 20 mg/ml, down from 66 mg/ml. As of July
23, 2021, it is prohibited to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than 20 mg/ml
in Canada.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, on June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the
proposed Order Amending Schedules 2 and 3 to the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the
proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes Regulations. The proposal is a three-
pronged approach to restricting flavoured vaping products. The regulations would restrict the
promotion of flavours in vaping products to tobacco, mint, and menthol; prohibit all sugars and
sweeteners and most flavouring ingredients; and prescribesensory attributes standards to prevent a
sensory perception other than one that is typical of tobacco or mint/menthol. The consultation period
for the proposed regulations closed September 2, 2021 and the department is reviewing feedback on
this proposal.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)–ELIGIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL DISORDER AS THE
SOLE UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITION IN MARCH 2023 (102 words)
• The Government acknowledges concerns regarding the end in March 2023 of the temporary
exclusion from access to MAID for persons with a mental disorder as their sole underlying medical
condition.
• The mandatory eligibility criteria and safeguards in the legislation set a very high bar for access
to MAID. We laud the rigor and diligence demonstrated by MAID practitioners who abide by all the
requirements of the legislation.
• We are working hard with provinces, territories, clinicians and regulatory bodies on MAID
practice standards and accredited training programs, which will ensure MAIDassessors are well
equipped to make decisions on complex requests for MAID.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER INITIATIVES THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS UNDERTAKING (104 words)
• Our Government is working with provinces, territories and partners on implementation of key
recommendations of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness.
• We have convened a task group to develop MAID practice standards that will provide clinicians
with guidance when assessing complex MAID requests, including those involving mental disorders.
• We are also funding the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers to develop a
fully accredited MAID training curriculum. Modules will be rolled out early in 2023.
• Over the longer term, we will implement a research agenda that aims to provide greater insight
into the circumstances and experiences of people who seek MAID.
IF PRESSED THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL DISORDERS AS THE SOLE UNDERLYING
CONDITION OR THE EXPERT PANEL REPORT (118 words)
• Our Government is working to support MAID practitioners who, after March 17, may receive
MAID requests from persons with a mental disorder as their sole underlying medical condition.
• Some MAID practitioners have already assessed cases that involve mental disorders, alongside
other conditions. We are working on further guidance to help providers interpret the eligibility criteria
and apply the safeguards to these complex cases.
• We have convened a task group to develop MAID practice standards that will be available in
early 2023, providing clinicians across the country with consistent guidance when assessing complex
MAID requests, including involving mental disorders. We are encouraging provincial and territorial
governments and medical regulators to work collaboratively to consider and adopt these practice
standards.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLY THOSE
WITH A MENTAL DISORDER (128 words)
• The latest review of international studies suggests that the availability of MAID does not have a
statistically significant impact on suicide rates.
• The MAID framework sets a high bar for access. Just as persons with physical ailments must be
suffering grievously and be in an advanced state of irreversible decline arising from an incurable
conditionin order to receive MAID, only individuals with severe and long-standing mental illnesses that
have been resistant to multiple treatments and interventions will ever be considered for MAID.
• The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness also noted that suicide assessments are already
part of MAID practice. This includes ensuring that a person’s request is consistent, unambiguous and
rationally considered during a prolonged period of stability, and not during a time of crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES (84 words)
• We do not comment on individual cases, as only the individuals and their clinicians involved
truly know the full circumstances.
• While a personmay say they want to receive MAID due to inadequate services, the eligibility
criteria and safeguards in the law are robust. Two independent practitioners must conclude a person is
eligible and an offer of available services and supports must be made and considered by the requester.
• No person would ever be approved for MAID simply because they lack adequate support
services.
IF PRESSED ON EFFICACY OF NEW SAFEGUARDS FOR WHERE DEATH IS NOT REASONABLY FORSEEABLE
(ALSO KNOWN AS TRACK 2 CASES) (103 words)
• Recognizing the variability in the types of applicants who might make a request, the legislation
established new and enhanced safeguards that require among other things, inclusion of professional
expertise in the assessment process, and offering of alternate options to alleviate suffering.
• These safeguards ensure that practitioners consider the physical, psychological and social
circumstances of requesters who are not nearing a foreseeable natural death.
• We are also supporting development of MAID practice standards to help clinicians consistently
interpret and apply eligibility criteria and safeguards when assessing complex requests that may fall
under the track two stream, including requests where a mental disorder is involved.
IF PRESSED ON UPCOMINGREGULATORY AMENDMENTS TO EXPAND DATA COLLECTION FOR MAID (63
words)
• The amendments to the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID will respond to the changes to
the MAID legislation in 2021, and will provide for the collection of new data related to race, gender and
Indigenous identity, as well as disability status of MAID requesters.
• These amendments are on track to be published in Canada Gazette, Part II prior to January 1,
2023.
IF PRESSED ON INDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT ON MAID (39 words)
• Health Canadais committed to engaging with Indigenous peoples on the culturally safe
implementation of MAID, guided by principles respecting the Government of Canada’s relationship with
Indigenous peoples, and based on recognition and respect for the right to self-determination.
IF PRESSED ON THE POTENTIAL ELIGIBILITY OF MATURE MINORS FOR MAID (130 words)
• Many Canadians have strong views about MAID. There may be additional tensions and
sensitivities when considering potential eligibility for mature minors.
• Generally speaking, mature minors are those under 18 with the capacity to make informed
health care decisions and the ability to act voluntarily on those decisions.
• In many provinces and territories, mature minors already have the right to make important
decisions regarding their care. This includes the right to consent to or refuse lifesaving medical
treatment.
• Medically assisted dying is still relatively new in Canada and we are still learning. That is why the
Government will be working closely with experts and other stakeholders to support necessary research
on its implementation. We also look forward to reviewing the Special Joint Committee’s final report on
MAID, expected in October 2022.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICALASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Québec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Québec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new 2021 MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months,
and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
IMPLEMENTING KEY RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
The revised legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests from
individuals where mental illness is the sole underlying condition. After March 17, 2023, individuals with
a mental illness as their sole condition will be able to request and receive MAID, providing they meet all
other eligibility criteria.
During this exclusion period, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to
conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental
Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It includes 19 recommendations that provide guidance
on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated safeguards, and the
assessment process, as well as advice on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime
more broadly.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that the existing MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards (interpreted
appropriately) buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices in related areas of healthcare, can
provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex (track two) MAID requests, including
where a mental disorder is thesole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations that will help
prepare the MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress
included: developing a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID
curriculum; enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of
MAID; plans for Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The new legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal
Assent. The Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The committee
reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report, specifically focused on
MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The committee’s final report is
due no later than February 17, 2023.
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO MAID REGULATIONS
On May 21, 2022, the proposed amendments to the existing 2018 Regulations for the Monitoring of
Medical Assistance in Dying were published on the Canada Gazette, Part 1 website for a 30-day public
comment period. The proposed regulatory amendments support Canada’s MAID regime by allowing for
enhancements to data collection and reporting through the federal MAID monitoring regime to provide
a more comprehensive and inclusive picture of how MAID, with expanded eligibility, is being
implemented in Canada.
Once the amended Regulations are enacted, the expanded data collection requirements will commence
and the information collected will be reflected in the federal annual report on MAID in Canada for 2023,
to be publicly released in the summer of 2024.
INDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT
Throughout various consultative and Parliamentary discussions on MAID, Indigenous participants, as
well as several Parliamentarians, spoketo about the lack of and need for meaningful engagement with
Indigenous peoples on the topic of MAID to understand their diverse views and perspectives. This view
was most recently echoed by the May 2022 final report by the Expert Panel on MAID and MentalIllness,
and the June 2022 Interim Report of the Special Joint Committee on MAID. These calls for engagement
come from the concerns raised around the potential impacts of MAID on Indigenous peoples, such as:
• Undermining of suicide prevention efforts;
• Straining already inaccessible culturally-safe health care services, including palliative care; and
• Exacerbating systemic racism experienced by Indigenous peoples in the health care system.
FUNDING FOR MAID INITIATIVES
Expanded access to MAID (as codified in the new legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility
assessments and requires the administration of the enhanced safeguards aimed at protecting vulnerable
people who might be induced to seek an assisted death. Budget 2021 provided $13.2 million to Health
Canada over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the
development of training and guidance materials for practitioners, as well as a policy driven research
agenda. This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to support safe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
MAID AND MATURE MINORS
Generally, mature minors are those under 18 with the capacity to make informed health care decisions
and the ability to act voluntarily on those decisions. While provinces and territories may have different
requirements, in some cases mature minors are already legally capable of making end-of-life decisions
(such as withdrawing life-sustaining treatment), but this is dependent on the capacity of the young
person to understand their decision and their ability to provide consent.
Individuals under the age of 18 are not currently eligible for MAID. In 2016, the federal Ministers of
Health and Justice tasked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) with completing a review of
questions related to complex MAID requests, including MAID and mature minors. The CCA report,
tabled by the Ministers in December 2018 indicated:
o The need for key safeguards for mature minors, noting that autonomy develops in a relational
context, where decision making should involve the patient, their family (parents or guardians), and an
inter-professional healthcare team;
o While chronological age can provide some developmental generalizations about decision-
making abilities, it is not the most important variable in determining capacity for informed consent;
o Capacity of a minor to consent to a healthcare intervention must be determined on a case-by-
case basis by considering their experiences, maturity, circumstances, and the gravity of the decision at
hand; and,
o Any deliberation on whether to permit MAID for currently excluded groups would benefit from
greater engagement with Canadian society, especially those groups most likely to be affected. They also
noted that the voice of youth is missing in the discussions surrounding access to MAID for mature
minors.
There is limited research in the area of assisted dying for mature minors. Understanding the views of
minors, family members and health care professionals about MAID requests for mature minors will
inform future policy development. To this end, Health Canada is in the early stages of launching research
that will generate nationally informed evidence for policymakers to consider in deliberations pertaining
to requests for MAID from mature minors.
The mandate of the Special Joint Committee on MAID includes the question of MAID and mature
minors. The final report of this Committee is due by February 17, 2023.
SHORTAGE OF PEDIATRIC ANALGESICS (190 words)
• Our Government shares the concerns of many parents and caregivers who may not be able to
easily access these important medications to treat their children.
• To increase the supply of these products on store shelves, Health Canada has approved the
exceptional importation of over 1.2 million units, including acetaminophen from the global market that
has started to become available to consumers in retail and community pharmacies.
• This also includes supply of the recently approved exceptional importation of ibuprofen from
the U.S. and acetaminophen from Australia, to supply hospitals in Canada. Importation of ibuprofen has
occurred, and distribution to hospitalshas started. Children’s acetaminophen from Australia for
hospitals has arrived in Canada and distribution will begin shortly. These supplies are in addition to the
1.1M ibuprofen units produced in Canada by Haleon during the month of November 2022.
• All options continue to be on the table to address this situation.
• The Department will continue to work with multiple players along the supply chain, right to
patient groups, hospitals and pharmacies, to take any and all additional measures necessary to ensure
access to needed supply of these important medications for our children.
IF PRESSED ON WHY THE SHORTAGE ISN’T YET RESOLVED (190 words)
• My Department has been actively working with manufacturers and distributors of pediatric
acetaminophen and ibuprofen products, the provinces and territories, children’s hospitals, the Canadian
Pediatric Society, the Canadian Pharmacists Association, and Food, Health and Consumer Products of
Canada since first learning about supply constraints to help increase thesupply of these medications.
• In response to unprecedented demand, manufacturers that supply the Canadian market have
increased production, some producing at record levels, and they are exploring options to further
increase production and expedite re-supply where product is needed most. For example, during the
month of November a total of 1.1M units of domestically produced Children’s Advil products from
Haleon will have been made available for the Canadian market.
• In addition to the products already authorized for exceptional importation, we will continue to
work with suppliers to bring in additional imported products to increase the supply in Canada.
• I have spoken directly to the manufacturers of these medications and hosted two roundtables
with multiple stakeholders who are playing a role to resolve this situation.
• We will continue to treat this as a priority, with Health Canada reviewing additional proposals
for exceptional importation.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IS THIS SO PRONOUNCED IN CANADA (ARE OTHER COUNTRIES EXPERIENCING THE
SAME SHORTAGE?) (74 WORDS)
• Other countries have reported signals of supply constraints, but none have seen the demand
that we have seen in Canada.
• We saw demand for analgesics rise over the summer months, which is the period manufacturers
normally use to restock analgesics for the fall and winter seasons.
• Combined with the increased attention on the issue in Canada in mid-August, and the viral
infections circulating, it has resulted in a drastic and unprecedented spike in demand.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA DID NOT PERMIT IMPORTATION OF FOREIGN PRODUCTS EARLIER
(144 WORDS)
• Exceptional importation of foreign authorized drugs is considered when the Canadian drug is at
risk, or in critical shortage. This measure is always available for any shortage and was offered to
suppliers when we began to hear about supply constraints in the spring.
• When demand spiked to unprecedented levels in August, my Department intensified ongoing
efforts with industry and other stakeholders to explore all possible solutions. This included options to
further increase supply in the Canadian market, such as ramping up production and accessing foreign
supply.
• We are now seeing the positive results of these efforts. In addition to importing products from
the U.S. and Australia to supply hospitals in Canada, we have started to see children’s acetaminophen
on retail shelves in the last few days.
• We are continuing to work with manufacturers to increase supply in Canada and bring in
additional foreign-authorized products.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IT WILL TAKE SO LONG TO GET THE EXCEPTIONALLY IMPORTED ACETAMINOPHEN
TO STORE SHELVES (78 WORDS)
• Each proposal received from a company to import a foreign authorized product undergoes
careful review by Health Canada to confirm that the product was manufactured according to the same
high quality standards the people of Canada expect.
• After careful review, the Department has approved the exceptional importation of
acetaminophen from the global market and products are already appearing on store shelves.
• The Department is actively working with distributors and retailers to ensure fair distribution of
supply across Canada.
BACKGROUND
On August 16, 2022, media reported that the SickKids Hospital in Toronto was warning parents and
caregivers that, due to nationwide shortages, a prescription would be required for liquid acetaminophen
and ibuprofen products, and that a pharmacist would provide the medication to them.
CBC News and Sick Kids issued corrective statements clarifying that prescriptions for these products
were not required. However, this media attention triggered a further spike in demand for these
products nationally, following reports of intermittent supply constraints that had been previously
reported. Companies have indicated they have ramped up production beyond normal historical demand
levels but that the current demand is outpacing production.
On August 30, the CanadianPediatric Society issued guidance directed to caregivers and parents on the
use of these products.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers and all stakeholders across the supply chain to
identify mitigation measures to increase supply and meet demand for these products, including
reviewing proposals that may require regulatory flexibility or consideration of foreign supply.
Manufacturers are maximizing production, with some companies producing at 100% more than they
were at the same timein 2021, including Haleon’s production of 1.1M units of children’s Advil during
the month of November 2022.
The Department has prioritized information-sharing with provinces and territories via various FPT tables.
The Department has also involved PTs in broader multi-stakeholder discussions to identify solutions as
quickly as possible.
Health Canada has approved the importation of foreign supply of children’s ibuprofen and infant’s
acetaminophen for use in hospitals. Further to this, on November 4, 2022,the Department approved a
proposal from Johnson & Johnson for the exceptional importation of U.S.-labelled acetaminophen that
will help to fill the current supply gap in retail and community pharmacies. On November 10, 2022, the
Department approved the company’s proposed distribution and risk communication plan for the
product, including bilingual safety information and measures to enhance the supply of bilingually
labelled product to Quebec and to French language minority communities in Canada. More than 1.2
million bottles of product have already entered Canada to supply hospitals, community pharmacies and
retailers and products are already appearing on store shelves. An addition 500K units are expected at
retail within the next three weeks. The additionalamount to be imported will help increase the supply
available to consumers and will continue to help address the immediate situation. Health Canada
continues to assess additional proposals for exceptional importation to further supplement this
increased supply.
Health Canada is prioritizing public communication by providing information and advice to Canadians.
This was done via a Departmental Statement, and Public Advisory issued on October 7, 2022. As well a
webpage was launch on October 26, 2022 dedicated to the analgesic shortage. Health Canada will
continue to keep Canadians up to date on this shortage and the products that have been approved for
importation through this webpage.
In addition to discussions with suppliers, on November 2, 2022, and November 17, 2022, the
Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, hosted roundtable discussions on the pediatric and
children’s analgesics shortage in Canada. In attendance were external participants representing
manufacturers, distributors, pharmacists,children’s hospitals, and pediatricians. The objective of the
roundtable was to highlight actions to date and provide participants with an opportunity to share
perspectives on the shortage, measures taken, and ongoing challenges, while underscoring the need for
all stakeholders to continue taking measures to end this shortage as soon as possible.
POST COVID-19 CONDITION (189 WORDS)
• The Government recognizes that many Canadians who contract COVID-19 face a prolonged
recovery, withsymptoms that endure for some time after their infection.
• While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building, there is still
much that is unknown. The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international
experts to build the evidence base on post COVID-19 condition, to inform and identity strategies to
improve the prevention, diagnosis and treatment.
• The Chief Science Advisor of Canada, Dr. Mona Nemer, has convened a Task Force to develop a
scientificroadmap that will provide a comprehensive framework for addressing post COVID-19
condition. Once released, it will inform decision-making going forward to address its health and
socioeconomic impacts in Canada.
• Statistics Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada recently provided the first Canadian
data that provides insight into the magnitude and impacts of post COVID-19 condition on the Canadian
population. The reports, based on data from the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey Cycle
2, will help inform our way forward in supporting Canadians living with post COVID 19 condition and will
help to prevent future cases.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS PCC AND ON DETAILS OF PCC FUNDING FOR RESEARCH,
SURVEILLANCE AND EVIDENCE-BASED GUIDELINES IN CANADA (142 WORDS)
• The Government of Canada is making significant investments to build the evidence-base to
better understand post COVID-19 condition.
• Since March 2020, our Government has invested $414 million for COVID-19 research through
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, including $17.7 million in targeted funding to study post
COVID-19 condition.
• We have also continued to build on these investments. Budget 2022 provided $20 million over
five years, starting this year, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research that will support a new
research network dedicated to understanding and addressing the long-term impacts of COVID-19
infections on people living in Canada and Canadian health systems.
• Budget 2022 also included $10 million over 3 years for the Public Health Agency of Canada to
develop evidence-based guidelines and tools for the identification, prevention, self-management, and
clinical treatment of post COVID-19 condition, and to undertake additional surveillance activities.
IF PRESSED ON THE PREVALENCE OR IMPACTS OF PCC IN CANADA (300 WORDS)
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to monitor developments on scientific evidence
nationally and internationally. This includes working with the provinces and territories to better
understand the long-term effects of COVID 19.
• Research in Canada and around the world is underway to better understand post COVID-19
condition and its impacts. Numerous studies have reported the estimated prevalence of post COVID-19
condition in different populations, though these estimates range considerably for several reasons,
including differences in when and where the studies were conducted.
• Results from the limited provisional release, on October 17th, 2022, of the Canadian COVID-19
Antibody and Health Survey by Statistics Canada, including some results on longer-term symptoms
present for 3 months or more following an acute COVID-19 infection.
o The preliminary findings indicate that 14.8% of Canadian adults who reported a COVID-19
infection reported longer term symptoms 3 or more months after the acute infection.
• In addition, new data published on October 20th by the Public Health Agency of Canada show
that the impacts of these longer term symptoms are significant. Almost half (47.3%) experienced
symptoms for a year or longer, and 21.3% said that their symptoms often or always limited their daily
activities.
o These symptoms also had an important impact on employment or school attendance. Among
adults with longer-term symptoms who were employed or attending school, approximately three-
quarters (74.1%) missed some work or school due to their symptoms. On average, they missed 20 days.
• Thisstudy and others to follow will help to refine our understanding of the prevalence of post
COVID-19 condition in Canada, as well as potentially relevant risk factors.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also undertaking efforts to understand the socio-
economic impacts of post COVID-19 condition in Canada, and its potential implications for the health
care system, and the broader economy.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF VACCINATION ON PCC IN CANADA (70 WORDS)
• Early evidence suggests that vaccination with two or more doses of COVID-19 vaccines helps to
reduce the risk of developing post COVID-19 condition if individuals become infected.
• The best way to prevent post COVID-19 condition is to take measures to avoid getting infected
in the first place. This includes following public health measures, reducing the risk of COVID-19
complications by getting vaccinated, and remaining up to date on booster doses.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL SERVICES AND SUPPORTS AVAILABLE TO CANADIANS WITH PCC (87 WORDS)
• Given thecomplexity of post COVID-19 condition, we recommend that Canadians experiencing a
delayed recovery from COVID-19 maintain an ongoing dialogue with their health care providers about
possible ways to manage their symptoms.
• The provinces and territorial governments are responsible for the management, organization
and delivery of health care services for their residents. Many jurisdictions have developed local
resources on post COVID-19 condition. This includes specialized clinics dedicated to post COVID-19
condition recovery. In the United States, preparations for a three-digit number took place over a four-
year period.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONTRACT WITH PRICEWATERHOUSECOOPERS, WHICH IS ANALYZING ANTICIPATED
SERVICE VOLUMES (119 words)
• The Public Health Agency of Canada contracted PricewaterhouseCoopers to understand
anticipated service volume and demand for 9-8-8.
• This analysis factored in anticipated demand over time, the impact of diverted calls from other
services, including 911 and local crisis lines, as well as new growth associated with introducing an easy-
to-remember number.
• This analysis forecasts a four to six-fold increase by 2027. This will inform planning, including
costs and resources.
• This exercise builds on forecasting analysis undertaken by the U.S. which estimated a four-to
tenfold growth in service volumes within the first five years of launching 9-8-8.
• The U.S. experienced a higher volume of calls and texts than initially forecasted. These findings
will inform the service volumeforecast for Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IT TOOK SO LONG TO BEGIN THE CONSULTATION ON THE 9-8-8 SERVICE MODEL
AND IMPLEMENTATION (136 words)
• In April 2022, the CRTC asked the Public Health Agency of Canada to determine the termination
point of calls made to the abbreviated number, the entity that would manage calls to the abbreviated
number, as well as the scope of the services being provided.
• The CRTC noted that these determinations would need to be informed through engagement
with partners, includingprovincial and territorial governments, suicide prevention stakeholders, and
Indigenous organizations. The CRTC asked for receipt of this information in fall 2022. The Public Health
Agency of Canada has confirmed that this engagement is underway and it will provide a response in this
timeframe.
• Engagement with representatives from provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations and
key stakeholders began in May 2022 and is ongoing. It will inform implementation planning so that 9-8-8
is operational on November 30, 2023.
BACKGROUND
The World Health Organization (WHO) developed the first version of a clinical case definition of post
COVID-19 condition (PCC) in adults as follows: “Post COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a
history ofprobable or confirmed SARS CoV-2 infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19
with symptoms and that last for at least 2 months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis.”
The WHO is exploring the possibility of developing, in the coming months, a separate clinical case
definition for children.
There are currently many scientific uncertainties related to PCC and the evidence is slowly evolving. PCC
can affect many different organs, including the brain, the heart, and the lungs. The reported range of
symptoms is broad, varying from mild to severe, and can fluctuate in intensity and sometimes disappear
and reappear over time. Common PCC symptoms include fatigue, cough, shortness of breath, brain fog,
intolerance to physical activity, and others. Often these symptoms have a significant impact on everyday
functioning and quality of life. PCC can affect both adults and children, regardless of the presence
and/or severity of their initial COVID-19 symptoms. Studies in adults have reported thatthose who were
hospitalized or needed intensive care during recovery are at increased risk of experiencing longer-term
effects and PCC.
PCC will have a significant long-term impact on public health and the health care system in general. At
this point, there is insufficient evidence to determine the socio-economic impacts of PCC in Canada, and
its potential burden on the health care system, or the broader economy. The Government of Canada is
actively monitoring the latest research, as well as engaging experts and policy makers (domestic and
international) to help inform public health action.
National Surveillance and Research
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and partners
Statistics Canada, in partnership with PHAC and in consultation with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
have been working on the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS–Cycle 2). The first
wave of the survey was launched in April 2022 and the collected data will be used to estimate the
prevalence of PCC in adults in Canada.
• On September 6th, 2022, Statistics Canada released preliminary results from the CCAHS –Cycle
2 via “The Daily” page on the Statistics Canada website. Using responses received as of July 15th, this
first release will highlight the proportion of self-reported positive tests for COVID-19, as well as self-
reported suspected infections, and symptom prevalence.
• On October 17, 2022, further preliminary results about adults reporting longer-term symptoms
following a SARS-CoV-2 infection were released by Statistics Canada. Data from the CCAHS estimate that
14.8% of Canadian adults who contracted COVID-19 experience longer-term symptoms 3 months or
more after initial COVID-19 infection.
The Canadian Paediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a joint project of PHAC and the Canadian
Paediatric Society, launched a new two-year surveillance study of PCC in children and youth in Canada in
early September 2022. The CPSP study will also provide information on risk factors, symptoms, and
impacts on daily functioning. Preliminary results are not anticipated before early 2023.
Through Budget 2022, PHAC will receive $9 million over the next three years (2022-2023: $1
million; 2023-2024: $4 million; 2024-2025: $4 million) to develop and disseminate evidence-based
guidelines on PCC. Potential topics may include guidance for the identification, prevention, self-
management, and clinical treatment of PCC. PHAC is collaborating with partners to:
• Scope guidelines and evidence that are already available,
• Prioritize guideline topics and focus,
• Identify knowledge gaps and priority areas, and
• Establish a guideline panel of experts.
These guidelines will consider the Canadian context, and special populations (e.g. Indigenous, racialized,
etc.) will alsobe taken into consideration.
Budget 2022 also includes another $1 million to undertake additional surveillance activities.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $414 million in 965
COVID-19 research projects, including $17.7 million to fund 41 targeted research studies on PCC.
Spanning a wide range of research interests the funded projects across Canada will yield important
results to inform how to manage and treatpeople with PCC.
Budget 2022 also provided an additional $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for CIHR that
will support the creation of a research network on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on
people living in Canada and Canadian health systems.The funding opportunity was launched on October
19, 2022, and it is anticipated that the successful network will be notified on January 12, 2023.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease
Preparedness. This global initiative is an alliance of research funding organizations that facilitates
rapid/effective research responses.
Office of the Chief Science Advisor of Canada
The Chief Science Advisor of Canada, Dr. Mona Nemer, has convened a Task Force on post-COVID-19
condition. With a focus on the Canadian context, the key objectives of the Task Force are to summarize
evidence that can inform the management of PCC, and to identify knowledge gaps in order to address
the health and socioeconomic impacts of PCC in Canada. To help meet these objectives, the taskforce
held a series of round tables with different stakeholders. The Task Force’s report is anticipated in
November 2022.
Prevalence of PCC
There is still uncertainty about the prevalence of PCC. Based on early published reports in 2020 and
before the development of a first case definition, the WHO estimated that at least 10% to 20% of people
would experience PCC after their initial COVID-19 infection. Several evidence reviews (including one led
by PHAC) from the initial phase of the pandemic (prior to the Omicron variant and roll out of vaccination
campaigns) found that about 30% to 40% of those not hospitalized still reported at least one symptom,
whether it be mild or more severe, beyond 12weeks since their initial COVID-19 infection.
In these reviews, the prevalence estimates of PCC vary wildly, ranging from below 5% in some studies to
around 80% in studies among those with severe initial illness. The variation in estimates is likely due to
differences in the definitions used for PCC, in the characteristics of the study populations (e.g.
hospitalized for COVID-19 or outpatients), and in the methods and timing of assessment of PCC-related
symptoms.
The first results from CCAHS, related to PCC were released in October, estimating that 14.8% of adults
have longer term symptoms 3 months or more after initial COVID-19 infection. This represents
approximately 1.4 million Canadian adults, or 4.6% of the adult population. Data were collected from
April to August 2022.
Some preliminary evidence, including from the Oct 17th release from the CCAHS, suggests that
infections caused by the Omicron variant may be less likely to lead to PCC compared to other variants.
More research is needed to understand whether this is due to differences in variants or other factors
such as increasing population immunity (from vaccination and/or infection), or a combination of both.
The impact of multiple infections on the risk of PCC is also not yet well understood, but preliminary and
limited evidence suggests that the risks of PCC may increase with the number of reinfections.
At this time, the prevalence of PCC in children is not yet well-established, with high variability in
estimates being observed from only a small number of studies. These estimates will become more
precise as more studies, including the CPSP, are conducted and new evidence emerges.
Socioeconomic impacts of PCC
The socio-economic impacts of PCC bring emerging issues, for example in relation to the labour market.
In the United States, for example:
• Around 16 million working-age Americans (those aged 18 to 65) presently have PCC;
• Of those, 2 to 4 million are out of work due to PCC; and
• The annual cost of those lost wages alone is around $170billion a year (and potentially as high
as $230 billion).
The volume of media stories highlighting the plight of individuals suffering from PCC continues to
increase. These often focus on the dual barrier of accessing care, as well as the dire financial
implications; including loss of homes, jobs, custody of children, and draining of personal pension funds.
We learned from CCAHS that among adults with longer-term symptoms, 21.3% said that their symptoms
often or always limited their daily activities. Among adults with longer-term symptoms who were
employed or attending school, approximately three-quarters (74.1%) missed some work or school due
to their symptoms. On average, they missed 20 days. This loss of productivity results in adverse social
and economic consequences (e.g. loss of income, loss of employment among those experiencing
symptoms over a long time period)
PHAC is using modelling to quantify the economic impact of PCC cases averted due to vaccination (from
December 2020 to March 2022), focusing on the economic costs associated with reduced productivity,
and labour force participation among those with PCC. The results from the modelling work, generated
through a partnership with Finance Canada, will be published in 2023.
In addition, PHAC’s Office of the Chief Science Officer has initiated a scoping project with COVID-END
that will outline and synthesize theavailable evidence for these gaps.
Vaccination and post COVID-19 condition
PHAC continues to closely monitor the evidence for the impacts of vaccination on PCC. Findings from
PHAC’s latest review of the evidence (published up to July 7, 2022) continue to suggest that COVID-19
vaccination with two or more doses may reduce the risk of developing PCC among individuals who get
vaccinated prior to a COVID-19 infection. More research is needed to quantify the extent to which
additional doses may provide additional protection.
Support for Canadians with PCC
In terms of financial support, Canadians suffering from COVID-19 or PCC, who are unable to work, may
be eligible to receive up to 15 weeks of income support through the Employment Insurance (EI) Sickness
Benefit. In recognition that some individuals require more time to recover from an illness or injury, ESDC
is planning to extend the EI sickness benefit from 15 to 26 weeks. This change has not been
implemented, and it is anticipated to be launched before year end.
The provinces and territories are responsible for the management and delivery of health care services
for their residents, including rehabilitation and treatment services for people with PCC. There are a
number of public and private clinics that provide care to individuals with PCC across Canada, with a
focus on interdisciplinary care. As of August 19, 2022, four provinces have clinics: British Columbia,
Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec.
RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS (181 WORDS)
• The health and safety of people in Canada is the Government’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada monitors for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Based on
surveillance data from the week ending November 19, 2022, RSV activity in Canada has stabilized.
Activity remains above expected levels for this time of year; however, it is approaching seasonal norms.
• RSV is a common respiratory virus and the most common cause of respiratory hospitalizations in
children in Canada and worldwide. Most children will get an RSV infection before they turn two years
old. While many infections with RSV are mild, children and infants under the age of two years are
particularly at risk of serious complications of RSV infection, such as bronchiolitis or pneumonia, and
may be hospitalized.
• We are aware of reports of increased pressure on the health care system across the country,
especially pediatric hospitals, caused in part by RSV-related illness along with the co-circulation of
COVID-19 and influenza. Strain on the healthcare system may further be compounded by a shortage of
healthcare workers, and supply shortages of some over-the-counter medications.
IF PRESSED ON FACTORS CONTRIBUTING TO RSV CASES (248 WORDS)
• RSV, like seasonal influenza, causes annual seasonal epidemics. Due to reduced circulation of
RSV during the winter months of 2020–2021 and 2021 2022, older children might now be at increased
risk of severe RSV associated illness since they have likely not had typical levels of exposure to RSV
duringthe past two seasons.
• Given that many public health measures used to prevent the spread of COVID-19 (such as
gathering restrictions, lockdowns and mask mandates) have been eased, we expect increased cases of
RSV and other respiratory viruses for the current respiratory illness season. This occurred with RSV last
fall when an earlier than typical RSV epidemic placed time-limited, regional pressures on pediatric
hospitals in Canada over the fall and into the winter.
• Other factors that may also be contributing to a resurgence in respiratory illnesses, like RSV,
include more individuals moving into indoor settings due to the colder weather and a lack of population-
level immunity given the lower circulation of viruses during previous years of the pandemic, especially in
children.
• The federal government is committed to continue working with our provincial and territorial
counterparts, regulators, health workers and Canadians to identify and implement strategies to address
the current health human resource crisis. Collaborative work is underway to identify concrete solutions.
• The use of personal protective practices, like staying home when sick, frequently washing your
hands, covering your coughs and sneezes, and cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces can
help prevent the spread of RSV and other seasonal respiratory viruses.
BACKGROUND
This fall, a rise in pediatric hospitalizations for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV) is being reported across
the United States, with some pediatric hospitals reporting being ‘overwhelmed’. Several factors are
contributing to this, including a lack of normal exposure to the virus for children during the COVID-19
pandemic.
A similar rise in Canada was observed but appears to be stabilizing (1,944 detections; 7.6% positive in
the week ending November 19, 2022). RSV activity remains above expected levels, placing pressure on
pediatric hospitals in Canada, but is approaching levels typical of this time of year.
In Canada, activity of influenza is currentlyhighest and increasing, especially in children and adolescents,
compounding already pressured pediatric hospitals.
RSV is one of several seasonal respiratory viruses that circulate in the colder months from fall through
spring in Canada. Among non-SARS-CoV-2 seasonal respiratory viruses, activity of influenza is highest
and increasing; activity of both influenza and RSV remain elevated as of the week ending November 19,
2022.
RSV is the leading cause of acute lower respiratory tract infections in children, nationally and
internationally. Approximately 95% of children <2 years old develop at least one RSV infection.
RSV is primarily spread via respiratory particles when a person coughs or sneezes, and through direct
contact with a contaminated surface.
Canada typically sees increasing RSV activity over the fall and a seasonal RSV epidemic during the winter
months, peaking in December/January, each year.
Based on surveillance data from the week ending November 19, 2022, RSV activity in Canada has
stabilized (1,944 detections; 7.6% positive). Activity remains above expected levels for this time of year
but is approaching seasonal norms.
The health risks from RSV are low for most Canadians, and people who get RSV will usually have mild
symptoms similar tothe common cold, such as coughing and sneezing, and will recover quickly.
However, infants, young children and, to a lesser degree, seniors, are at a higher risk of severe illness
compared to the general population.
The federal Health Portfolio estimates that, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, each year RSV led to an
average of 1,042 hospitalizations per 100,000 infants under 2 years of age, 106 hospitalizations per
100,000 children ages 2 to 4 years, and 52 hospitalizations per 100,000 seniors aged 65+. In comparison,
hospitalizations for the general population attributed to RSV are estimated at 27 per 100,000 people
annually.
Currently, there is no vaccine to prevent RSV. Passive immunization with palivizumab is the only
pharmaceutical option for RSV prevention at this time. This is an antibody recommended for high-risk
infants.
While there is no vaccine currently available, Health Canada received a submission from
GlaxoSmithKline on October 25 of this year for a vaccine for adults 60 years of age and older. Pfizer has
also notified Health Canada of its plans to submit two vaccine candidates in 2023 –one for seniors and
one for pregnant women. All submissions are reviewed by Health Canada using an independent process
based on scientific rigour and medicalevidence.
Until a vaccine is available, the best guidance to protect each other, especially those at risk, is for all
Canadians to practice effective public health measures such as staying home when sick, wearing a mask,
and practicing frequent hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette. These actions can help reduce the
spread not only of RSV, but also of other respiratory illnesses such as seasonal flu, especially when used
together in a layered approach.
RSV surveillance
Canada participates in national and international activities to detect and monitor the spread of RSV in
humans. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) maintains the Respiratory Virus Detection
Surveillance System, Canada’s national surveillance system that monitors the circulation of seasonal
respiratory viruses, including RSV, each week. PHAC also works with the Canadian Pediatric Society to
support enhanced surveillance pilot projects on pediatric RSV to prepare for new treatments and
vaccines to reduce the burden of RSV in vulnerablechildren.
Vaccine Development and Treatment
There is currently no vaccine to prevent RSV infections, but there are a few that are currently in
development. There is a drug (palivizumab) that can help protect young infants at high risk for severe
disease.Passive immunization with palivizumab is the only pharmaceutical option for RSV prevention at
this time. This is an antibody recommended for high-risk infants. Canada’s National Advisory Committee
on Immunization has issued guidance on the recommended useof palivizumab to reduce complications
of RSV infection in infants.
Several vaccines and preventative agents are in development to prevent RSV disease in children, infants
and older adults. Earlier this fall, GlaxoSmithKline and AZ/Sanofi (collaboration) announced their new
drug submissions to Health Canada for prevention of severe diseases due to RSV.
Prevention
With the co-circulation of COVID-19, RSV and influenza across many communities in Canada, PHAC
continues to recommend a vaccine PLUS approach,which includes the layered use of personal
protective practices. Many of these measures have been used before and during the COVID-19
pandemic and continue to be important everyday practices. These include:
• getting your COVID-19 and annual influenza vaccines;
• staying home when sick;
• improving indoor ventilation, when possible, such as opening a window or door;
• frequently cleaning your hands;
• avoiding touching your face with unclean hands;
• covering your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or the bend of your arm; and
• cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects.
In addition, to reduce the spread of COVID-19, PHAC continues to recommend that individuals properly
wearing a well-constructed, well-fitting mask or respirator in public indoor settings, especially if they are
crowded or poorly ventilated. Masks can also act as an added layer of protection against other
respiratory illnesses such as RSV and influenza.
DENTAL CARE–WORK TOWARDS LONG TERM PROGRAM (194 WORDS)
• Budget 2022 committed $5.3 billion over five years, and $1.7B ongoing, to provide dental care
for Canadians who are unable to access care because of the costs. The Government remains committed
to providing dental care to Canadians and continues to take the necessary steps to build a national
dental care program. Although we are working as fast as we can, it will take time to get it right.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with key stakeholders, industry partners,
academics, and dentistry associations and organizations to help inform decisions on implementing a
national dental care program.
• For example, the Government of Canada issued an Invitation to Qualify (ITQ) On October 28,
2022, to engage with experts in the field of health care claimsprocessing services. This ITQ will allow the
government to create a list of qualified vendors who could deliver a long-term, national dental care
program with the scope and scale needed to serve all eligible Canadians.
• At the same time, Health Canadahas been reaching out to provinces and territories to better
understand their current dental care programs and seek their views on how best to implement a long-
term program.
DENTAL CARE–PT JURISDICTION (104 WORDS)
• Although health care delivery is under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal
government continues to play an important role in health care in Canada and, in fact, we already play a
significant role in dental care delivery for federal populations.
• It is within our jurisdictionto exercise the federal spending power to provide support to
Canadians and that is what we are doing here-so that they can get the help they need to make dental
care for their children more affordable.
• We remain committed to finding ways to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to
improve access to oral health in Canada.
BACKGROUND
KEY FACTS
The Government of Canada has committed to making access to dental care more affordable. Budget
2022 proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion ongoing for a
national dental care program for Canadians who earn under $90,000.
The Canada Dental Benefit is an interim measure that will allow Canadian families to access funding as
soon as possible to begin dealing with some of their eligible children’s dental care needs. While this
temporary program is in place, the Government of Canada is working to build a national dental care
program.
Discussions with key stakeholders, including provinces and territories,as well as industry and clinical
experts, are ongoing to help inform the Government’s decisions on implementing a national dental care
program.
On October 28, 2022, the Government of Canada issued an Invitation to Qualify (ITQ) to engage with
experts inthe field of health care claims processing services. This ITQ will allow the government to
create a list of qualified vendors who could deliver a long-term, national dental care program with the
scope and scale that would be needed to serve all eligible Canadians.
In addition, the Minister of Health and Health Canada officials have been meeting with key stakeholders,
including experts, academics, and dentistry associations and organizations over the past several months
to discuss the design and delivery of a national dental care program.
More details will be available as decisions are finalized regarding a new national dental care program.
Under the Canada Health Act, provinces/territories (PTs) provide residents with medically or dentally
required emergency/catastrophic surgical-dental procedures performed by a dentist in hospital as
publicly-insured services. Outside of those services, PTs are not required to provide dental care under
the public health care system.
All PTs provide additional dental coverage, at their discretion, although eligibility and coverage is limited
and varies greatly.
In total, PTs spend an estimated $650 million a year on public dental programs.
The federal government also plays a key role in health care in Canada. It is able to use its spending
power, as long it is done in a manner that does not amount to regulation of a space that is under PT
jurisdiction, which the proposed benefit does not.
On October 20, 2022, the Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) released a Legislative
Parliamentary Note that included a supplementary information table with estimates of costs for the
interim Canada Dental Benefit for each province.
Some MPshave expressed concerns that these costing estimates imply that Quebec and Atlantic
provinces with robust programs for children would be receiving a disproportionate amount of funding.
The proposed delivery model for the interim Canada Dental Benefit does not include funding to the
provinces or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible
Canadians through the tax system.
The eligibility criteria and level of payment will be the same for all Canadians across the country.
CANADA HEALTH ACT–ABORTION SERVICES (85 WORDS)
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• In addition to enforcing the Act, over $3.5 million of funding targeted at improving access to
abortion services has been announced through Budget 2021’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT (85 words)
• While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories, there is still work to be done
to improve access in many areas of the country.
• Health Canada continues to work with Ontario on its Reimbursement Action Plan to ensure that
patients do not face financial barriers when accessing insured surgical abortion services.
• New Brunswick will continue to be subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions as long as the
province refuses to cover insured surgical abortion services provided at private clinics, resulting in
patient charges.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND (78 words)
• This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health services more
accessible, with an emphasis on populations experiencing the highest risks and greatest barriers,
including Indigenous people, racialized populations, members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, women and
youth. That is why Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, directed to community-based
organizations that help to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information,
and services for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including women
who choose to end their pregnancy. The Government of Canada unequivocally supports the right to
choose, and works to ensure that safe and legal abortion services are available to everyone. Abortion
services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories. Individuals
should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where the services are
provided.
The Canada Health Act establishes criteria and conditions related to insured health services and
extended health care services that the provinces and territories must fulfill to receive the full federal
cash contribution under the Canada Health Transfer (CHT). The aim of the Act is to ensure that all
eligible residents of Canadian provinces and territories have reasonable access to medically necessary
hospital, physician, and surgical-dental services that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis,
without charges related to the provision of insured health care services.
Roe v. Wade
On June 24, 2022, the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. This decision repealed the US federal
constitutional protection for abortion services and now defers to the individual states to regulate
abortion services.
The overturning of Roe v. Wade has galvanized the discussion about access to abortion in Canada as well
as questions surrounding Americans from states with restrictive abortion laws crossing border to access
abortion services in Canada and possible implications for Canadian providers. Similar to other health
care services, Americans coming to Canada would be able to obtain safe abortion care in Canada, but
would have to pay for the service out-of-pocket. Media articles have reported an increase in phone
enquiries from Americans seeking information since the decision, but no increase in the booking of
appointments.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges
for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act
and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since March 2020,
deductions totaling $269,916 have been levied against the NB’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments
in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for abortions performed
in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution. Currently, Clinic
554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion services.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) fileda statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20. The Association was
granted standing in the case by the NB Court of Queen’s bench on June 2, 2021. The group argues that
the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had
previously advised the province it would take legal action if the regulation was not amended to permit
coverage for abortion services received outside hospitals. The province filed their Statement of Defence
on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does
not violate the Canada Health Act.
The case is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is awaiting information from the province,
which was requested in January 2022. The CCLA has stated that if the information is not provided in a
timely matter they may bring forward a motion for theCourt to compel the information. To date, no
trial date has been set. Following the overturn of Roe v. Wade, the CCLA wrote to the NB Government to
reiterate their position.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, media stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical
abortion services in some private clinics. Health Canada followed up on these reports by analyzing clinic
websites, and by making phone or email inquiries to clinics of concern. While the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations, the patient charges discovered
were reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021 and March
2022 deductions (totaling $20,465). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan
to Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured
surgical abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as it works to
implement its action plan and eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services and the province
will provide an updated status report in the coming months, which will be published in the Canada
Health Act Annual Report for 2021-2022.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces and
territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them.The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
Additional Federal Initiatives with Respect to Sexual and Reproductive Health
Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund is advancing work nationwide to increase access
to sexual and reproductive health. Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, starting in
2021-2022, to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information, and services
for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
Health Canada has announced more than $3.5 million in funding for two projects, coming out of the
Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund. These projects will improve access by removing barriers to vital
abortion services, including financial assistance for those travelling for abortion services, and offering
accurate reproductive health information to Canadians
ARRIVECAN (178 WORDS)
• In the context of a global pandemic, the need to take timely action drove innovation. ArriveCAN
evolved with the pandemic, mirroring the changes adopted through the Orders in Council and reflecting
the advice and trajectory of the pandemic.
• It was the best way to collect and share traveller information to operationalize the measures
and enable compliance and enforcement while avoiding crowding at Canada’s ports of entry.
• Since October 1st, travellers no longer have to submit information through the ArriveCAN
app/website. However, if they choose to, they can continue to use the optional Advance Declaration
feature in ArriveCAN before arriving at Toronto-Pearson, Montreal-Trudeau, or Vancouver international
airports. Travellers choosing to do this can use either the free ArriveCAN mobile app or the website.
• Our measures have evolved over the past two and a half years and they could change again. We
need to remain ready to respond quickly with a fully accessible, secure app and web-based tool for data
collection that is respectful of both official languages, so we can protect Canadians from new significant
emerging public health threats.
IF PRESSED ON USING GPS OR LOCATION DATA (120 WORDS)
• The ArriveCAN app did not collect any location data. There is no location data stored in any
database.
• When an app is registered in the app store, there areservices listed that the app “may” use.
ArriveCAN uses a software that allows the app to easily look up an address to make it easier for
travellers to enter their travel destination information.
• This software can also be used to allow people to use their location by default, however,
ArriveCAN does not, and has never, used that feature. But because the software is there, the app stores
show that the app “may” use location data.
• Let me be clear, ArriveCAN does not, and has never collected any location data from users.
BACKGROUND
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 to support the digital submission of mandatory public health
information required from travellers coming into Canada. ArriveCAN evolved in lockstep with the border
measures to expedite the processing of travellers at all of Canada’s ports of entry including at the very
beginning of the pandemic before vaccines and when little was known about the emerging variants.
In the face of the global COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada tookmeasures to close borders
and drastically reduce international travel, in addition to many other heightened public safety measures.
Past requirements for travellers to provide contact details and information on their plans for quarantine
increased border processing times. Modern tools in stakeholder data collection and analysis were
leveraged.
To support the administration and enforcement of the Quarantine Act and Emergency Orders made
under it, CBSA and PHAC developed ArriveCAN, an integrated digital solution that enables real-time
collection of information at Canadian Ports of Entry (POE) for all incoming travellers. ArriveCAN enabled
travellers to provide their information digitally as was previously required by law under the Quarantine
Act, to support compliance and enforcement and public health measures.
ArriveCAN first launched in April 2020 and is available as a mobile app on the Apple App and Google Play
stores or by signing in online atCanada.ca/ArriveCAN.
Developmentof the ArriveCAN app and sign in online platform
In February 2020, Canada began collecting mandatory information from travellers who had been in
specific geographical locations in the previous two weeks, such as Hubei province in China, Italy and
Iran. Travellers submitted this information via the Coronavirus Form.
The Coronavirus Form was modified to become the Traveller Contact Information Form to support the
first Mandatory Isolation Order in late March 2020. The form was made available digitally via a website
in March 2020.
The ArriveCAN app was first developed to digitize the paper Traveller Contact Information Form used at
Canadian POEs. Heavy reliance on the paper form led to a number of inefficiencies, including inaccurate
or incomplete submissions and lengthy digitization processing that led to delays in sharing the
information with the provinces and territories. The app and sign-in online platform reduced points of
contact at POEs, improved processing times at the border and reduced crowding, and allowed for faster
sharing of information with provinces and territories.
On April 30, 2020, ArriveCAN Phase I was launched which digitized the mandatory collection of
information occurring via the paper form and the website. ArriveCAN Phase I allowed travellers to enter
information in advance, but they could only submit at the border upon entering a token. No information
was collected from exempt travellers.
On July 20, 2020, the federal government released the full launch of ArriveCAN Phase II, including the
accessible sign-in online platform. The same information was collected in Phase II –the personal contact
and travel information, symptom self-assessment, and quarantine plan questionnaire.
A few functionalities to note:
- Phase II allowed travellers to submit their information 48 hours in advance of their arrival to
Canada (previously, travellers could only submit at the border upon entering a token).
- Starting June 30, 2020, CBSA asked exempt travellers for information. Exempt travellers were
encouraged to use ArriveCAN to reduce processing times at the border and to receive important public
health information.
- Phase II enabled travellers to use ArriveCAN to voluntarily check in to their place of quarantine
or isolation, and to provide symptom self-assessment throughout their 14 days of quarantine.
Mandatory Digital Submission: ArriveCAN Phase III
ArriveCAN stopped being mandatory as of October 1st, 2022.
Submission of traveller information using ArriveCAN was initially voluntary. However, on November 21,
2020, it became mandatory for air travellers to submit their information digitally in advance of arriving
in Canada (i.e., before boarding the aircraft to Canada). At the time, travellers entering Canada by air
accounted for approximately 20% of all travel. As of February 22, 2021, it became mandatory for
travellers entering via land to submit their information through ArriveCAN prior to arriving at the border
crossing. Travellers entering Canada by land accounted for approximately 78% of total travel.
Travellers were not denied boarding their aircraft for failing to comply with the digital requirements;
however, they faced potential enforcement actions upon entry ranging from a verbal warning to a
$5,000 fine.
Once in Canada, it was mandatory for non-exempt travellers from all modes (air, land, marine) to
provide information digitally, including daily symptom self-assessments, throughout their 14-day
quarantine, and confirm that they have reached their place of quarantine through ArriveCAN or the toll-
free number.
Although exempt travellers were mandated to provide contact information in advance if travelling by air
or land, they were exempt from post-border reporting as they were exempt from the mandatory
isolation order. Approximately 75% of travellers were exempt from the mandatory requirement to
quarantine, including travellers who entered Canada for the purpose of performing cross-border work,
medical support, essential services, or trade or transport.
During the period when the mandatory requirements were in effect, usage of ArriveCAN for air
travellers was consistently at or above 85% and above 80% for land travellers since January 2022.
Information provided through ArriveCAN was shared with provinces and territories and law
enforcement agencies for public health follow-up and to verify compliance with the Quarantine Act.
ArriveCAN was part of a broader suite of activities and tools supporting Canada’s evolving border
policies throughout COVID-19.
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore how digital tools can further support Canada’s
public health data needs.
