Created: 2024-10-15T15:00:21.284998
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_Mental_Health_and_Addictions_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(A)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/3721618f-6371-4613-87be-53d31cf9551b/resource/ec47f264-a49f-445a-905e-5a16af3d4e8b/download/supps-a-saks-eng.pdf
Package ID: 3721618f-6371-4613-87be-53d31cf9551b
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'budget', 'health']
Notes: Appearance of the Minister of Health Before HESA on the Supps A.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH
Appearance on Supplementary Estimates (A), 2024-25
Mini Package of Lines and Information
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
June 17, 2024
KEY LINES
1. Substance Use and Addictions Program – Overview of MySafe Society’s Prescribed Alternatives
Project 3
If Pressed on Conflicts of Interest
If Pressed on Diversion in Federally Funding Projects
If Pressed on Evidence
2. Safe Hospitals Act
If Pressed on Federal and Provincial Jurisdiction for Health Services
If Pressed on Impact of Stigma / Nature of Drug Use in Hospitals
If Pressed on Exposure to Controlled Substances (e.g., fentanyl, methamphetamine, etc.) in the
Workplace
If Pressed on BC Exemption Related to Personal Possession
If Pressed on Bill C-321 (An Act to amend the Criminal Code (assaults against persons who provide
health services and first responders))
If Pressed on Federal Actions
If Pressed on Federal Actions – Nurses
If Pressed on Federal Actions – Personal Support Workers (PSWs)
3. Fair Price Pharma
If Pressed on Importation of 15kg of Heroin in November 2021
If Pressed on Meetings with Fair Price Pharma 32
4. Import and Export of Controlled Substances
If Pressed on Importing Controlled Substances
If Pressed on Canada being a Recognized Exporter of Fentanyl
5. Precursors
If Pressed on Recent Actions Taken Against Fentanyl Precursors
If Pressed on Concerns Raised by the RCMP (that we haven’t yet scheduled all chemicals used to
manufacture illegal drugs)
6. Tracing Chemicals in Drugs Used in Prescribed Alternatives Programs
ADDITIONAL IF PRESSED SECTIONS
7. Supervised Consumption Services at Maison Benoît Labre in Montréal
8. Medical Uses for Heroin, Medical Uses for Cocaine, and Why Companies are Conducting
Activities with Controlled Substances
Medical Uses for Heroin
Medical Uses for Cocaine
Why Companies Licensed for Controlled Substances are Conducting Activities with Cocaine,
MDMA, Heroin (Diacetylmorphine), and Psilocybin
ADDITIONAL
9. 9-8-8
If Pressed on Funding
If Pressed on How Calls and Texts Are Routed
If Pressed on Privacy and Confidentiality
If Pressed on Police Services
If Pressed on Monitoring, Reporting, and Data
10. Suicide Prevention
If Pressed on the SOCI Report Recommendations Informing the Action Plan
If Pressed on Funding for the Action Plan
12. Supplementary Estimates (A) Financial Material
SUBSTANCE USE AND ADDICTIONS PROGRAM – OVERVIEW OF MYSAFE SOCIETY’S PRESCRIBED
ALTERNATIVES PROJECT
This Government is committed to supporting innovative projects to address the overdose crisis,
evaluating and learning from these projects, and making adjustments as needed.
The MySafe project had a 3-year funding agreement with Health Canada, which ended on March 31,
2024.
The Contribution Agreement for MySafe pilot project was not extended as the project did not
include wrap around services which emerging evidence is showing is an important component of
these projects.
MySafe model was also unable to incorporate new Health Canada funded project requirements for
take home doses and witnessed dosing, among other interventions, to mitigate the risk of diversion.
IF PRESSED ON CONFLICTS OF INTEREST
Program recipients cannot derive any direct benefit resulting from their funding agreement.
As part of their funding requirements, program recipients must adhere to all applicable governing
legislation and codes, including the Conflict of Interest Act.
Program funding must be used for expenditures that are directly related to the activities set out in
their agreement with Health Canada. Recipients may further distribute their contribution funding to
other entities only to conduct approved project activities.
Program recipients are required to report to the department, including regularly submitting
performance management and evaluation reports and providing financial audit statements.
IF PRESSED ON DIVERSION IN FEDERALLY FUNDED PROJECTS
Diversion of any controlled substance is illegal, including prescription drugs containing controlled
substances.
Health Canada has worked with federally-funded prescribed alternatives pilot projects to
strengthen their operational protocols to help reduce diversion risk.
Projects have implemented a number of protocols to help reduce diversion risk, including patient
screening, efforts to better match drugs to patient tolerance, risk-based protocols for assessing,
patient eligibly for take-home dosing, and patient monitoring.
Health Canada has measures in place to ensure that organizations remain in compliance with the
terms of their agreements, including all applicable laws. Those who do not comply risk termination
of their funding agreement.
Health Canada continues to support law enforcement actions to address illegal drug trafficking and
support community safety.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE
Prescribed alternatives projects are being studied by a number of researchers across Canada.
We are seeing some promising outcomes from prescribed alternatives programs, including reports
of reductions in hospitalizations, overdoses, illegal drug use, and criminal activity.
We recognize that there are differing views among experts.
We will continue to evaluate all available and emerging evidence, and listen and engage with
experts with various views, to learn from current experiences and inform this practice moving
forward.
SAFE HOSPITALS ACT
As part of their Constitutional responsibility for the delivery of health care services, provinces and
territories already have policies and protocols, such as anti-smoking policies, to protect the safety
of staff and patients.
Rather than creating unnecessary legislative barriers to scientific research in hospitals, provinces
and territories need to keep these policies up to date to meet the complex needs of patients who
use drugs while keeping staff safe.
This Government is committed to supporting provinces and territories in providing health care and
supports to people who use drugs, while also keeping everyone safe in their communities and
workplaces.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL AND PROVINCIAL JURISDICTION FOR HEALTH SERVICES
Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and the provinces and
territories. While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories
for health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of
these services falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction. This includes policies and protocols
to help keep health workers safe.
Hospitals already have policies and protocols in place to protect staff and patient safety. This
includes policies banning drug use, such as anti-smoking policies and protocols on how to support
patients with substance use disorders. It is essential that provinces and territories ensure these
policies are up to date and implemented appropriately.
Our Government supports Private Members Bill C-321 ((An Act to amend the Criminal Code
(assaults against persons who provide health services and first responders)), which seeks to
amend the criminal code to direct judges to consider as an aggravating factor at sentencing
whether the victim of the offence was a person who provides health services or is a first responder.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF STIGMA / NATURE OF DRUG USE IN HOSPITALS
Addiction is a complex health issue that cannot be discussed in black and white terms.
The evidence is clear that stigma can prevent people with substance use disorders, from accessing
or continuing to access the health services they need.
It is important that health services have policies and procedures in place to protect the health and
safety of all staff and clients while also acknowledging the chronic nature of addiction.
IF PRESSED ON EXPOSURE TO CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES (E.G., FENTANYL,
METHAMPHETAMINE, ETC.) IN THE WORKPLACE
Everyone deserves to feel safe in their place of work.
The risk of an overdose from inadvertent second hand exposure to smoke from drugs such as
cocaine, fentanyl, and methamphetamines is very low.
It is essential that provinces and territories ensure policies on illegal drugs, including exposure, are
up to date and implemented appropriately.
IF PRESSED ON BC EXEMPTION RELATED TO PERSONAL POSSESSION
This exemption is one tool in a comprehensive response to help remove barriers to accessing
health and social services.
We recognize the importance of law enforcement having the tools they need to address issues of
public safety, while continuing to take a public health approach to drug use.
That is why I granted BC’s recent request for amendments so that the exemption only applies in
private residences, health care clinics as designated by the province of BC, places where people
are lawfully sheltering, and overdose prevention and drug checking sites.
IF PRESSED ON Bill C-321 (AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (ASSAULTS AGAINST
PERSONS WHO PROVIDE HEALTH SERVICES AND FIRST RESPONDERS))
Health care workers have long faced difficult working conditions, including violence and threats of
violence in the workplace.
Our Government supports Private Members Bill C-321 ((An Act to amend the Criminal Code
(assaults against persons who provide health services and first responders)), which seeks to
amend the criminal code to direct judges to consider as an aggravating factor at sentencing
whether the victim of the offence was a person who provides health services or is a first responder.
This legislation will complement other federal actions to protect health care workers through
amendments to the Criminal Code. Our Government was proud to pass Bill C-3 (An Act to amend
the Criminal Code and the Canada Labour Code), which received Royal Assent in December 2021
and made it a criminal offense to intimidate health care workers in order to impede them in
performing their duties.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS
The safety of health workers is critical for our Government.
For example, our Government was proud to pass Bill C-3, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and
the Canada Labour Code, which received Royal Assent in December 2021, making it a criminal
offence to intimidate health care workers in order to impede them in performing their duties
We will continue to work with our partners in other jurisdictions to keep health care workplaces
safe.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS – NURSES
As Canada's largest group of regulated health professionals with more than 450,000 members,
nurses are critical to Canada's health care system. However, nurses are currently facing increased
workloads, high rates of burnout, stress, anxiety and depression, and, in some cases, abuse.
In March 2024, Health Canada launched the Nursing Retention Toolkit, which provides a framework
that can be utilized by employers and organizations to enhance the working conditions of nurses.
The toolkit centres on eight core themes.
The theme of organizational mental health and wellness focuses on increasing timely and fulsome
access to appropriate and effective preventative and acute health and wellness supports. This
theme brings awareness to zero-tolerance for behaviours that are not acceptable towards or within
the nursing community.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS – PERSONAL SUPPORT WORKERS (PSWs)
Canada is also taking action to improve working conditions for the approximately 380,000 Personal
Support Workers (PSWs) working in the health sector. PSWs are an unregulated workforce that
provide the majority of direct care for Canadian seniors and persons with disabilities.
Persistent issues within the PSW field include chronic understaffing, stress, burnout, and
challenging working conditions.
We are currently working with provinces and territories to improve recruitment and retention of
personal support workers through better wages and working conditions, supported by federal
funding of $1.7 billion over 5 years to provinces and territories.
FAIR PRICE PHARMA
Health Canada licenses companies to legally possess and conduct certain activities with
controlled substances in Canada for legitimate medical and research purposes only.
Companies also require a permit issued by Health Canada to be able to import or export a
controlled substance.
Fair Price Pharma does not currently hold a controlled substance licence from Health Canada or a
permit to import controlled substances, however they have applied for a licence.
Fair Price Pharma has not been authorized to import heroin or any other controlled substance.
IF PRESSED ON IMPORTATION OF 15KG OF HEROIN IN NOVEMBER 2021
Fair Price Pharma has not imported heroin or any other controlled substance.
In July 2021, Fair Price Pharma issued a message on Twitter stating that they were approved to
import inhalable diacetylmorphine (heroin).
Health Canada immediately reached out to the company and requested immediate retraction of
the misinformation.
Fair Price Pharma updated their statement.
Another company, which is licensed to conduct activities with controlled substances, imported
15kg of heroin in November 2021.
IF PRESSED ON MEETINGS WITH FAIR PRICE PHARMA
Health Canada officials met with Fair Price Pharma to discuss regulatory issues, such as the
licensing requirements for controlled substances, and hear about progress on their products.
Fair Price Pharma has requested funding from the federal government to complete construction of
their production facility.
Health Canada does not provide funding to pharmaceutical companies and has not entered into
any contracts with Fair Price Pharma.
IF PRESSED ON MEDICAL USE OF HEROIN
Health Canada recognizes the importance of access to approved medical treatments.
Heroin (diacetylmorphine) is an approved drug to manage severe opioid use disorder in adults who
have failed previous attempts at opioid agonist therapy.
The choice and administration of a particular product to a patient is a decision made by the
physician and falls under the practice of medicine, which is regulated by the provinces and
territories.
IMPORT AND EXPORT OF CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Health Canada licenses companies and research organizations to legally possess and conduct
certain activities with controlled substances in Canada for legitimate medical and research
purposes only.
For example, licensed companies import needed medications to support the delivery of health care
services in Canada.
Companies who hold a licence require a permit from Health Canada to be able to import and export
a controlled substance.
There are very strict rules in place for obtaining and maintaining a licence and import permit.
If a company does not follow these strict rules, Health Canada will not hesitate to take action,
which could include revoking their licence and/or permit.
IF PRESSED ON IMPORTING CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
Health Canada thoroughly reviews import permit applications to ensure that all the appropriate
policies and procedures are in place to maintain public health and public safety.
Health Canada will not hesitate to act if the strict requirements are not being followed, which may
include refusal, suspension or revoking the import permit.
Health Canada continues to monitor companies conducting activities with controlled substance
and will act swiftly if there is a risk to public health or public safety.
Health Canada does not share the names of the companies that imported substances for security
and confidential business reasons.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA BEING A RECOGNIZED EXPORTER OF FENTANYL
Fentanyl, fentanyl analogues and fentanyl precursors are controlled under the Controlled Drugs
and Substances Act.
Activities with these substances, including sale and exportation, are illegal, unless they are
authorized for medical, scientific or industrial purposes.
We are working closely with public safety and criminal justice partners in Canada and
internationally to:
help identify and disrupt the flow of illegal drugs and precursors across our borders;
identify and address money laundering of the proceeds of illegal drug trafficking; and
investigate and charge criminal actors suspected in the manufacturing and/or trafficking of illegal
drugs.
PRECURSORS
The Government of Canada is deeply concerned about the public health and public safety harms
associated with synthetic drugs like fentanyl and fentanyl analogues.
We are committed to taking action against the illegal production, diversion, trafficking, and related
crimes involving synthetic drugs.
In Canada, precursors are subject to strict regulatory requirements to minimize their risk of
diversion to the illegal market.
The Government of Canada will continue to proactively schedule novel substances, including
precursors, to disrupt the production and supply of illegal drugs by organized crime while also
enabling the legitimate uses of these substances in industry, research and medicine.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA BEING AN EXPORTER OF ILLEGAL FENTANYL
Fentanyl, fentanyl analogues and fentanyl precursors are controlled under the Controlled Drugs
and Substances Act.
Activities with these substances, including sale and exportation, are illegal, unless they are
authorized for medical, scientific or industrial purposes.
We are working closely with public safety and criminal justice partners in Canada and
internationally to:
help identify and disrupt the flow of illegal drugs and precursors across our borders;
identify and address money laundering of the proceeds of illegal drug trafficking; and
investigate and charge criminal actors suspected in the manufacturing and/or trafficking of illegal
drugs.
IF PRESSED ON RECENT ACTIONS TAKEN AGAINST FENTANYL PRECURSORS
Within the past year alone, regulatory changes were made to schedule two new groups of fentanyl
precursors under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
Canada participates in a number of international forums such as the Trilateral Fentanyl Committee
to strengthen the coordinated global response to the public health and public safety challenges
posed by synthetic drugs.
Canada also works in collaboration with partners and stakeholders to ensure that controlled
substances and precursor chemicals are handled effectively and remain in legal distribution
channels.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS RAISED BY THE RCMP (THAT WE HAVEN’T YET SCHEDULED ALL
CHEMICALS USED TO MANUFACTURE ILLEGAL DRUGS)
Canada is a world leader in the scheduling of precursor chemicals.
To prevent illegal drug producers from deliberately chemically engineering novel substances to
circumvent domestic controls, the Government of Canada takes a proactive approach in
scheduling chemically related substances.
The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with domestic and international partners,
including law enforcement agencies, to take action against the illegal use of precursors to
manufacture synthetic drugs like fentanyl.
TRACING CHEMICALS IN DRUGS USED IN PRESCRIBED ALTERNATIVES PROGRAMS
We take diversion of drugs seriously. Officials are analyzing the feasibility of pharmaceutical
traceability.
It is not yet clear how tracing could be implemented effectively, or how it would help prevent
diversion of substances used as prescribed alternatives.
Health Canada is actively working with federally-funded prescribed alternatives pilot projects to
strengthen their protocols to help reduce diversion risk.
We will continue to monitor these projects and take further action if necessary to support public
health and community safety.
My focus remains on addressing the increasingly toxic and highly unpredictable illegal drug supply,
where highly toxic synthetic opioids like fentanyl are driving deaths and harms.
ADDITIONAL IF PRESSED SECTIONS
SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SERVICES AT MAISON BENOÎT LABRE IN MONTRÉAL
All provinces and territories were granted an exemption to establish overdose prevention sites and
determine where they are located.
Maison Benoît Labre is currently operating under the authority of the province.
The Minister of Health of Quebec is responsible for ensuring that sites they authorize maintain
engagement with impacted community members, including school boards.
When these essential medical services are properly funded, supervised consumption sites can
operate very well, supporting the public health and safety of people who use drugs and the
surrounding community.
In the 2023 budget, the Government increased funding to provinces and territories by $200 billion
over 10 years, including $25 billion for shared health priorities, including mental health and
addiction services.
MEDICAL USES FOR HEROIN, MEDICAL USES FOR COCAINE, AND WHY COMPANIES ARE
CONDUCTIONG ACTIVITIES WITH CONTROLLED ACTIVITIES WITH CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES
MEDICAL USE OF HEROIN
Health Canada recognizes the importance of access to approved medical treatments.
Prescription heroin (diacetylmorphine) is an approved drug for treating severe opioid use disorder
under medical supervision in adults who have failed previous attempts at opioid agonist therapy.
There has been significant research and evaluation of the use of prescription heroin in Canada and
internationally, where it has been used to treat severe opioid use disorder with recognized success.
The choice and administration of a particular product to a patient is a decision made by the
physician and falls under the practice of medicine, which is regulated by the provinces and
territories.
MEDICAL USES FOR COCAINE
Health products containing cocaine were previously approved in Canada for medical and dental
procedures, however, these drugs have been discontinued in Canada in 2017.
Although there are no marketed drugs containing cocaine in Canada, compounding pharmacies
and hospitals who hold a licence to conduct activities with cocaine, may be using it for medical
purposes.
The choice and administration of a particular product to a patient is a decision made by the
physician and falls under the practice of medicine, which is regulated by the provinces and
territories.
IF PRESSED ON WHY COMPANIES LICENSED FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ARE CONDUCTING
ACTIVITIES WITH COCAINE, MDMA, HEROIN (DIACETYLMORPHINE), AND PSILOCYBIN
Companies licensed for controlled substances in Canada are authorized to conduct specific
activities for legitimate medical and research purposes only, for example, to research the health
impacts of a new drug in development. Heroin is an approved drug to manage severe opioid use
disorder in adults who have failed previous attempts at opioid agonist therapy.
Psilocybin and MDMA are being studied through clinical trials for their potential therapeutic uses,
such as in psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
Compounding pharmacies and hospitals who can conduct activities with cocaine, may be using it
for legitimate medical purposes, such as a numbing agent during nasal surgery.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ACTIONS HEATH CANADA HAS TAKEN TO CLARIFY WHAT ACTIVITIES
COMPANIES LICENSED FOR CONTROLLED SUBSTANCES ARE AUTHORIZED TO CONDUCT
Health Canada has issued regulatory letters to various companies regarding the misinformation
they published.
Health Canada issued a bulletin on March 4, 2023, to ALL companies licensed for controlled
substances across the country clarifying their responsibilities and authorities under their licence.
Health Canada continues to monitor companies conducting activities with controlled substance
and will act swiftly if there is a risk to public health or public safety.
9-8-8
The Government of Canada is investing 177 million over 3 years to launch and implement 9-8-8, a
three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
The Suicide Crisis Helpline is available to everyone in Canada via voice and text, 24/7, 365 days a
year, in both English and French.
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health is leading the initiative and has recruited 39 provincial
and local crisis and distress lines to the 9-8-8 network.
In April 2024, 9-8-8 received over 800 phone calls and 400 texts per day.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING
The Government of Canada is investing $177 million over 3 years to support 9-8-8. This includes:
$158.4 million over 3 years from Budget 2023 to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8.
Of this investment, the Public Health Agency of Canada is providing $156 million over three years to
the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to support the implementation and operation of
9-8-8.
The remaining $2.4 million over three years is allocated to PHAC to cover costs related to the
oversight, administration, reporting, and evaluation activities associated with 9-8-8.
$21.4 million towards CAMH to bolster the capacity of distress centres that were part of the Talk
Suicide Canada network to prepare for 9-8-8 implementation.
This funding was part of the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, which announced $50 million to
support distress centres during and beyond the COVID-19 pandemic.
If Pressed on How Calls and Texts Are Routed
Calls and texts to the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline are routed based on area codes to 9-8-8
partner crisis and distress lines. Calls and texts will be answered as close to home as possible in
the official language selected.
The intention with 9-8-8 is to minimize disruption by leveraging existing service delivery models,
where possible.
Some specialized lines, like Kids Help Phone and Hope For Wellness, are part of the 9-8-8 network
and can offer tailored support to youth and First Nations, Inuit and Métis.
If Pressed on Privacy and Confidentiality
People calling or texting 9-8-8 are not required to share personal information with responders.
While phone numbers may be visible to responders, location information is not tracked through 9-
8-8. All responders are required to sign confidentiality agreements.
Calls and texts may be monitored or recorded for quality assurance purposes and for the safety of
both the caller or texter, and the 9-8-8 responder.
Only aggregated, non-identifiable, data will be shared with the Government of Canada and third-
parties for monitoring and reporting purposes.
If Pressed on Police Services
If a caller is at imminent risk of seriously harming oneself or others, there is an established protocol
for transferring a 9-8-8 call to emergency services.
Responders are trained to de-escalate a crisis and the majority of calls and texts placed to 9-8-8
will not require an emergency intervention. For example, only 3% to 4% of calls placed to the 9-8-8:
Suicide Crisis Helpline required emergency intervention.
CAMH continues to engage with emergency services and law enforcement stakeholders on
improvements to crisis response coordination and protocols.
If Pressed on Monitoring, Reporting, and Data
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health will regularly share key metrics with the Public Health
Agency of Canada as part of their reporting requirements, including service volumes and wait
times.
Thousands of Canadians have reached out to 9-8-8 for support since it launched. In April 2024, wait
times averaged 19 seconds for phone calls and approximately 1 ½ minutes for texts.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
Suicide is a significant public health issue that can affect people of all ages and backgrounds
across the country.
Building on momentum of the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline, on May 31, 2024, the Government of
Canada released its first National Suicide Prevention Action Plan.
The Action Plan is three-year, evergreen plan that aims to strengthen Canada’s collective response
to suicide through increased, ongoing collaboration with partners including provinces and
territories, Indigenous partners and suicide prevention stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE SOCI REPORT RECOMMENDATIONS INFORMING THE ACTION PLAN
The Government of Canada welcomes the findings of the Senate Committee on Social Affairs,
Science and Technology (SOCI), and its recommendations on how to improve suicide prevention
efforts in Canada. The SOCI recommendations have informed the areas for action in the National
Suicide Prevention Action Plan including the need for concrete, measurable actions.
We know that certain populations and communities are disproportionality represented in suicide
rates and that tailored, evidence-based approaches are needed.
The Action Plan acknowledges the additional challenges faced by the specific populations such as
men and boys, Indigenous People, and members of the 2SLGBTQI+ community.
We are committed to collaboration and ongoing engagement with all partners, including Indigenous
partners, to improve and advance shared suicide prevention and life promotion efforts that will
have the greatest impact for all people and communities in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR THE ACTION PLAN
The Action Plan outlines current and planned activities drawing from existing resources.
While there is no new funding tied to the implementation of the Action Plan, it builds on and
leverages important work already taking place, including the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline.
More recently, Budget 2024 announced $500 million over five years for the creation of a new Youth
Mental Health Fund to help young people in Canada access the mental health care they need and
$7.5 million over three years to support Kids Help Phone in providing mental health, counselling
and crisis support to young people in Canada.
These investments will help improve mental health particularly among youth, which will in turn,
improve suicide prevention.
Supplementary Estimates (A) Financial Material
Health Canada Overview
(In dollars)
Voted
Previous Estimates to Date
8,398,015,720
Supplementary Estimates (A)
Transfers
(214,376)
Adjustments
342,727,957
Proposed Authorities to Date
8,740,529,301
% Change in Proposed Authorities Due to these estimates
4.08%
% Change in Proposed Authorities to Date This Year Over Last Year
33.45%
(In dollars)
Statutory
Previous Estimates to Date
280,586,804
Supplementary Estimates (A)
Transfers
-
Adjustments
411,351
Proposed Authorities to Date
280,998,155
% Change in Proposed Authorities Due to these estimates
0.15%
% Change in Proposed Authorities to Date This Year Over Last Year
55.08%
(In dollars)
Total Budgetary
Previous Estimates to Date
8,678,602,524
Supplementary Estimates (A)
Transfers
(214,376)
Adjustments
343,139,308
Proposed Authorities to Date
9,021,527,456
% Change in Proposed Authorities Due to these estimates
3.95%
% Change in Proposed Authorities to Date This Year Over Last Year
34.03%
Health Canada has proposed a net increase of $342.9M in the 2024-25 Supplementary Estimates
(A), bringing its proposed authorities to date to $9,021.5M. These Supplementary Estimates
include:
Voted Appropriations of $342.5M:
New Funding [$342.7M]
$325M – Funding to improve Working Conditions for Personal Support Workers (Budget 2023).
$17.7M – Funding to establish the Canadian Drug Agency
Transfers from Health Canada [-$0.2M]
-$0.2M – To the Department of Indigenous Services for the post-negotiations work related to the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency
Statutory Appropriations of $0.4M
$0.4M – EBP amount related to approved Treasury Board submission: Funding to establish the
Canadian Drug Agency
Health Canada’s 2024-25 Supplementary Estimates (A)
Health Canada
Improve Working Conditions for Personal Support Workers (B2023)
2024-25: $325M
Total: HC will receive $1,709.0M over five years (2024-25 to 2028-29)
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
As announced in Budget 2023, this funding will be provided to provincial and territorial
governments to support one or more projects in each jurisdiction.
Provinces and territories will use the funds to improve working conditions for personal support
workers (PSWs), including increasing hourly wages.
To Improve and address a severe shortage of PSWs concerning the ongoing recruitment and
retention challenges in key sectors including long-term care and home care. Wage increases are
expected to benefit more than 45,000 Canadians working as PSWs, and additional working
condition improvements could benefit up to 380,000 PSWs.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
To finalize bilateral agreements with provinces and territories (PTs), for the purpose of supporting
hourly wage increases for personal support workers (PSWs) and related professions and improving
other working conditions.
Funding would be included in the Aging with Dignity agreements in 2024-25 via amendment
following additional negotiations, with funding staring in fiscal year 2024-25.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Improving PSW working conditions in order to strengthen the recruitment and retention of the PSW
workforce.
To increase workforce capacity in order to lead positive changes in health care delivery, resulting in
improved health outcomes for Canadians.
Voted
325,000,000
Statutory
N/A
Establishing the Canadian Drug Agency (Bill C-64)
2024-25: $18.1M
Total: HC will receive $89M over five years (2024-25 to 2028-29) and $16M per year ongoing
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
To advance the four functions of appropriate prescribing and use of medicines, drug data and
analytics, improved coordination of Canada’s pharmaceutical management system, and
administrative supports for drug price negotiations.
Funds will also support work on a formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan.
The CDA will be built from the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), in
partnership with provinces, territories (PTs) and key stakeholders.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
To provide centralized federal leadership to advance pharmacare and bring together jurisdictions
and key players to transform the Canadian pharmaceuticals landscape.
Advance Canadian Drug Agency functions for the a) appropriate prescribing and use of prescription
drugs and b) data analytics
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
To improve health outcomes and ensure patients are prescribed the safest and most effective
treatments for their condition.
Priorities are aligned with broader F/P/T digital health data initiatives including, the Working
Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians plan and the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases
Voted
17,727,957
Statutory
411,351
From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services for the post-negotiations
work related to the establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency
2024-25: -$0.2M
Total: HC will transfer to ISC $0.6M over three years (2024-25 to 2026-27)
SPB
Key Messages (2-3 bullets max)
To transfer funds to Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) to support initial work on administrative
supports for drug price negotiations.
Purpose /Objectives (2-3 bullets max)
To continue advancing a collaborative pilot project over the next three years, which involves
developing supports for public drug plans, implementing negotiated drug price agreements and
collect associated rebates for a targeted P/T.
Expected Results (2-3 bullets max)
Determination whether there is a broader interest among other P/Ts to receive similar support and
work with HC to identify resourcing options, such as cost recovery.
Voted
(214,376)
Statutory
N/A
