Created: 2023-03-30T16:08:11.378461
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_health_Financial_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(B)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/40cc5ffe-766d-4528-bc30-0c837e29d868/resource/990a271f-81c3-4c7a-a782-880d7820df28/download/supp-b-appearance-financial-binder-disclosure-en.pdf
Package ID: 40cc5ffe-766d-4528-bc30-0c837e29d868
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Health', 'House committee', 'Standing committee on health', 'budget']
Notes: Financial binder for the Minister of Health's appearance before the standing committee on health on November 29, 2022 concerning the supplementary estimates B. 
The briefing binder and the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction's binder are available as separate resources

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Supplementary Estimates (B)
Minister Duclos and Minister Bennett
Tuesday, November 29, 2022
FINANCIALS
FINANCIAL NOTES
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES B
NOVEMBER 29, 2022
FINANCIAL OVERVIEWS
1. Health Canada
2. Public Health Agency ofCanada
3. Canadian Food Inspection Agency
4. Canadian Institutes of Health Research
FUNDING CROSSWALK
5. Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates B Funding Crosswalk
a. Health Canada
b. Public Health Agency of Canada
c. Canadian Food Inspection Agency
d. Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Health Canada Overview
(In dollars)
Previous estimates to date:
- Voted: 3,803,963,999
- Statutory: 163,872,352
- Total budgetary: 3,967,836,351
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers
o Voted: (19,423,019)
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: (19,423,019)
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 170,395,528
o Statutory: 1,789,938,360
o Total budgetary: 1,960,333,888
Proposed authorities to date:-
- Voted: 3,954,936,508
- Statutory: 1,953,810,712
- Total budgetary: 5,908,747,220
% changein proposed authorities due to these estimates
- Voted: 4,0%
- Statutory: 1,092,3%
- Total budgetary: 48,9%
% change in proposed authorities to date this year over last year
- Voted: (19,6)%
- Statutory: 948,5%
- Total budgetary: 15,8%
Health Canada hasproposed a net increase of $1,940.9M in the 2022-23 Supplementary
Estimates (B), bringing its proposed authorities to date to $5,908.7M. These Supplementary
Estimates include:
Voted Appropriations of $151M:
New Funding [$95.2M]
• $69.4M–Funding to improve mental health supports and services (Budget 2022);
• $12.3M–Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022);
• $10.8M–Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021);
• $1.7M–Funding for advancing acircular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022);
and,
• $0.9M–Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022).
Reprofiled Funding [$75.2M]
• $50.0M–Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic (Budget 2022);
• $7.7M–Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review
process;
• $5.0M–Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve);
• $4.1M–Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives;
• $3.8M–Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information
and services;
• $3.7M–Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program;
• $0.6M–Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe
access to medical assistance in dying;and,
• $0.3M–Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care.
Transfers [-$19.4M]
Transfers to Health Canada (+$1.2M)
• $552.5K–From the Department of Indigenous Services to provide microbiological and
physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities;
• $406.7K–From the Public Health Agency of Canada for Enterprise Service Model
reallocation; and,
• $265.7K–From the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety
and Security Program.
Transfers from Health Canada (-$20.6M)
• -$132.6K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint Expert Committee
on Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive;
• -$200.0K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for
Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) Health Committee;
• -$200.0K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control;
• -$200.5K–to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the pilot water
monitoring program for pesticides;
• -$245.5K–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance policies that
promote science and evidence-based decision making;
• -$332.5K–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate decriminalization
of personal possession of illicit substances;
• -$741.9K–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID initiative;
• -$1.3M–to the Public Health Agency of Canada to implement innovative COVID-19
testing for other communicable diseases;
• -$5.0M–to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for a COVID-19 outpatient
therapeutic study; and,
• -$12.3M–to the Department of Indigenous Services Canada for the First Nations
Information Governance Centre.
StatutoryAppropriations of $1.8B
• $1,789.9M–Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuant to An Act respecting certain
measures related to COVID-19; and,
• $0.8M–EBP amounts related to approved Treasury Board submissions:
o $286.3K–Funding to improve mental health supports and services;
o $253.4K–Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada;
o $193.8K–Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan; and,
o $81.6K–Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use.
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
Public Health Agency of Canada
Authorities to date:
- Voted: 10,184,285,266
- Statutory: 79,345,305
- Total budgetary:10,263,630,571
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers:
o Voted: (3,838,866)
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: (3,838,866)
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 1,362,767,516
o Statutory: 1,416,761
o Total budgetary: 1,364,184,277
- Total:
o Voted: 1,358,928,650
o Statutory: 1,416,761
o Totalbudgetary: 1,360,345,411
Proposed authorities to date:
- Voted: 11,543,213,916
- Statutory: 80,726,066
- Total budgetary: 11,623,975,982
The Public Health Agency of Canada is seeking an increase of $1.36 billion to its reference levels:
New Funding ($117.7M):
• To bolster current inventories of medical countermeasures and to enhance diagnostic
and surveillance activities of monkeypox in Canada ($102.7M);
• Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation ($8.0M);
• Special Immigration Measures for Ukrainian Nationals ($4.9M);
• Resettlement commitment for the evacuation and immigration of Afghan nationals to
Canada ($1.2M);
• Government advertising programs ($500K); and
• Reinvestment of royalties from intellectual property ($338K).
Reprofiles from 2021-22($1.245B):
• Medical research and vaccine developments (COVID-19) ($696.2M);
• Border and travel measures and isolation sites (COVID-19) ($400.0M);
• Logistics for vaccine distribution-medical countermeasures (COVID-19) ($61.3M);
• Stabilize core capacities for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile ($50.0M);
• Innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the pandemic
(COVID-19) ($20.4M);
• Kids Help Phone and the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (COVID-19)($13.0M);
• Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework ($2.4M);
• Improve mental health supports and services (COVID-19) ($1.0M);
• Creation of a national autism strategy ($690K); and
• Prevent diabetes and improve treatments ($158.3K).
Transfersto/from Other Government Departments (-$3.8M):
• Transfer from the Department of Health to implement innovative COVID-19 testing for
other communicable diseases ($1.3M);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the CanCOVID initiative ($742K);
• Transfer from the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and
Security Program ($561K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for economic Co-
operation and Development (OECD) Health Committee ($200K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support World Health Organization
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control ($200K);
• Transfer from Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the delivery of the
international AIDS Conference ($200K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Joint Expert Committee on Food
Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive ($133K);
• Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariat to support the Capacity Accelerator Project(-
$20K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support European Union Joint
Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on
neurodegenerative diseases (-$33K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support a health system impact
fellowship (-$47K);
• Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Canadian Aboriginal
AIDS Network (CAAN) with their Indigenous knowledge facilitation activity for AIDS2022 (-$50K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research on priorities
outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer report(-99.5K);
• Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Pan-Canadian Health
Inequalities Reporting Initiative-Mental Wellness among First Nations Peoples living on reserve
(-$200K);
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support policy research for health
system transformation (-$300K);
• Transfer to the Department of Healthfor the Enterprise Service Model reallocation (-
$406K);
• Transfer to the Canada Border Services Agency for data integration on border health
surveillance (-$1.1M);
• Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to
supportIndigenous early learning and child care (-$1.9M); and
• Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support pediatric outcome
improvement through coordination of research networks (-$3.0M).
Vote Transfers
Internal Transfers (zero impact on reference levels):
• From operating to contributions for HIV self tests, monkeypox and myocarditis
($11.7M);
• From operating to grants for the Immunization Partnership Fund ($3.0M); and
• From operating to grants for the World Health Organization’s handbookon health
inequality monitoring ($180K).
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Overview
Supplementary estimates (B)
- Transfers
o Voted: 16,353
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: 16,353
- Adjustments:
o Voted: 16,128,427
o Statutory: 3,372,015
o Total budgetary: 19,500,442
- Total:
o Voted: 16,114,780
o Statutory: 3,372,015
o Total budgetary: 19,516,795
% change in proposed authorities due to supplementary estimates (B)
- Voted: 2.2%
- Statutory: 2.2%
- Total budgetary: 2.2%
% changein proposed authorities to date this year over last year
- Voted: 6.1%
- Statutory: (0.2%)
- Total budgetary: 5.0%
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has proposed a net increase of $19.5M in the 2022-23
Supplementary Estimates (B) based on:
Voted Appropriations of $16.1M:
Adjustments–increase of $16.1M
• $16.1M–Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of
Canada’s food safety system (COVID-19)
Transfers–net increase of $16.4K
Transfers to Canadian Food Inspection Agency
• $58K-From the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and
Security Program
Transfers from Canadian Food Inspection Agency
• ($16.6K)-To the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to provide
support to departmental staff located at missions abroad
• ($25K)-To the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to cost share the Market
Access Support System
Statutory Appropriations of $3.4M:
Employee Benefit Plan adjustments related to increased Supplementary Estimates (B) salary
funding for the following:
• $3.4M– Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of
Canada’s food safety system (COVID-19)
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
ADJUSTMENTS TO CIHR’S AVAILABLE AUTHORITIES (in $ millions)
Vote 1 operating expenditures:
- Authorities to date: 68
- Supplementary estimates (B): 5.3
- Proposed authorities to date: 73.3
Vote 5 Grants
- Authorities to date: 1,169.9
- Supplementary estimates (B): 99,4
- Proposed authorities to date: 1,269.3
Subtotal:
- Authorities to date: 1,237.9
- Supplementary estimates (B): 104.7
- Proposed authorities do date: 1,342.6
Statutory items
- Authorities to date: 7.7
- Supplementary estimates (B): 1.4
- Proposed authorities to date: 9.1
Total:
- Authorities to date: 1,245.6
- Supplementary estimates (B): 106.1
- Proposed authorities to date: 1,351.7
As a result of Supplementary Estimates (B), CIHR’s overall available and statutory authorities for
2022-23 will increase by approximately $106.1 million to a total of $1,351.7 million.
Adjustments from Treasury Board Submissions -Increase of $98.7 million
• $84.7 million for the Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021)
• $10.2 million for the response to monkeypox outbreaks in Canada (horizontal item)
• $1.3 million to support the study of long-term health impacts of COVID-19 (Budget
2022)
• $1.2 million tosupport Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022)
(horizontal item)
• $1.1 million to support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative to advance
research in high-priority areas of women’s health
• $0.2 million for research security and the Research Support Fund (Budget 2022)
(horizontal item)
• Transfers from Other Departments and Agencies–Increase of $9.6 million
o $5.0 million from the Department of Health (HC) for a COVID-19 outpatient therapeutic
study
o $3.0 million from the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to support pediatric
outcome improvement through coordination of research networks
o $0.5 million from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council to support the
Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative
o $0.3 million from HC to evaluate decriminalization of personal possession of illicit
substances
o $0.3 million from PHAC to support policy research for health system transformation
o $0.2 million from HC to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based
decision making
o $0.1 million from the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Healthy Youth
Initiative
o $0.1 million from PHAC to support research on priorities outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief
Public Health Officer report
o $0.05 million from PHAC to support a health system impact fellowship
o $0.03 million from PHAC to support European Union Joint Programme-
Neurodegerative Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
Transfers to Other Departments and Agencies–Decrease of $3.7 million
• $0.1 million to the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) to support the
mobilizing principles for equitable global health research
• $0.2 million to PHAC to support the delivery of the international AIDSConference
• $0.2 million to IDRC to support Phase II of the Joint Canada-Israel Health Research
Program
• $1.1 million to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council to explore the
development of a common grants management solution
• $2.1 million to IDRC to support women’s health and economic well-being for a post-
COVID 19 recovery
Internal Transfer between CIHR's Transfer Payment Programs–Nil Financial Impact
• Internal reallocation of resources from the Grants for research projects and personnel
support ($904,208) to the Institute support grants.
Statutory Authorities –Increase of $1.4 million
• $1.4 million for contributions to employee benefit plans related to New Voted
Appropriations, including $1.1 million for the Clinical Trials Fund
HEALTH CANADA FUNDING CROSSWALK
Contents
Funding to improve mental health supports and services
Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic
Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022)
Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021)
Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve)
Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives
Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022)
Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022)
Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to
medical assistance in dying
Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuant to An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-
19
From the Department of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide
microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health for Enterprise Service
Model reallocation
From the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the Canadian
Safety and Security Program
From the Department of Health to thePublic Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint
Expert Committee on Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food
additive
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Health Committee
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the World
Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
From the Department of Health to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the
pilot water monitoring program for pesticides
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance
policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate
decriminalization of personal possession of Illicit substances
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID
initiative
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
implementation of innovative COVID-19 testing approaches for other communicable diseases
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research on a COVID-19
Outpatient Therapeutic Study
From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the First
Nations Information Governance Centre
Health Canada’s 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
Funding to improve mental health supports and services
(Budget 2022)
Total: $69,680,465
SPB
- Key messages:
o Budget 2022 provided $140M over two years for the extension of the Wellness
Together Canada (WTC) portal until March 2024 so it can continue to provide
Canadians with free access 24/7 to services and supports for mild to moderate
mental health and substance use issues.
o Since the WTC portal was launched in April 2020, almost 3 million people across
Canada have accessed free mental health and substance use supports and
services through the portal. The portal offers immediate access to a variety of
supports for different levels of need, including self-guided resources, peer
support programs, and confidential counselling sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals.
o Impactdata collected in 2021 and 2022 show that WTC users indicate a positive
change on all three self-assessment scales–mood, well-being and functioning–
from the time they first engage with the portal to after using any resource or
accessing support.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objective is to support Canadians’ wellbeing through the continued
provision of mental health and substance use supports and services through the
WTC portal.
o The portal provides an inclusive experience to all individuals in Canada and
Canadians abroad, tailored to meet the needs of varying age groups and diverse
populations.
- Expected results:
o Immediate expected results include:
o Canadians have increased awareness of the WTC portal
o Intermediate expected results include:
o WTC clients use services available on the portal (e.g., self-guided courses,
telephone counselling services)
o Ultimate expected results include:
o WTC clients are satisfied with the services available on the portal
o WTC has a positive impact on the mental health of Canadians
- Voted:
o 69,394,150
- Statutory:
o 286,315
Funding for the continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic
(Budget 2022)
Total: $50,000,000
CFOB
- Key messages:
o To reprofile $50.0M from2021-22 to 2022-23 in support of Health Canada’s
continued response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Given the potential for resurgences based on significant regional variability in
vaccination rates and in provincial/territorial policy approaches, Health Canada
is extending funding and maintaining critical staffing levels.
o To support Health Canada’s Regulatory Response and to ensure Canadians and
the health care system have timely, uninterrupted access to safe and effective
health products to combat COVID-19 as the virus continues to evolve.
- Expected results:
o This initiative would support regulatory review and approval of new products to
fight the pandemic, thereby addressing unmet health care needs.
o This initiativealso supports the development of innovative ways to inform
Canadians on how they can stay safe, provide regular updates on regulatory
approvals for tests and treatments, and keep Canadians informed on the
evolving conditions of the pandemic.
- Voted: 50,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding for addressing the opioid crisis and substance use (Budget 2022)
Total: $12,412,305
CSCB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis has become one
of the most significant public health crises in a generation.
o This $12.4 million is part of Budget 2022 that announced an additional $100
million for the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) to support harm
reduction, treatment and prevention initiatives at the community level.
o The Government of Canada remainsfully committed to addressing the overdose
crisis and working with partners to save lives. Since 2017, the federal
government has taken significant actions and made commitments of over
$815M to address the overdose crisis.
o This includes nearly $350 million in funding for innovative community-led SUAP
projects to help address the overdose crisis and broader substance use.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides
contribution funding for a wide range of evidence-informed and innovative
substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across
Canada.
o These initiatives target a range of controlled drugs and substances, including
opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
- Expected results:
o Projects funded through SUAP contribute to individual capacity and
organizational, system and community level program, policy and practice
change by: preventing and reducing harms related to substance use; facilitating
treatment and related system enhancements; and, improving awareness,
knowledge, skills and competencies of targeted stakeholders and Canadians.
o SUAP funded projects are expected in the short-term to increase access to
information on substance use and availability of harm reduction services, and in
the longer-term improve knowledge and skills and positive behavior outcomes.
Ultimately, SUAP projects contribute to reduced negative health impacts
experienced by people who use drugs and substances.
- Voted: 12,330,658
- Statutory: 81,647
Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites (Budget 2021)
Total: $10,817,000
SPB
- Key messages:
o Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the
security of Canada’s supply of plasma-derived products (PDPs).
o Greater domestic collection of plasma provides better security of PDP supply for
patients with life-threatening and other medical conditions, especially where
PDPs are the only treatment option available.
o Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with the national blood and
plasma operator is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area
for the health and safety of Canadians.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Budget 2021 provided $20 million, which allows Canadian Blood Services (CBS)
to construct and start-up six new dedicated plasma collection sites across
Canada (except Quebec) to achieve a greater domestic supply.
o Funding supports construction and fit-up of sites, purchasing of necessary
equipment, staff training (but not staff salary) andpublic outreach to secure
donors.
o Provinces and territories are responsible for ongoing operational costs of these
sites through their agreements with CBS.
- Expected results:
o Funding will allow three plasma collection sites to be open to public plasma
donations by the end of 2022-23, and three more will be opened in 2023-24.
o These sites are expected to help raise Canadian domestic sufficiency (outside
Quebec) from 15% in 2021-22 to 22% in 2027-28, when all CBS plasma collection
sites are expected to beworking at full capacity.
o This increase in plasma sufficiency equates approximately to an additional 150
000 litres of plasma collected annually.
- Voted: 10,817,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
Total: $7,653,025
PMRA
- Key messages:
o to 2022-23 needed to support the advancement of transformation activities
outlined in the Treasury Board (TB) Submission "Strengthening the Capacity and
Transparency of the Pesticide Review Process".
o It will enable the Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) to complete
necessary activities and deliverables in 2022-23 to strengthen oversight on
pesticides including the availability of independent data to further support
pesticide review decisions and the transparency of decision-making.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The funding reprofile allows PMRA to double its efforts advancing work to
support transformation beyond what was originally conceived (e.g. stakeholder
engagement, long-term funding strategy, risk based prioritization framework,
and IT Modernization)
o PMRA is also in a position to now bring in 10 FTEs earlier than anticipated to
carryout implementation of a pilot program on business process improvements
- Expected results:
o Development and implementation of a comprehensive stakeholder engagement
strategy that is critical to inform the implementation of various proposed
measures under the Transformation agenda including potential amendments to
the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA), proposed water monitoring framework,
and expanded pesticide use.
o Development of a risk-based workload prioritization model to allocate resources
based on the classification of pesticide risk
o Digital Modernization–new IM/IT investments to enable transformation of
scientific and regulatoryprocesses.
- Voted: 7,653,025
- Statutory:-
Funding for medical research (Critical Drug Reserve)
Total: $5,000,000
ROEB
- Key messages:
o This funding supported the extension of the Critical Drug Reserve (CDR) for one
year into 2022-23 through aReprofile.
o The CDR was established with Provinces and Territories (PTs) to bolster
collective pandemic preparedness in Canada and was a safety net of twelve
drugs used in the treatment of COVID-19.
o The CDR was scheduled to sunset on March 31, 2022. Giventhe fourth and fifth
waves of COVID-19, the unknown impacts of the Omicron variant, and the need
for additional time for PTs to absorb drugs into their health care systems, it was
extended to June 30, 2022.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The $5M extension supporteda small number of FTEs (12), to potentially
purchase new drugs or replenish existing drugs given the uncertainty of the
pandemic, cover the costs of contract extensions with CDR vendors, and support
PSPC in the operations of the CDR Single Window Order Desk.
o The twelve FTEs were responsible for managing the CDR governance, PT
relations, overseeing orders and inventory levels, providing technical authority
for contracts, managing vendor issues and staffing the PSPC Single Window
Order Desk.
- Expected results:
o Successfully completed divestment (ordering, shipping and invoicing) of all
drugs in the Critical Drug Reserve from the vendors to provinces and territories.
o Continued to support public health measures related to Covid-19 to bolster
pandemic preparedness.
o Completed lessons learned report and CDR playbook to better position the
Government of Canada for future planning during public health emergencies or
as a mitigation measure within drug shortages management.
- Voted: 5,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding for theimplementation of greening initiatives
Total: $4,100,000
CSB/CFOB
- Key messages:
o To implement a project to reduce the department’s environmental footprint in
support of the Greening Government Strategy.
o The initiative will reduce HC’s custodial footprint and environmental impacts by
reducing the department’s overall green house gas emissions.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Objective to utilize funding to implement the divestiture of the Environment
Health Centre (EHC) building in support of the Greening Government Strategy
(GGS) and reduce the department’s environmental footprint.
- Expected results:
o Will contribute to the Government of Canada’s commitment to reduce its
environmental footprint by 2030 and reduce the department’s green house gas
emissions
- Voted: 4,100,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
Total: $3,844,508
SPB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada firmly believes that all people in Canada should
have access to a full suite ofsexual and reproductive health care services–
including abortion–that are safe and stigma-free.
o Many longstanding factors, including stigma and discrimination, lack of
specialized training in meeting the needs of some populations, travel time and
costs,and limitations in availability of culturally safe and relevant health
services, result in reduced access to quality sexual and reproductive health care.
This has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, which has worsened
existing gaps in sexual and reproductive health care, stretching previously
limited resources and affecting services across Canada.
o The Government of Canada supports projects that improve the availability and
accessibility of sexual and reproductive health services for all people in Canada,
while also recognizing and respecting the mandates and jurisdictions of its
provincial and territorial partners.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to
improve access to sexual andreproductive health care support, information,
and services for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
o Of this $45 million commitment, $24.9 million has been allocated to date. Nine
projects, valued at $15.3 million, are underway.
o The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created to support a wide range
of evidence-informed and innovative projects for underserved people in Canada
who are at increased risk for poorer sexual and reproductive health outcomes,
including 2SLGBTQI+ people, Indigenous and racialized populations, women and
youth.
o Factors contributing to the need for a reprofile were:
o The fund was established in July of FY 2021-22, and although a targeted Call for
Proposals was initiated within the same month, projects recommended for
funding were not approved until late in the fiscal year. The review process and
approvals took longer than anticipated as this is a new fund with new recipients.
o In developing the agreement with the Province of Quebec, the Province
required additional time to confer internally to determine those projects that
would be best suited to be funded under the SRHF.
- Expected results:
o Funding will help remove barriers to abortion for people who would not
otherwise be able to access abortion services, by covering travel and logistics
costs.
o Funding will also contribute to health care practitioners having the knowledge,
skills and tools required to provide inclusive, respectful, relevant and culturally
safe sexual and reproductive health care for 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, and
racialized populations, as well as youth and other underserved populations.
o Underserved populations, including 2SLGBTQI+ communities, Indigenous and
racialized populations, and youth will also have knowledge, resources, and
supports to address their specific sexual and reproductive health and care
needs.
- Voted: 3,844,508
- Statutory:-
Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
Total: $3,746,184
SPB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada is committed tosupporting Canadian thalidomide
survivors and helping them age with dignity.
o The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) application
period is open until June 3, 2024.
o The Program currently supports 123 survivors.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The CTSSP provides ongoing financial assistance, and access to an Extraordinary
Medical Assistance Fund to help pay for home or vehicle adaptations,
specialized surgeries and other ongoing costs. Newly confirmed survivors also
receive a one-time ex gratia paymentto assist with immediate health needs.
o Funding will support newly confirmed thalidomide survivors. $2.99M in Vote 1 is
for the one-time ex gratia payments made to new survivors and $756K in Vote
10 is for their ongoing annual funding.
- Expected results:
o Canadian thalidomide survivors will be able to access care, treatment, and other
supports they need.
o The CTSSP is intended to contribute to meeting the lifetime needs of eligible
Canadian thalidomide survivors so they may age with dignity.
- Voted: 3,746,184
- Statutory:-
Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada (Budget 2022)
Total: $1,947,216
HECSB/HPFB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada will receive $1,947,216 to implement phase two of the Zero
Plastics Waste Initiative to provide health research, scientific, program, and
policy expertise to support actions and policies on plastic pollution and waste.
o The funding will be used to advance federal action to eliminate plastic waste in
two key priority areas:
o Expanding knowledge on plastics in theeconomy and the environment; and
o Developing, implementing, and updating management measures.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objectives of these investments are to:
o Conduct internal research, and fund external research through a new
contribution program to evaluate the human health effects of exposure to
microplastics;
o Initiate additional scientific review of recent literature on the effects of
microplastics on human health and the environment;
o Identify and prioritize action for existing chemical additives in plastics; and
o Develop options for the introduction of a mandatory food chemical safety
program for food packaging and update guidance on use of recycled plastics in
food packaging application.
- Expected results
o This funding will enable:
o A reliable body of knowledge on plastics and the zero plastic waste agenda to be
accessible to stakeholders and the public;
o Government policy-makers to make evidence-based decisions on plastics; and
o Canadians to be protected by strengthening food chemical safety of food
packaging materials made from plastics, including recycledplastics.
- Voted: 1,693,825
- Statutory: 253,391
Funding for the Oceans Protection Plan (Budget 2022)
Total: $1,133,459
HECSB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada will receive $1,133,459 to provide health expertise for chemical
emergency management in support of enhancing marine safety, as part of the
second phase of the Oceans Protection Plan.
o This funding will enable Health Canada to respond to marine pollution incidents,
which is a responsibility of the Minister of Health under the Emergency
Management Act.
- Purpose/objectives
o The objectives of these investments are to integrate human health
considerations across three Oceans Protection Plan initiatives:
o Hazardous and Noxious Substances: to develop and implement a federal
framework to better prepare for and respond to releases of Hazardous and
Noxious Substances in the marine environment.
o Integrated Marine Response Planning: to create a new national program for
marine spill response planning based on a consistent and risk-based
methodology.
o Recovery from EnvironmentalEmergencies Involving Marine Oil Spills: to
develop a coordinated and sustainable Canadian Recovery Framework, comply
with guidelines from Public Safety Canada on emergency management, and
incorporate public input.
- Expected results:
o This funding will enable:
o Integration of health considerations in national policies for industry, response
partners, government departments and agencies, as well as coastal and
Indigenous communities;
o Enhancement of the Government's science and research capacity;
o Establishment of partnerships with response partners;
o Integration of federal scientific expertise and health considerations in
preparedness and in response activities; and
o Development of human health impact guidance and an inventory of key local
health authorities and subject matter experts.
- Voted: 939,617
- Statutory: 193,842
Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to
medical assistance in dying
(MAID Reprofile)
Total: $576,561
SPB
- Key messages:
o Expanded access to medical assistance in dying (MAID) (as codified in the new
legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility assessments and requires the
administration of the enhanced safeguards aimedat protecting vulnerable
people who might be induced to seek an assisted death.
o Budget 2021 provides $13.2 million over six years, beginning in 2021-22, with
$2.6 million per year ongoing*, to ensure that Canada’s MAID law is
implemented consistently andwith all appropriate safeguards.
- Purpose/objectives:
o This item reprofiles funding from 2021-22 to 2022-23 and outer years in order
to design a policy-oriented research agenda to address existing qualitative
knowledge gaps about MAID; establish an advisorynetwork to inform future
MAID policy and research planning; and, provide sufficient policy support.
o Factors contributing to the need for a reprofile were:
o Funds were received late in 2021 leaving only a few months in which to
undertake consultation, concept development, to launch calls for proposals and
sign contribution agreements with third-party organizations; and
o Impacts of the pandemic on timing to do sufficient consulting with
partners/stakeholders (largely clinicians and other health sector organizations).
- Expected results:
o With the increasing complexity in implementing MAID, this and other funding
from Budget 2021 will enable stronger federal leadership in supporting
consistent and evidence-informed guidance; increasing the body of knowledge
on MAID;and establishing an advisory network.
o All of these activities will lay the groundwork to support future policy decisions
on MAID.
- Voted: 576,561
- Statutory:-
Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
Total: $300,000
SPB
- Key messages:
o Budget 2021 announced an investment of $126.7 million over three years,
starting in 2021-22, for Indigenous Services Canada and Health Canada to
address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health systems. Of this funding,
$14.9M over three years was announced for Health Canada to establish the
Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program,
with $13.9M in contribution funding ($13M in ProjectStream; $900k in
Engagement Stream).
o The Program was established to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination, and advances Health Canada’s overall mandate to help everyone
in Canada maintain and improve their health by striving to ensure high quality
health services are efficient and accessible, and by reducing health inequities.
o The Program is a part of the short-term suite of measures developed in
response to the three National Dialogues to Address Anti-Indigenous Racism in
Canada’s Health Systems. This Program is also a flagship initiative under the
Federal Pathway to Address Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women, Girls
and 2SLGBTQQIA+ People.
- Purpose/objectives:
o This item reprofiles $300K originally allocated to 2021-22.
o The Program provides contribution funding for time-limited projects that
address systemic racism and discrimination in Canada’s health systems in a way
that is informed by the lived experiences of Indigenous, racialized and
marginalized communities. The Program also supports capacity development for
Indigenous organizations to meaningfully engage on their health priorities.
o The objectives of the Program are expected to result in:
o Improved access by individuals living in Canada to appropriate, effective, and
culturally sensitive health services; and,
o Better health outcomes for Indigenous, racialized and marginalized populations.
- Expected results:
o The Program’s short-term outcomes are that health system partners have
increased capacity to create and provide culturally safe and inclusive health
services for racialized and marginalized communities, and that Indigenous
organizations have increased capacity to engage on health priorities.
- Voted: 300,000
- Statutory:-
Payments for COVID-19 tests pursuant to An Actrespecting certain measures related to COVID-
19
Total: $1,789,123,165
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Key messages:
o Bill C10 received royal assent March 4, 2022 and provided Health Canada the
authority and $2.5B in funding to procure and distribute COVID-19 tests.
o $711M was used in 2021-22 leaving a balance of $1.789B for 2022-23 and
onward.
o Based on current forecasts approximately $543M will remain at the end of this
fiscal year (enough to buy approximately 77M Rapid Antigen Tests at $7/test).
- Purpose/objectives:
o Rapid tests remain an important tool to enable Canadians to take responsibility
and to manage their individual risks.
o With funding, HC will continue to support jurisdictions in their efforts to manage
COVID-19 by ensuring widespread distribution of tests across the country.
o More specifically, funds are used to support procurement, warehousing, and
distribution of rapid tests.
- Expected results:
o Procurement of 205,347,655 tests to date this FY, with an additional 241,008
tests underway.
o Establishment of a federal strategic reserve of 55M tests for surge
requirements.
o Distribution of rapid tests to PTs, workplaces and vulnerable populations via
different channels (PT, Canadian Red Cross, Pharmacies, etc.).
- Voted:-
- Statutory: 1,789,123,165
From the Department of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide
microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
Total: $552,497
ROEB
- Key messages:
o In collaboration with ISC in the Quebec Region, HC supports the delivery of
clean, safe and reliable drinking water to First Nations communities.
o This funding supports Health Canada in providing microbiological and physical-
chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of the funding is to allow HC to support the delivery of clean, safe
and reliable drinking water to First Nations communities, in collaboration with
ISC in the Quebec Region through:
o Regular monitoring of all publicly accessible drinking water systems (this
includes 29 public drinking water systems and 12 semi-public systems in 26 First
Nations communities in Quebec);
o Providing well water bacteriological testing services to residents, upon request
and free of charge.
- Expected results:
o The funds allows ROEB laboratories to perform microbiological and physico-
chemical analyses of drinking water to residents in First Nations Communities to
ensure clean, safe and reliable drinking water.
- Voted: 552,497
- Statutory:-
From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health for Enterprise Service
Model reallocation
Total: $406,660
DTB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada delivers IT services to the Public Health Agency of Canada as part
of a shared services partnership.
o Anumber of cell phones belonging to PHAC staff were inadvertently charged to
Health Canada.
o This transfer ensures expenses are appropriately aligned to the correct
department.
- Purpose/objectives
o Shared Services Canada delivers mobile services to departments.
o For fiscal 2022-23, they permanently transferred approximately $4.2 M from
Health Canada and about $500k from PHAC to SCC for a range of IT services
including mobile devices.
o On review of the detailed accounts it was determined that a portion of Health
Canada’s transfer was actually for devices used by PHAC employees.
- Expected results:
o Costs for mobile devices are charged to the correct department.
- Voted: 406,660
- Statutory:-
From the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the Canadian
Safety and Security Program
Total: $265,683
HECSB/HPFB
- Key messages:
o Health Canada will receive $265,683 from the Department of National Defence
under the scrutiny and governance framework of the Canadian Safety and
Security Program:
o To purchase laboratory equipment such as an automated micropore and
physiorption analyzer to enhance Canada’s ability to detect and attribute
radiological and nuclear incidents and to support national security and public
health emergency response.
o To purchase adigital PCR machine for the Diagnostics Lab (RDL) which has the
mandate of protecting the health of Canadians by researching new, rapid
techniques for detecting pathogens within food samples. The digital PCR
machine will complement the workflows involved in this research, enabled
quantification and therefore validation of all new techniques.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The objective of these acquisitions are to:
o Enhance Canada’s ability to support Canada’s national security interests and
mandates throughdetecting and attributing radiological and nuclear incidents.
o Enhance Health Canada’s capabilities for emergency response by providing a
platform for rapid, high sensitivity pathogen detection to inform intervention,
and the release of information to the public.
- Expected results:
o This funding will strengthen federal emergency preparedness by enhancing
federal capabilities to support national security and public health emergency
response.
o This funding will also help detect pathogens within a food sample, even for
research purposes, which are laborious and time-consuming. A digital PCR
instrument not only shortens these timelines, but also adds the element of
quantification, which will strengthen the quality and reliability of the work
performed.
o This technology will have an important impact on the detection and monitoring
of foodborne viral, bacterial and parasitic pathogens identified as priorities by
Health Canada.
- Voted: 265,683
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Joint
Expert Committee on Food Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food
additive
Total: ($132,604)
HPFB
- Key messages:
o Recently, the European Commission prohibited the use of titanium dioxide
(TiO2), a widely usedfood additive internationally, in food, based on a scientific
opinion by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
o The Joint WHO/FAO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) is best placed
to re-evaluate the safety of TiO2 as a food additive. JECFA intends to hold a
meeting to establish scientific advice on TiO2, however, funds are needed.
Funding this initiative will facilitate JECFA’s ability to re-evaluate TiO2 in a timely
manner.
o This advice will help inform Canada’s actions and is important to help maintain
Canadians’ confidence in the Canadian and international food safety systems.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Facilitate a grant payment to the WHO which will be used to establish scientific
advice through the re-evaluationof the safety of titanium dioxide as a food
additive, as well as the use of aspartame which will help inform the
development and update of both domestic and international standards.
- Voted: (132,604)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Health Committee
Total: ($200,000)
SPB
- Key messages:
o The work of the OECD Health Committee supports the Government of Canada’s
health policies andprograms.
o This work benefits Canada by providing internationally comparable data and
policy analysis to support improvements in the health system, and allows
Canadians to more easily measure the performance of Canada’s health system
against those of otherOECD countries.
o Funding from Canada supports participation in the Patient Reported Indicators
Surveys (PaRIS) initiative on patient-reported primary care indicators and will
position Canada as a more influential member of the Health Committee in terms
of the selection of priorities for data collection and policy analysis.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The transfer from Health Canada to the OECD Health Committee will support its
work to foster improvements in the performance of member countries’, and as
appropriate, non-member countries’ health systems, in the areas of financial
sustainability and efficiency of health and long-term care systems, and the
provision of high-quality health care to all.
o The Health Committee’s work is focused on the development of health statistics
and indicators, and providing analyses of the financial sustainability, efficiency,
and quality of health and long-term care systems in member countries.
- Expected results:
o The Government of Canada contributes to, and regularly uses, OECD reports to
assess Canada’s health system achievements. The Health Committee’s data and
policy analysis supports Canada’s health priorities such as post-COVID health
system resilience and initiatives to improve the health care system such as
digital health and long-term care.
o A portion of the funding will be used to pay for Canada’s participation in a major
new survey (called PaRIS) to collect patient-reported indicators of their
experience in primary health care.
o The funding to the Health Committee would also demonstrate Canada’s support
for the OECD’s work in health, and promote Canada’s continued engagement on
global health issues related to health system strengthening and universal health
coverage.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory:-
From the Department ofHealth to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the World
Health Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
Total: ($200,000)
CSCB
- Key messages:
o Canada remains committed to implementing the Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control (FCTC).Advancing full implementation of the FCTC, both within
Canada and abroad, will continue to be a priority for the Government of
Canada.
o Canada continues to actively participate in regional and international tobacco
control fora to address the burden of tobacco use.
o Canada values the collaborative relationship it has with the WHO FCTC
Convention Secretariat, including providing support to the Secretariat via the
International Health Grants Program on a regular basis since 2015 for activities
related to strengthening the implementation of the FCTC regionally and
internationally.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The project aims to support the development of efficiencies in the reporting
process under the WHO FCTC through, among others, the revision of the
reporting process, and the implementation of a quality assurance framework
supporting the collection of timely and quality data.
o The revised reporting process would seek to better serve the data needs related
to the monitoring of the indicators of the Global Strategy to Accelerate Tobacco
Control: Advancing Sustainable Development through the Implementation of
the WHO FCTC 2019-2025, which was championed by Canada.
- Expected results:
o Reduced reporting burden on the Parties, allowing for a smoother analysis of
data by theConvention Secretariat, resulting in more informative global
progress reports to be submitted to the Conference of the Parties to the FCTC.
o The proposed project would not only contribute to reducing the reporting
burden on under-resourced tobacco control programs, but would also provide
Parties with informative WHO FCTC progress reports and data analysis to
strategically inform their domestic tobacco control efforts.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food to support the
pilot water monitoring program for pesticides
Total: ($200,500)
PMRA
- Key messages:
o Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency is developing a
framework for a National Water Monitoring Program for Pesticides under the
Increased Use of Real-world Data and Independent Advice pillar of the agency’s
Transformation Agenda.
o The goal is to provide data and advice to better inform pesticide regulatory
decisions.
o The PMRA is implementing a 2-year water monitoring pilot programat select
sites across Canada in partnership with Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and
Environment and Climate Change Canada to inform framework development
- Purpose/objectives
o This transfer of $200,500 funds to Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada activities
will support Year 1 of Health Canada’s two-year Pilot Water Monitoring Program
for Pesticides.
o Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and third-party contractors will collect surface
water samples from across Canada for laboratory analysis of pesticides.
o Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada will also complete analytical method
development work for glyphosate and its transformation products in order to be
considered for Year 2 of the pilot program.
- Expected results:
o Results and lessons learned will inform the HealthCanada Pest Management
Regulatory Agency’s development of a Framework for a National Water
Monitoring Program for Pesticides.
- Voted: (200,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance
policiesthat promote science and evidence-based decision making
Total: ($245,500)
SPB
- Key messages:
o This funding supports Dr. Cara Tannenbaum, the Scientific Director of the CIHR
Institute of Gender and Health, in her role as Health Canada’sDepartmental
Science Advisor (DSA). Her role has been extended to two days a week until
September 30th, 2023.
o As the DSA, Dr. Tannenbaum will continue to provide advice on strengthening
science input to Health Canada’s priorities and signature initiatives,including
policy and regulatory development.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Dr. Tannenbaum is working to strengthen implementation of Health Canada’s
science priorities, as well as elevating the voice of science and scientists in
decision-making, as appropriate.
o Leading the Science and Research Integration Network, science priorities
outlined in Health Canada’s Framework for Science and Research Excellence will
be implemented.
o Dr. Tannenbaum represents Health Canada and brings forward the
department’s progress tothe Federal Departmental Science Advisors Network
chaired by Dr. Nemer, Canada’s Chief Science Advisor.
- Expected results:
o Integration of science advice will be advanced, as appropriate, across Health
Canada including in relevant policy and regulations.
o Working with colleagues, the DSA will strive to accelerate systematic integration
of science advice across Health Canada at policy, program and horizontal levels.
o Department-and government-wide horizontal science priorities including
application of sex and gender-based Plus (SGBA Plus) analysis, including with
respect to disaggregated data, will be expanded and measured.
- Voted: (245,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to evaluate
decriminalization of personal possession of Illicit substances
Total: ($332,500)
CSCB
- Key messages:
o The Government of Canada is committed to evidence-informed policy making. A
strong evidence base forms the foundation of the Canadian Drugs and
Substances Strategy (CDSS). To that end, the Government of Canada continues
to invest in research and evaluation through the Canadian Institute of Health
Research (CIHR) to generate evidence to help ensure that Canada's drug policies
better protect and promote the health and safety of Canadians.
o Funding through Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program will be
provided to the CIHR to issue grant funding for a third-party evaluation of an
exemption issued to BC under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act,
removing the criminalpenalties for the possession of small amounts of certain
controlled substances for personal use by adults 18 years of age and older.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of the evaluation is to rigorously assess the impact of the
exemption on people who use drugs, the general population, the criminal
justice system (including police services and correctional systems), economic
consequences and return on investment.
- Expected results:
o The evaluation will measure progress towards the objectives of the exemption,
intended outcomes, unintended consequences and other potential risks, on an
ongoing basis. Ultimately, the findings from the evaluation will help to inform
next steps with respect to the exemption as well as any potential future national
approach.
- Voted: (332,500)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the CanCOVID
initiative
Total: ($741,853)
SPB
- Key messages:
o CanCOVIDsupports the federal COVID-19 scientific effort by fostering
collaboration to enable knowledge mobilization and science-to-policy action.
o It maintains an on-line collaboration platform, hosts Speaker Series and
conducts literature reviews to respond to targeted pandemic-related questions.
o Health Canada has an opportunity to engage CanCOVID and benefit from its
research, through an existing contribution agreement between CanCOVID and
the Public Health Agency of Canada.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Under a renewed contribution agreement, CanCOVID will research a range of
topics for Health Canada including the effectiveness of interventions as well as
the broader impacts of COVID-19 including on health systems, public health
measures, and vulnerable populations.
o All resources, including literature, social media, interviews with key informants
and expert panel discussions will be used to cover 5-6 topics of Health Canada’s
choice, and distilled into reports and rapid reviews for use by Health Canada
(and in most cases available to the public).
o The objective is to answer crucial questions where Health Canada lacks internal
research capacity.
- Expected results:
o Health Canada will leverage pandemic related information gathered by
CanCOVID to inform policy making, adjust policy positions and for future
planning and preparedness in both pandemic and non-pandemic matters.
o The reports and rapid reviews generated will inform policy discussion and
ultimately decision making at Health Canada.
- Voted: (741,853)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
implementation of innovative COVID-19 testing approaches for other communicable diseases
Total: ($1,259,689)
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Key messages:
o Funds used to support British Columbia Centre for Disease Control initiative on
enhancing testing across northern, remote and isolated (NRI) communities.
o Planning began in February 2022 with the objective to fund the initiative under
the COVID-19 SRA Contribution Program of Health Canada.
o To increase efficiency, funds are being transferred to the Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC) through the Estimates process
- Purpose/objectives:
o This project is aligned with the priorities of the SRA Program, particularly its
focus on expanding access totesting across NRI communities, and its expansion
of testing beyond COVID-19 and screening for communicable diseases.
- Expected results:
o Over the course of the pandemic, COVID-19 molecular testing platforms were
implemented in health facilities in First Nations communities across British
Colombia as a means of improving access to testing and turn-around times for
results in remote communities. BCCDC plans to build upon these established
community based testing system to identify priority tests to run on these
platforms for other infectious diseases.
o This initiative will help pivot community-based testing to other infectious
diseases, andwill serve as a model for other community-based testing programs
across Canada. Beyond testing for Sexually Transmitted and Blood Borne
Infections (STBBI), TB and other infectious diseases, this work will form the
foundation for current and future pandemic preparedness throughout NRI
communities.
o Beyond supporting the expansion of community-based testing in NRI
communities, this project will also expand the optimal use of these new testing
technologies by working hand in hand with wastewater surveillance(WWS)
networks. In expanding testing in NRIs alongside WWS, these monitoring
systems will ensure health authorities keep apprised of viral loads and variants
of concern within NRI communities.
- Voted: (1,259,689)
- Statutory:-
From the Department of Healthto the Canadian Institutes of Health Research on a COVID-19
Outpatient Therapeutic Study
Total: ($5,000,000)
EXEC-Taskforce
- Key messages:
o HC and CIHR, in collaboration with PHAC, have funded a large pan-Canadian
study of COVID-19 treatments administeredto non-hospitalized patients.
o This study was funded in June 2022 ($10M total over one year-$5M each from
HC and CIHR), and was part of the Government of Canada’s continued rapid
response to address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic.
- Purpose/objectives:
o Canada has invested substantially in COVID-19 therapeutics alongside its
portfolio of vaccines, screening approaches, and broader public health
measures.
o Toward the end of 2021, the Government of Canada announced purchase
agreements to accessemerging antiviral medications as treatment options for
patients who present with mild to moderate COVID-19 and who are at high risk
of developing serious disease.
o To effectively roll out these new antiviral medications, there is a pressing need
to further study the outcomes, including effectiveness, comparative
effectiveness, and cost effectiveness of administering these treatments-as well
as any other therapeutics which may become available-to non-hospitalized
patients in the Canadian health care system.
- Expected results:
o Provide evidence regarding the clinical and cost-effectiveness, practical
challenges, and outcomes of administering therapeutics for COVID-19 to non-
hospitalized patients in Canadian healthcare settings
o Generate evidence on treatment effectiveness in diverse populations. These can
include: communities marginalized by race; First Nations, Inuit, Métis and Urban
Indigenous Peoples; communities historically excluded from research; those
experiencing health inequities; persons with disabilities and individuals across
diverse health status (e.g. vaccination status, high risk populations, individuals
with comorbid conditions); those experiencing gendered impacts of the
pandemic; and those in life stages that have been underrepresented in research
and
o Provide rapid evidence to inform clinical and health system management and
public health response, and/or decision-making and planning within and across
jurisdictions in Canada and internationally.
- Voted: (5,000,000)
- Statutory:-
From theDepartment of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the First
Nations Information Governance Centre
Total: ($12,335,213)
EXEC-Testing Secretariat
- Key messages:
o Funds used to support to the First Nations Information Governance Centre
(FNIGC)
o More specifically to support the Regional Health Survey (RHS) and Regional and
National COVID-19 Data Management Capacity and Infrastructure Building
projects across 2021-22 and 2022-23.
o To increase efficiency, funds are being transferred to Indigenous Services
Canada (ISC) through the Estimates process
- Purpose/objectives:
o This project is aligned with the priorities of the SRA Program, particularly its
focus on modernizing health data management,
o FNIGC is a mechanism that rights-holding First Nationscan use to assert
sovereignty over their data and information.
o FNIGC supports First Nations communities in building data and statistical
capacities, and assists in the provision of credible and relevant information on
First Nations.
- Expected results:
o Launch of a fourth wave of the First Nations Regional Health Survey (RHS 4)
which is the only national First Nation health survey. The survey will address
gaps in national-level health data for First Nation communities.
o Development, modernization and oversight of data management infrastructure,
systems, and capacity building projects within FNIGC’s 10 member regions.
o Development of appropriate and consistent standards to support COVID-19
adapted data collection, management & usage methodologies.
- Voted: (12,335,213)
- Statutory:-
Public Health Agency of Canada-2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA’S FUNDING CROSSWALK
Contents
NEW FUNDING
Funding to bolster current inventories of medical countermeasures and to enhance diagnostic
and surveillance activities of monkeypox in Canada
Funding for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation
Funding for Special Immigration Measures for Ukrainian Nationals
Funding for the resettlement commitment for the evacuation and immigration of Afghan
nationals to Canada (horizontal item)
Funding for government advertising programs (horizontal item)
Reinvestment of royalties from intellectual property
Total New Funding
REPROFILES
Funding for medical research and vaccine developments (COVID-19)
Funding for border travel measures and isolation sites (COVID-19)
Funding for medical countermeasures (COVID-19)
Funding to stabilize core capacities for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
Funding for innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the
pandemic
(COVID-19)
Funding for mental health and to address substance use (COVID-19)
Funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework
Funding to improve mental health supports and services (COVID-19)
Funding to create a national autism strategy
Funding to prevent diabetes and improve treatments
Total Reprofiles
TRANSFERS
Transfer from the Department of Health to implement innovative COVID-19 testing for other
communicable diseases
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the CanCOVID initiative
Transfer from the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and Security
Program
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) Health Committee
Transfer from the Department of Health to support World Health Organization Framework
Convention on TobaccoControl
Transfer from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the delivery of the
international AIDS Conference
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Joint Expert Committee on Food
Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive
Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariat to support the Capacity Accelerator Project
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support EU Joint Programme-
Neurodegerative Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support a Health System Impact
Fellowship
Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Canadian Aboriginal AIDS
Network (CAAN) with their Indigenous
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research on priorities outlined in
Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO) report
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support Policy Research for Health System
Transformation
Transfer to the Department of Health for the Enterprise Service Model (ESM) reallocation
Transfer to the Canada Border Services Agency for data integration on border health
surveillance
Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to support
Indigenous early learning and child care
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support Pediatric Outcome Improvement
through Coordination of Research Networks
Total Transfers
INTERNALREALLOCATIONS
Internal reallocation of resources from operating to contributions in support of HIV self tests,
monkeypox and myocarditis
Internal reallocation of resources to support booster campaign uptake through the
Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF)
Internal reallocation of resources in partnership with the WHO, for new tools for advanced
monitoring and reporting on health inequities
Net Internal Reallocations
NEW FUNDING
Funding to bolster current inventories of medical countermeasures and to enhance diagnostic
and surveillance activities of monkeypox in Canada
- Key messages:
o The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is closely monitoring the
monkeypox situation in Canadaand has developed a national strategy to
prepare for and mount a response to monkeypox.
o PHAC Strategies developed for monkeypox include the following: Public Health
Measures, Surveillance Epidemiological Analysis, Health System, Vaccines and
Treatments,and Research and Development.
o Federal-Provincial-Territorial (FPT) public health officials are working
collaboratively through the Public Health Network to coordinate the pan-
Canadian public health response to monkeypox, including prevention and
treatmentapproaches.
- Purpose/objectives:
o New funding will support the following two specific initiatives:
o $94.4M to bolster current inventories of medical countermeasures suitable for
prevention and treatment of monkeypox and maintain smallpox preparedness
in Canada; and
o $8.3M for the National Microbiology Laboratory to enhance its capacity for
diagnostic surge and coordination as well as genomic surveillance activities for
monkeypox.
- Expected results
o Investments will support:
o Effective and timely outbreak management for monkeypox, strengthen
Canada’s security of supply and maintain our current level of smallpox
preparedness.
o Improve our understanding of the virus transmission dynamics and support case
identification and surveillance of monkeypox in Canada to better inform
national and global decision-making and public health action.
- Voted: 102,704,797
- Statutory: 0
Funding for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation
- Key messages:
o Budget 2022 provided $30M over 3 years,starting in 2022-23 for the Centre for
Aging and Brain Health Innovation (CABHI) to help accelerate innovative
solutions in brain health and aging.
o Through a contribution agreement with PHAC, CABHI will be the sole recipient
of contribution funding, including $8M in 2022-23, $11M in 2023-24, and
$11M in 2024-25.
o CABHI is a unique collaboration of health care, science, industry, not-for-profit
and government partners whose aim is to help improve quality of life for the
world’s aging population, allowing older adults of all backgrounds and abilities
to age safely in the setting of their choice while maintaining their cognitive,
emotional, and physical well-being.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Help advance the health and wellbeing of older adults at home, in the
community, and in care settings;
o Build a skilled workforce and system-level capacity in older adult care that
mobilizes knowledge and innovation through a suite of programs, and;
o Build amore resilient, sustainable, and competitive economy by providing
tailored acceleration services for commercialization and wide-scale adoption of
innovations.
- Expected results:
o Increased and accelerated development, validation and scaling of solutions that
enable older adults and people living with brain health issues, including
dementia, to live in the setting of their choice and remain active in their
communities;
o Improved products, programs and services that support dementia prevention
and enhance the quality of life of people living with dementia and caregivers;
o Expanded delivery of high-quality, accessible virtual care for physical, mental,
and cognitive health services and supports; and
o Enhanced knowledge mobilization related to aging and brain health.
- Voted: 8,000,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding for Special Immigration Measures for Ukrainian Nationals
- Key messages:
o Ukrainians are expected to arrive at various air and land ports of entry across
Canada at any time of the day/night. As such, PHAC will berequired to provide
physical and virtual health assessments at various air and land ports of entry.
o This additional funding will support PHAC’s ports of entry (POEs) to conduct
health screening and assessments of these travellers pursuant to the
requirements of the Quarantine Act.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support presence at the ports of entry to conduct health screening and
assessments of Ukrainian travellers pursuant to the requirements of the
Quarantine Act.
- Expected results:
o Effectively support the volume of incoming Ukrainian nationals at the varying
entry points that are expected to be used (via air or land border) in different
locations at any time of the day.
o Physical and virtual health assessment will be conducted for incoming Ukrainian
nationals.
- Voted: 4,990,485
- Statutory: 1,160,964
Funding for the resettlement commitment for the evacuation and immigration of Afghan
nationals to Canada (horizontal item)
- Key messages:
o PHAC’s physical presence is particularly required for incoming Afghan nationals.
Virtual assessments (by phone) would not be possible, as most travellers will
require an interpreter on site, and large families will be travelling together.
o The funding will ease the impact on PHAC to deploy staff at many ports of entry
used to receive Afghan nationals.
- Purpose/objectives:
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support presence at the ports of entry to conduct health screening and
assessments of Afghan Nationals pursuant to the requirements of the
QuarantineAct.
- Expected results:
o Effectively support the volume of incoming Afghan nationals at the varying entry
points that are expected to be used (via air or land border) in different locations
at any time of the day.
o Physical health assessment will be conductedfor incoming Ukrainian nationals.
- Voted: 1,203,375
- Statutory: 255,106
Funding for government advertising programs (horizontal item)
- Key messages:
o Each year, departments under Schedules I, I.I, and II of the Financial
Administration Act submit advertising expenditure forecasts to the Privy Council
Office (PCO) for review.
o To gain access to the central fund, departments submit advertising proposals to
PCO, which are typically based on priorities set out in the Speech from the
Throne, Budget and Mandate Letters.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Financegovernment advertising programs (horizontal item)
- Expected results:
o The primary objective of the childhood vaccination campaign is to:
o Increase Canadians’ awareness and uptake of childhood vaccination information
in an effort to counter vaccination hesitancy;
o Help parents make informed choices concerning their children’s health, thereby
contributing to PHAC’s mission of health promotion and prevention of diseases
for Canadians.
- Voted: 500,000
- Statutory: 0
Reinvestment of royalties from intellectual property
- Key messages
o PHAC collects licensing revenues and processes awards to inventors in a manner
that is consistent with federal policies and with Section 10 of the Public Servants
Invention Act.
o Proceeds collected in fiscal year 2021-2022 totalled $338,368. The majority of
this funding returns to PHAC to reinvest in research and innovation; the
remaining 35% is shared among eight inventors (current and former public
servants).
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding for:
o The reinvestment of royalties from licensing of Intellectual Property.
o Pursuant to the 1993 decision of the Treasury Board respecting the retention of
royalties and fees from the licensing of Crown-owned intellectual property,
PHAC is authorized to receive, throughSupplementary Estimates, an annual
appropriation equal to all such revenues that PHAC had remitted to the
Consolidated Revenue Fund in the previous year.
- Expected results:
o Facilitate and promote a culture of innovation and research by the
reinvestments inlaboratory programs.
- Voted: 337,677
- Statutory: 691
Total new funding
- Voted: 117,736,334
- Statutory: 1,416,761
REPROFILES
Funding for medical research and vaccine developments (COVID-19)
- Key messages:
o Early evidence suggests Canada may require a regular supply of COVID-19
vaccine through 2024 to address waning immunity and to protect against
variants of concern. COVID-19 vaccines will also be required for unvaccinated
cohorts such as newly arrived immigrants and visiting workers, and children
under theage of 5, pending product authorization.
o Vaccine suppliers are developing new formulations that may offer greater
protection against the Omicron variant and potentially broaden protection
against other potential variants.
o In an effort to maximize vaccinesupply and minimize wastage, vaccine
deliveries from Canada’s purchase agreements have been spread out across
multiple years.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile request is to:
o Provide the funding to support the continued contractual commitments related
to COVID-19 vaccine doses that were unavailable or unneeded in previous years
and were therefore shifted into future years.
o It will also allow Canada the necessary flexibility and agility to rapidly secure
additional doses of new formulation, if needed, to provide Canadians with
vaccines that provide the best protection against COVID-19 and the cover to
secure additional doses into 2024, if recommended by scientific evidence and
expert advice.
- Expected results
o The Government of Canada will beable to continue to protect the population
against COVID-19 through timely access to vaccines.
o As variants of concern spread globally, timely access to additional boosters and
new formulations will allow eligible individuals to build on the protection
received through the initial vaccination campaign.
o In addition to greater efficacy and durability against variants, new and improved
formulations may be more effective at reducing the transmission of the SARS
CoV-2 virus.
- Voted: 696,179,267
- Statutory: 0
Funding for border travel measures and isolation sites (COVID-19)
- Key messages:
o Reprofiled funding will be for PHAC to support its ports of entry to conduct
testing, health screening and assessments of travellers pursuant to the
requirementsof the Quarantine Act.
o Designated quarantine facilities must meet public health guidelines for the
purposes of accommodating travellers who may be COVID-19 positive,
symptomatic, or do not have a suitable place to quarantine or isolate.
o However, in lightof the Government of Canada's recent decision to drop COVID-
19 measures at borders as of October 1st, 2022, the funding of $400M, initially
intended to provide border screening and quarantine capacity until the end of
the year, will be used for the close-out costs for the border and quarantine
program up until September 30th, 2022.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of the funding is:
o To sustain the cost of service provider contracts that support the coordination,
processing, logistics and data transfer for COVID-19 testing of international
travellers entering Canada up until September 30, 2022.
o To maintain the operation of the designated quarantine facilities in 14 cities
across Canada to accommodate travellers who may be COVID-19 positive,
symptomatic, or donot have a suitable place to quarantine up until September
30, 2022.
o To sustain capacity for continued oversight, development, implementation and
monitoring of border measures up until September 30, 2022.
- Expected results
o As Canada continues to move towards a recovery, there is a need to ensure
balanced border measures and continued readiness to react. It is important to
support critical needs to ensure that key programs that protect the health and
safety of Canadians are in place.
o This funding will ensure the Agency has the resources to close out the border
operations and to have funding available should a future border travel measure
response be necessary in the future.
- Voted: 400,000,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding for medical countermeasures (COVID-19)
- Keymessages:
o Reprofiled logistics funding will support the distribution of COVID-19 vaccines
and will also support F/P/T inventory management and supply/demand
forecasting through the Vaccine Connect platform, as well as enhanced supply
chain security through implementation of approaches such as Track and Trace
technology.
o Reprofiled primary packaging funds will support outstanding contracting costs
and potential new purchases associated with the Government of Canada's
commitment to procure massvaccination supplies needed for the continued
administration of COVID-19 vaccines.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Support the continued distribution of COVID-19 vaccines to provinces and
territories through logistical support and inventory management;
o Fulfill contractual commitments and provide flexibility to purchase additional
supplies necessary for the production and administration of COVID-19 vaccines;
o Ensure provinces and territories (P/Ts) have the support to effectivelyroll-out
COVID-19 vaccines across Canada.
- Expected results
o PHAC will continue protecting the population against COVID-19 through
providing timely access to vaccines for P/Ts and relevant federal departments
and agencies.
o Canada will fulfil its contractual obligations on the purchase of primary
packaging and mass vaccination materials, maintaining positive relationships
with key health product suppliers.
o Canada will have the flexibility to secure additional supplies to quickly and
effectively support P/Ts in their ongoing vaccine campaigns, including a planned
fall booster campaign, and the timely roll-out of vaccines for kids under the age
of five.
- Voted: 61,250,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding to stabilize core capacities for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
- Key messages:
o As a result of emerging COVID-19 variants such as Omicron, the risks posed by
waning vaccine immunity, and the combined impact of COVID-19, seasonal flu
and other respiratory viruses, there continues to be uncertainty about the
impactthat the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic will have on the need for and
available supply of key medical supplies.
o Reprofile funding will allow PHAC to maintain an 8 week stockpile of personal
protective equipment (PPE), to complete existing contract obligations,and
remaining funds to procure PPE and other medical supplies and equipment as
needed when other emergencies or events occur.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Provide the funds needed to maintain an 8 week stockpile and to pay for
delayed delivery of PPE orders due to strained global supply chains, etc.;
o It will also allow PHAC to have sufficient funding and be prepared for emerging
requirements not previously anticipated.
- Expected results
o PHAC would be prepared to support its leadership role in providing surge
capacity to P/Ts to support public health emergency management for the
ongoing COVID-19 response.
- Voted: 50,000,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding for innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the
pandemic (COVID-19)
- Key messages
o Reprofile funding will support the development of initiatives and services that
have been funded via the 2020 Fall Economic Statement (FES) “Innovative
Research and Support for New Testing Approaches and Technologies” envelope.
o It will also ensure that public health partners and Canadians alike continue to
receive the services and intelligence these initiatives provide.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Support the continuation and expansion of initiatives and services that were
instrumental to Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response; and
o Specifically, the expansion of wastewater surveillance programming and
genomics sequencing as well as the replacement of the aging mobile laboratory.
- Expected results
o Deliver innovative approaches to address COVID-19 and provide mobile
laboratory services to public health partners.
- Voted: 20,353,667
- Statutory: 0
Funding for mental health and to address substance use (COVID-19)
- Key messages:
o Reprofiled funding will support two existing, large scale funding agreements
with high capacity organizations (Kids Help Phone and the Centre for Addiction
and Mental Health) to address the surge and increased complexity of demand
for crisis services during and following the pandemic.
o Based on evidence, this need for mental health and suicide-related crisis
support is expected to remain heightened over the next two years, during
pandemic recovery.
o Funds would be administered through the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH), whichis overseeing Talk Suicide Canada, formally known as the
Canada Suicide Prevention Service, and has the capacity to address recruitment
and virtual training needs through its established relationships with distress
centres across Canada.
o The distress linesector are the backbone of suicide and mental health crisis
support in Canada, and will form the foundation of the network upon which a
national three-digit number for suicide prevention and crisis support will need
to be build.
- Purpose/objectives
o The reprofiled funds will enable two projects:
o Crisis supports to children and youth; and
o Resources to help distress centres address complex needs to continue serving
the needs of distress centres and of children and youth in crisis.
- Expected results
o Thisreprofile will address:
o Urgent needs for crisis and distress support, including the de-escalation of
mental health crisis, referrals to resources, curated resources for diverse
populations, and connection to emergency services.
o Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to support the capacity of the
distress centre sector, addressing recruitment and virtual training for
responders and responder supervisors, and helping to fully meet unmet
demand, including during pandemic recovery.
o Building a strong foundation in the distress line sector prior to the introduction
of a national three-digit number for suicide prevention and crisis support.
- Voted: 13,000,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework
- Key messages:
o TheFall Economic Statement (FES) 2020 committed ongoing funding to support
Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities (AHSUNC)
programming in fiscal year 2021-22, as part of the broader investments towards
the Indigenous Early Learning and ChildCare (IELCC) Transformation Initiative.
o In line with the goals of the IELCC Framework, AHSUNC’s Indigenous-led
approach relies on the National Aboriginal Head Start Council (NAHSC) to
determine strategic investment priorities. Over the past year NAHSC hasworked
to ratify a number of governance decisions including an allocation methodology
for distribution of funds across existing AHSUNC sites.
o Due to the delayed finalization of this methodology as well as significant
administrative capacity challenges forsites associated with the COVID-19
pandemic NAHSC has indicated a need to reprofile the $2.4M into next fiscal
year (2022-23) as a means to adequately allocate and manage the FES 2020
investments.
- Purpose/objectives
o PHAC has reprofiled the one-time contributions investments of $2.4M from
Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities (AHSUNC) program.
o AHSUNC provides funding and support to 133 sites which offer early-
intervention programming for approximately 4,300 Indigenous children each
year and empowers the National Aboriginal Head Start Council to make
decisions and provide advice on strategic priorities, funding allocations, and
other needs identified by the project sites across all regions.
- Expected results
o By reprofiling this funding into 2022-23, NAHSC will be able to:
o Properly implement the new methodology and determine the appropriate
allocation amounts for each project site;
o Work with sites to plan ahead for next fiscal year, rather than rushing into
commitments for this year, including determining the best use of the FES 2020
funds based on the unique needs of each region;
o Ensure that the funding is used appropriately in 2022-23 to address ongoing
operational pressures.
o Reprofiling this funding will continue AHSUNC’s relationship with NAHSC as part
of the Agency’s commitment to a self-determined IELCC system.
- Voted: 2,400,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding to improve mental health supports and services (COVID-19)
- Key messages:
o Budget 2021 provided time limited funding to PHAC for grant and contribution
programming to promote mental health and prevent mental illness, and address
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma, in priority populations.
o Given the time required in year one to obtain Treasury Board approval to
implement these new initiatives, and to solicit and review funding requests,
PHAC did not expend all funds available in 2021-22.
o Reprofile funding through the Supporting the Mental Health of those Most
Affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic (COVID MH) program, to support additional
projects and activities, and ensure equitable reach to priority populations.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Support enhanced programming to address the mental health needs of
populations most affected by the pandemic.
o The funds will be used to support new projects identified through targeted
solicitations to addressgaps in current programming, including projects
reaching Indigenous organizations and front line service providers; in addition to
supporting enhancements to existing successful projects.
- Expected results
o Programming will achieve equitable reach to diversepopulations whose mental
health has been disproportionately affected by the pandemic.
o Projects will promote mental health, prevent mental illness and PTSD, enhance
professional capacity, and build knowledge about effective practices in the
pandemic and recovery context.
- Voted: 1,000,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding to create a national autism strategy
- Key messages
o The reprofiled funding will support the initiatives and services that have been
funded via Budget 2021 to continue the development of the National Austim
Strategy (NAS) and continue providing community-based funding as part of the
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) Strategic Fund Initiative.
o This would allow PHAC to meet various commitments for the creation of a NAS,
including hosting a national autism conference and engaging with National
Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) to build consensus on the priorities for action
as well as finalizing specific surveillance enhancement deliverables in
partnership with the P/Ts and other data partners, and finally IT infrastructure
to inform decision making through the responsible and strategic use of data.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Support the continuation and expansion of initiatives and services that are
instrumental to the creation of a National Autism Strategy.
o Specifically, this means the continuation of the Autism Spectrum Disorder
Strategic Fund Initiative, and the engagementprocesses to develop a National
Autism Strategy, specifically with P/Ts, with families, and with Indigenous
People.
o Additionally, the continuation of activities related to enhancing surveillance of
autism, including the initiation of new data collection and testing the feasibility
of expanding existing surveillance infrastructure.
o The funds will also be geared towards the Agency’s centre of expertise on data
lifecycle management, infrastructure, security, policy, innovation, analytics and
talent to ensureIT capacity for this initiative.
- Expected results
o Hosting a national autism conference is a pivotal milestone to reach a consensus
on the priorities towards a National Autism Strategy, as well as finalizing specific
surveillance enhancement deliverables in partnership with P/Ts and other data
partners, and IT infrastructure.
o The collaboration and engagement of stakeholders, including Indigenous
People, families and other stakeholders is essential to ensuring a national
autism strategy is created and implemented as planned in spring/summer 2023.
- Voted: 690,000
- Statutory: 0
Funding to prevent diabetes and improve treatments
- Key messages
o Funding will support the implementation and more accurate representation of
the National Diabetes Framework.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this reprofile is to:
o Support the successful implementation of the National Diabetes Framework;
and
o Allow PHAC to deliver on its policy requirements to develop a national
framework for diabetes, based on engagement with multi-sectoral stakeholders,
and then support activities to advance it.
- Expected results
o To support healthy living and chronic disease prevention and effectively
research, design and deliver a National Diabetes Framework in support of
diabetes prevention and improved health outcomes among Canadians.
- Voted: 158,248
- Statutory: 0
Total reprofiles:
- Voted: 1,245,031,182
- Statutory: 0
TRANSFERS
Transfer from the Department of Health to implement innovative COVID-19 testing for other
communicable diseases
- Key messages
o The funding will allow PHAC to proceed with a Contribution Agreement with the
BC Centre for Communicable Disease, to support their proposal to implement a
number of innovative community-based sexually transmitted and blood-borne
infections (STBBI) testing approaches across British Columbia.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Evaluate testing innovations developed or used for COVID-19 testing, to
determine if and how they could be applied to testing for other communicable
disease such as STBBI;
o Focus the application of these innovations in rural, remote and Indigenous
communities and populations;
o Strengthen collaborative relations across public health, community, and
laboratory service providers to continue enhancing community-based testing in
the province of British Columbia.
- Expected results
o The project will result in an evaluated series of effective community-based
STBBI testing approaches that could then be scaled up in British Columbia, with
potential application in other jurisdictions in Canada.
- Voted: 1,259,689
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the CanCOVID initiative
- Keymessages:
o Funding will support a Program of Work between Health Canada and CanCOVID
for the period of April 1, 2022 to March 31, 2023.
o PHAC holds and manages a contribution agreement with CanCOVID in support
of a Program of Work, which acts to advance an evidence-informed public
health response to the pandemic and post-pandemic period.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Optimize external health science advice related to COVID-19.
o CanCOVID links over 2,400 members of Canada’s researchcommunity to
collaborate across critical research and development areas, providing
information, synthesis and input on the state of knowledge respect to key issues
stemming from COVID-19 and its aftermath.
o CanCOVID conducts a number of exchanges on emerging COVID-19 issues,
facilitating seminar style presentations on science topics, along with in-camera
expert panel discussions that provide a forum for academic and governmental
science and policy experts to openly engage with top national and international
scientists on priority topics. Information is synthesized and made public on the
CanCOVID website.
- Expected results
o Regular sentinel intelligence exchanges with scientific experts held on a variety
of COVID-19 topics, with summaries to be made public on the CanCOVID
website;
o Reports on a variety of topics related to the pandemic (e.g. Rapid Testing and
Screening, COVID-19 vaccine safety, COVID‑19 Disinformation/Misinformation
Among Black Canadians) disseminated on the CanCOVIDwebsite and promoted
through social media and weekly newsletters.
o Strengthened science and research community engagement through
workshops, website platform and social media.
- Voted: 741,853
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Department of National Defence tosupport the Canadian Safety and Security
Program
- Key messages
o This transfer is for the acquisition of various scientific equipment that;
o Detects respiratory pathogens such as SARS CoV-2;
o Builds upon the existing laboratory-based surveillance program for SARS CoV-2,
and;
o Produces high-quality DNA profiles.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to support scientific technology acquisition for the
National Microbiology Laboratory;
o Testing equipment that support emergency preparedness and strengthen
resilience against biological threats;
o Equipment to automate the analysis of substances to determine its composition
and downstream analysis; and
o Instruments to build capacity in Canada for forensics investigation of
contaminated evidence and potential attribution.
- Expected results
o The acquired scientific equipment will result in;
o Increased diagnostic capacity for rare diseases;
o Automation of thesurveillance program which will improve efficiency and
reduce impact on staffing resources;
o The use of DNA signatures from contaminated evidence in court for attribution.
- Voted: 561,000
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for economic Co-operation
and Development (OECD) Health Committee
- Key messages
o The work of the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
(OECD) Health Committee supports the Government of Canada’s health policies
and
o programs.
o Thiswork benefits Canada by providing internationally comparable data and
policy analysis to support improvements in the health system, and allows
Canadians to more easily measure the performance of Canada’s health system
against those of other OECD countries.
o Funding from Canada supports our participation in the Patient-Reported
Indicator Surveys (PaRIS) initiative on patient reported primary care indicators
and will position Canada as a more influential member of the Health Committee
in terms of the selection of priorities for data collection and policy analysis.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Facilitate a grant payment to the OECD Health Committee which will support its
work to foster improvements in the performance of member countries’, and as
appropriate, non-member countries’ health systems, in the areas of financial
sustainability and efficiency of health and long-term care systems, and the
provision of high-quality health care to all.
o The OECD Health Committee’s work is focused on the development of health
statistics and indicators, and providing analyses of the financial sustainability,
efficiency, and quality of health and long-term care systems in member
countries.
- Expected results
o The OECD Health Committee’s data and policy analysis supports Canada’s health
priorities such as post-COVID health system resilience and initiatives to improve
the health care system such as digital health and long-term care.
o A portion of the funding will be used to pay for Canada’s participation in a major
new survey (called PaRIS)
o to collect patient-reported indicators of their experience in primary health care.
o The funding to the OECD Health Committee would also demonstrate Canada’s
support for the OECD’s work inhealth, and promote Canada’s continued
engagement on global health issues related to health system strengthening and
universal health coverage.
- Voted: 200,000
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Department of Health to support World Health Organization Framework
Convention on TobaccoControl
- Key messages
o Canada remains committed to implementing the Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control (FCTC). Advancing full implementation of the FCTC, both within
Canada and abroad, will continue to be a priority for the Government of
Canada, aswill participating in regional and international tobacco control fora to
address the burden of tobacco use.
o A collaborative relationship exists with the World Health Organization (WHO)
FCTC Convention Secretariat, including providing support to the Secretariat via
the international health grants program (IHGP) on a regular basis since 2015 for
COP-related (Conference of the Parties) activities.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Facilitate a grant payment to the WHO FCTC.
o The grant is toassist in improving data collection, analysis and the impact of
Party reports in strengthening the WHO FCTC.
- Expected results
o A reduced reporting burden on the Parties, would allow for a smoother analysis
of data by the Convention Secretariat, resulting inmore informative global
progress reports to be submitted to the COP.
o The proposed project would not only contribute to reducing the reporting
burden on under-resourced tobacco control programs, but would also provide
Parties with informative WHO FCTC progress reports and data analysis to
strategically inform their domestic tobacco control efforts.
- Voted: 200,000
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the delivery of the
international AIDS Conference
- Key messages
o Funding provided by CIHR to support the development of future research
agendas, knowledge mobilization, and Canadian and international researcher
and knowledge user engagement at AIDS 2022.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Augment the Government of Canada support for AIDS 2022, through an existing
PHAC funding arrangement with the International AIDS Society.
- Expected results
o The funding will support the increased participation of Canadian researchers
through the conferencescholarship program.
- Voted: 200,000
- Statutory: 0
Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Joint Expert Committee on Food
Additives to re-evaluate the safety of titanium dioxide as a food additive
- Key messages
o Recently, the European Commission prohibited the use of titanium dioxide
(TiO2), a widely used food additive internationally, in food, based on a scientific
opinion by the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA).
o The Joint WHO/FAO Expert Committee on Food Additives (JECFA) is best placed
to re-evaluate the safety of TiO2 as a food additive. JECFA intends to hold a
meeting to establish scientific advice on TiO2, however, funds are needed.
Funding this initiative will facilitate JECFA’s ability to re-evaluate TiO2 in a timely
manner.
o Thisadvice will help inform Canada’s actions and is important to help maintain
Canadians’ confidence in the Canadian and international food safety systems.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Facilitate a grant payment to the WHO which will be used to establish scientific
advice through the re-evaluation of the safety of titanium dioxide as a food
additive, as well as the use of aspartame which will help inform the
development and update of both domestic and international standards.
- Expectedresults
o This work will enable the assessment of the safety of TiO2 (titanium dioxide) as
a food additive and supports discussions around international standards.
o It will also inform Canada’s domestic actions with respect to TiO2, as well as our
discussions with foreign regulatory partners.
o This work may also be useful in informing the evaluation of other uses of TiO2
(such as cosmetics, foods, natural health products, prescription and non-
prescription drugs, medical devices, consumer products).
- Voted: 132,604
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariat to support the Capacity Accelerator Project
- Key messages
o This transfer will fund operational costs for an internal audit community
initiative called the Capacity Accelerator Project, managed by the Internal Audit
Sector within the Office of Comptroller General (OCG-IAS).
o The OCG-IAS is responsible for implementing the Government’s renewed vision
for internal audits, which aims to provide timely and credible advice to
management that is tailored to the organization’s strategy, objectives, and
tolerance for risk.
o This funding is required to meet increased demand for internal audit services
and to continue developing a sustainable, diverse, and professional internal
audit community.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is for:
o The Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) which asked to financially contribute to
internal audit community services and initiatives to help develop and maintain
the OCG-IAS which in turn will provide OAE with support, guidance and best
practices.
- Expectedresults
o OCG-IAS is to provide the following services:
o Provide ongoing advice and support in the areas of learning, recruitment, and
retention.
o Oversee the development and implementation of a community diversity and
inclusion action plan.
o Lead the development of Interdepartmental Standardized Work Descriptions
and develop guidance and tools to support the conversion of various position
classifications.
o Lead the implementation of and ongoing support for the Community Data
Strategy, including the establishmentof an enterprise solution for TeamMate+.
o Make best practices and tools available to the community via established
platform
o Manage and fund IIA memberships for all eligible internal auditors.
- Voted: (20,000)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to Canadian Institutesof Health Research to support EU Joint Programme-
Neurodegerative Disease Research on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
- Key messages
o The EU Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND)
announced an international call to establish expert working groups on the
impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases.
o PHAC and CIHR signed an MOU on July 27, 2022in order to co-fund one expert
working group that will address priority data gaps around COVID and dementia
and support the implementation of the ‘Dementia Strategy for Canada:
Together We Aspire’.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is for:
o PHAC/CIHR collaboration which aims to support international work through the
EU Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND) that will help
advance research and/or surveillance on the impacts of COVID-19 on the
development and progression ofneurological diseases, supporting the
implementation of the national dementia strategy.
- Expected results
o The selected expert working group will assess research and/or surveillance
strategies to understand the impacts of COVID-19 on the development and
progression of neurological diseases.
o A white paper will be drafted to summarize the findings of this work.
o This work will help address a priority data gap and advance dementia research
and surveillance.
- Voted: (33,235)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support a Health System Impact
Fellowship
- Key messages
o This funding will fulfill PHAC’s commitment to support a post-doctoral fellow
funded by the CIHR Health System Impact (HIS) Fellowship Scheme.
o By this scheme, CIHR provides 70% of the fellowship costs and a partner
organisation (in this case PHAC) provides 30% to the host organisation
(University of Ottawa).
o Legal counsel has identified barriers to PHAC directly funding the University in
the context of this fellowship.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Allow PHAC operating dollars to be used to honour PHAC’s commitment to the
funding of a post-doctoral fellow at University of Ottawa in the context of the
HIS fellowship scheme.
o HC-PHAC legal have identified significant barriers to other forms of transfer of
funds.
- Expected results
o Funds transferred from PHAC to CIHR will be used by CIHR to transfer to
University of Ottawa the PHAC component of the support for the fellow.
o The fellow is undertaking research on West Nile virus and other emerging/re-
emerging mosquito-borne diseases in Canada to support our adaptation to
anticipated impacts of climate change on the risk to Canadians from these
diseases.
- Voted: (46,500)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Canadian Aboriginal AIDS
Network (CAAN) with their Indigenous Knowledge Facilitation activity for AIDS2022
- Key messages
o The national Indigenous organization, Communities Alliances and Network
(CAAN) sought financial support from the Government of Canada to facilitate an
Indigenous Knowledge aspect for the 24th International AIDS Conference held in
Montreal.
o PHAC agreed to provide CAAN a sum of $50,000 through Indigenous Services
Canada, as thelatter holds a block contribution agreement with CAAN.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Provide to the Canadian Aboriginal AIDS Network (CAAN) to support the
inclusion of Indigenous elders throughout the AIDS 22 conference, and for the
inclusion of Indigenous elders to provide land acknowledgements and
ceremonial prayers at the Opening and Closing Ceremonies.
- Expected results
o The 24th International AIDS Conference demonstrated the meaningful involved
of Indigenous peoples throughoutthe programme, acknowledging that the
event was taking place on their traditional lands, and in the context of an
infectious disease that disproportionately affects Indigenous peoples across
Canada.
- Voted: (50,000)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support research on priorities outlined in
Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO) report
- Key messages
o PHAC is partnering with CIHR on their Funding Opportunity: CPHO Report 2021:
o Future of Public Health. Researchers have submitted research proposals that
address at least one of the priorities for transformational change to the public
health system, identified in the 2021 Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO) report.
o PHAC will fund one proposal that fills important knowledge gaps related to
PHAC’s mandate and goals.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is so:
o PHAC funds support research relevant to the priority area identified in the 2021
CPHO Annual Report: “Evaluate the effectiveness of public health measures
implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic”, specifically focused on mask
wearing, quarantine and isolation, or physical distancing
- Expected results
o With these funds CIHR will:
o Support one high-quality research project aligned with priorities identified in
theCPHO’s 2021 Annual Report that evaluate the effectiveness of public health
measures implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic.
o Administer the grants to successful applicants, including payment and
monitoring the use of grant funds.
- Voted: (99,500)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Department of Indigenous Services to support the Pan-Canadian Health
Inequalities Reporting Initiative-Mental Wellness among First Nations Peoples living on reserve
- Keymessages
o First Nations Information Governance Centre (FNIGC), ISC (Indigenous Services
Canada) and PHAC will collaborate on a project entitled “Pan-Canadian Health
Inequalities Reporting Initiative (HIRI)–Mental Wellness among First Nations
Peoples living on reserve and in northern communities” to advance health
equity reporting among Indigenous population groups.
o The report will be led by the First Nations Information Governance Centre
(FNIGC) over 2 years and will strengthen the measurement, monitoring and
reporting of inequalities in relation to mental wellness experienced by First
Nations Peoples living on reserve and in northern communities. The report will
draw from the data in FNIGC’s Regional Health Survey.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support the development of an Indigenous-led report that will explore
inequalities in relation to the various dimensions that encompass mental
wellness as experienced by First Nations Peoples living on reserve and in
northern communities.
- Expected results
o The development of this Indigenous-led report will make it possible to explore
inequalities in the various dimensions that encompass mental wellness to
achieve the following objectives:
o Understand how and why inequalities in mental wellness occur among First
Nations Peoples living on reserve andhow to prevent them.
o Advance population health monitoring strategy as well as a dialogue around
mental wellness that centers on equity and social justice, bridging various forms
of knowledge.
o Guide and catalyze inter-sectoral policy and programs to reduce health
inequalities.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support Policy Research for Health System
Transformation
- Key messages
o PHAC is partnering with CIHR on their Funding Opportunity: Policy Research for
Health System Transformation. Researchers have been invited to submit
research proposals that generate evidence to inform macro-level policies to
support high-performing healthcare and public health systems in Canada with
the aim of advancing the Quadruple Aim–improved population health
outcomes, better patient and provider experience, and increased value –and
health equity.
o PHAC will fund two proposals thatfill important knowledge gaps related to
PHMGD’s mandate and goals.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support two research proposals that generate evidence to inform macro-level
policies to support high-performing health care and public health systems in
Canada with the aim of advancing the Quadruple Aim–improved population
health outcomes, better patient and provider experience, and increased value –
and health equity.
- Expected results
o With these funds CIHR will:
o Support two high-quality research projects that evaluate the effectiveness of
public health measure policies implemented during the COVID-19 pandemic.
o Administer the grants to successful applicants, including payment and
monitoring the use of grant funds.
- Voted: (300,000)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Department of Health for the Enterprise Service Model (ESM) reallocation
- Key messages
o In 2021-22, Shared Services Canada (SSC) implemented the Enterprise Service
Model (ESM). Through ESM, certain services provided by SSC would be funded,
on an ongoing basis, from appropriations rather than through cost recovery
from SSC to participating departments.
o In ARLU of 2022-23, HC made a permanent transfer to SSC for mobile telephone
services as part of ESM.
o This amount included, in error, a number of mobile devices that belonged to
PHAC. This Supplementary Estimates (B) transfer is to reimburse HC for the
overpayment it made to SSC.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Reimburse HC for the overpayment it made to SSC on behalf of PHAC for Mobile
Telephony Services related to Enterprise Service Model (ESM). PHAC will now
reflect an accurate cost and inventory of mobile telephony services delivered
through the (ESM).
- Expected results
o A reimbursement of $406,660 will be processed to Health Canada for the
overpayment it made from PHAC’s Corporate Reserve to HC via 2022-23
Supplementary Estimates (B).
o Subsequently, a permanent transfer from PHAC to HC for $406,660 is required
in ARLU of 2023-24
- Voted: (406,660)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Canada Border Services Agency for data integration on border health
surveillance
- Key messages
o While ownership of ArriveCAN is with Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA),
PHAC still requires the data for border health surveillance and evidence-based
decision-making.
o PHAC has agreed to pay CBSA this fiscal year for the preliminary data integration
that CBSA does before the data comes to PHAC.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is for:
o Border SQL (structured query language) database management and analytics is
a core responsibility of the Data Science team and requires this information
from CBSA to continue to support PHAC program areas.
- Expected results
o As data continues to be received from CBSA, the Data Management Innovation
and Analysis centre within PHAC will continue to support PHAC programs
(Regional Operation, National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) Testing
Directorate, Modelling, NML Genomics Surveillance, CBTH, DTB) through
analytics of border data and senior management dashboards and briefing tools.
- Voted: (1,078,000)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to support
Indigenous early learning and child care
- Key messages
o This funding transfer involves:
o the Kativik Regional Government (KRG) PHAC and;
o the Government of Nunatsiavut (GN) PHAC;
o under the Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities (AHSUNC)
program to Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada (CIRNAC)
with the administration ofa transfer through a new comprehensive Federal
Fiscal Funding Arrangement (FFA) to support the implementation of the
Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC).
o PHAC and CIRNAC have collaborated on the development of an
Interdepartmental Letter ofAgreement (ILA). Under this approach, PHAC will
delegate all authority of the Financial Administration Act (FAA) to CIRNAC, to
enable them to make program payments and administer the AHSUNC funding.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support the Federal government’s commitment to reconciliation and recognizes
the Inuit peoples’ right to be active and full partners in the management of
federal funding related to Inuit early learning and childcare.
o Guided by the Indigenous Early Learningand Child Care (IELCC) Framework, the
IELCC Transformation Initiative supports the development of flexible and
responsive funding agreements for Indigenous-led regional bodies and their
recipients across federal government departments.
- Expected results
o An Indigenous led approach to streamlining the administration of IELCC funding
under a single grant agreement.
- Voted: (1,900,117)
- Statutory: 0
Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support Pediatric Outcome Improvement
through Coordinationof Research Networks
- Key messages
o Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support Pediatric Outcome
Improvement through Coordination of Research Networks
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support a research study todetermine the proportion of children with positive
antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 according to age and geographic region over time, as
an estimate of recent infection.
o Leftover blood samples collected in Emergency Department visits will be used to
test for past COVID-19 infection and immunity.
- Expected results
o The purpose of this funding is to:
o Support a research study to determine the proportion of children with positive
antibodies to SARS-CoV-2 according to age and geographic region over time, as
an estimateof recent infection.
o Leftover blood samples collected in Emergency Department visits will be used to
test for past COVID-19 infection and immunity.
- Voted: (3,000,000)
- Statutory: 0
Total transfers
- Voted: (3,383,866)
- Statutory: 0
INTERNALREALLOCATIONS
Internal reallocation of resources from operating to contributions in support of HIV self tests,
monkeypox and myocarditis
- Key messages
o This funding in the amount of $11,668,122, which will be reallocated from
Operating funding to Contribution funding, will be used to:
o Support the procurement and distribution of HIV self-tests kits across Canada
($8,000,000); and
o Support the study of post-vaccination myocarditis and/or pericarditis
($1,668,122); and support public health research on the current Canadian
monkeypox outbreak ($2,000,000).
- Purpose/objectives
o This is a conversion of $11,668,122 from Operating to Contributions
- Expected results
o This contribution funding will allow:
o Community based organizations to procure the self-test kits and provide the
necessary support services to their client base;
o The Canadian Cardiovascular Society to undertake a robust national, Canada-
focussed surveillance study to collect Canadian data on post-vaccination
myocarditis and/or pericarditis (MYCOVAX); and
o Collaborative public health research studies on the current Canadian
monkeypox outbreak in order to address critical knowledge gaps and support
community organizations for prevention, awareness, anti-stigma type activities.
- Voted: 0
- Statutory: 0
Internal reallocation of resources to support booster campaign uptake through the
Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF
- Key messages
o This funding, which will be reallocated from Operating funding to Grant funding
from the Medical Countermeasures, Phase 3, Part A–VaccineEnvelope will be
used by the Immunization Partnership Fund for projects to support vaccine
confidence and uptake of COVID-19 boosters.
o This supports PHAC’s efforts to help finish the fight against COVID-19 with
communities across Canada and within priority populations, and to continue the
fight against vaccine mis-and dis-information.
- Purpose/objectives
o This is a conversion of $3,000,000 from Operating to Grants.
- Expected results
o The IPF will fund some new projects with priority populations, andprovide
additional funding to existing projects, in support of a fall/winter 2022 COVID-19
booster/vaccination efforts.
o Funding will assist vaccination stakeholders and community partners by
increasing their capacity to provide evidence-based, equity-driven, and
culturally-safe vaccination information and supports.
o This funding will also increase vaccine confidence and ultimately support
residents of Canada in their choice to be vaccinated in order to protect
themselves and others from COVID-19.
- Voted: 0
- Statutory:0
Internal reallocation of resources in partnership with the WHO, for new tools for advanced
monitoring and reporting on health inequities
- Key messages
o This funding, which will be reallocated from Operating funding to Grant funding,
will be used to make a payment to the World Health Organization.
o This item is required in these estimates to obtain authority to list the related
grant. It will help the WHO to develop an updated and expanded set of health
inequality monitoring tools, including anew and expanded edition of the
“Handbook on health inequality monitoring”, incorporating the latest
developments in the health inequality monitoring science field since he first
edition.
- Purpose/objectives
o This is a conversion of $180,000 from Operating to Grants.
- Expected results
o An updated and expanded set of monitoring tools, including a revised edition of
the handbook, will contribute towards advancing health equity by providing
new tools to support decision-makers with an enhanced evidence base for
formulating equity-oriented policies, programmes and practices. The new and
expanded edition of the “Handbook on health inequality monitoring”, will
incorporate
o recent developments in the field, including:
o Considerations for health inequality monitoring in high-income countries.
o Considerations for monitoring of inequalities in the context of a pandemic and
other health emergencies (including, but not limited to, COVID-19)
o Recent improvements in data collection methods, monitoring tools and
methodologies
o The use of inequality monitoring data to inform equity-oriented decision-making
(knowledge translation)
- Voted: 0
- Statutory: 0
Net internal reallocations
- Voted: 0
- Statutory: 0
Canadian Food Inspection Agency-2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
CFIA’S FUNDING CROSSWALK
Contents
Name
TOTAL SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES ‘B’
Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of Canada’s food safety
system (COVID-19)
Transfer from the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the
Canadian Safety and Security Program
Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to
provide support to departmental staff located at missions abroad
Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food
to cost share the Market Access Support System.
TOTAL SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES ‘B’
Total: $19,516,795
- Key messages
o For Supplementary Estimates (B), CFIA has an increase of $19.5 million for the
following:
o $16.1 million in Voted Appropriations which includes $16.1 million in new
funding and $16.4K for transfers with Other Government Departments.
o $3.4 million in statutory appropriations for the employee benefit plans.
- Purpose/objectives:-
- Expectedresults:-
- Voted: 16,144,780
- Statutory: 3,372,015
Funding to increase food inspection capacity and safeguard the integrity of Canada’s food safety
system (COVID-19)
Total: $19,500,442
- Key messages
o Funding of $19.5M in 2022-23 to continue torespond to the unprecedented
impacts of COVID-19 on Canada’s food production / supply chain, as well the
economic implications stemming from disruptions in employment (public and
private sectors).
- Purpose/objectives
o Respond to the unprecedented impacts of COVID-19 on Canada’s food
production / supply chain, as well the economic implications stemming from
disruptions in employment (public and private sectors).
- Expected results
o This investment will allow CFIA to maintain reliable services (e.g. inspection,
laboratory testing and other enabling functions) paramount to ensuring that
Canadians have continued access to safe, high-quality food to feed their
families.
- Voted: 16,128,427
- Statutory: 3,372,015
Transfer from the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the
Canadian Safety and Security Program
Total $58,000
- Key messages
o Transfer from Department of National Defence to CFIA in the amount of $58.0K
to support the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP).
- Purpose/objectives
o The CSSP provides science and technology solutions, support and advice for
responding to the Government of Canada's public safety and security policy
imperatives.
- Expected results
o The transfer of funds will enable the CFIA to enhance its science and technology
capabilities for public safety and security through strategic acquisition of
technologies.
- Voted: 58,000
- Statutory:-
Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to
provide support to departmental staff located at missions abroad
Total: ($16,647)
- Key messages
o Transfer from CFIA to Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development in the amount of
$16.6K for funding mainly related to the foreign service directive allowance and
mission locally employed staff reclassification.
- Purpose/objectives
o Support CFIA staff located in missions aboard.
- Expected results
o CFIA staff located in missions aboard are adequately supported.
- Voted: (16,647)
- Statutory:-
Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to theDepartment of Agriculture and Agri-Food
to cost share the Market Access Support System.
Total: ($25,000)
- Key messages
o Transfer from CFIA to the Department of Agriculture and Agri-Food in the
amount of $25.0K to cost-share development andmaintenance of International
Affairs Branch's (IAB's) Market Access Support System (MASS), including MASS's
CFIA-specific modules.
- Purpose/objectives
o Cost-share development and maintenance of International Affairs Branch's
(IAB's) Market Access Support System (MASS), including MASS's CFIA-specific
modules.
- Expected results
o Cost-share development and maintenance of International Affairs Branch's
(IAB's) Market Access Support System (MASS), including MASS's CFIA-specific
modules.
- Voted: (25,000)
- Statutory:-
CIHR’s 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (B)
CIHR’S FUNDING CROSSWALK
Contents
Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021)
Funding to support the response to monkeypox outbreaks in Canada
Funding to support the study of long-term health impacts of COVID-19
Funding to support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows
Funding to support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative to advance research in
high-priority areas of women’s health
Funding for research security and the Research Support Fund
Funding for a COVID-19 outpatient therapeutic study
Funding to support pediatric outcome improvement through coordination of research networks
Funding to support the Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative
Funding to evaluate decriminalization of personal possession of illicit substances
Funding to support policy research for health system transformation
Funding to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
Funding to support the Healthy Youth Initiative
Funding to support research on priorities outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer
report
Funding to support a health system impact fellowship
Funding to support European Union Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research on
the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
Funding to support the Mobilizing Principles for Equitable Global Health Research
Funding to support the delivery of the international AIDS Conference
Funding to support Phase II of the Joint Canada-Israel Health Research Program
Funding to explore the development of a common grants management solution through the Tri-
Agency Grants Management Initiative
Funding to support women's health and economic well-being for a post-COVID-19 recovery
Clinical TrialsFund (Budget 2021)
Total: $85,820,817
Budget 2021
- Key messages
o The Government of Canada through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) is committed to supporting the health of all Canadians with innovative
new treatments and medicines by supporting the clinical trials pipeline from
discovery to implementation.
o Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada announced $250 million over
three fiscal years to create a new Clinical Trials Fund, through CIHR, which will
support research teams and infrastructure across the country to conduct clinical
trials.
- Purpose/objectives
o This funding allows for the implementation of the Clinical Trials Fund to
reinforce Canada’s clinical trials ecosystem by investing in three funding streams
including a Pan-Canadian Clinical Trials Consortium, clinical trials training
platforms and clinical trials projects.
- Expected results
o These important investments will stimulate innovation across the country and
ultimately lead to better health care systems and services for all Canadians.
- Voted: 84,721,744
- Statutory: 1,099,073
Funding to support the response to monkeypox outbreaks in Canada
Total: $10,279,200
Horizontal Item
- Key messages
o The Government of Canada is working to support a rapid response to outbreaks
of Monkeypox.
o This investment will support the rapid research response to be led by CIHR, in
collaboration with the Public Health Agency of Canada.
- Purpose/objectives
o To provide rapid evidence to inform clinical and health system management and
public health response, and/or decision-making and planning within and across
jurisdictions in Canada and internationally.
- Expected results
o Timely evidence to support decision-making andplanning within Canada and
internationally in light of the Monkeypox outbreak.
- Voted: 10,236,000
- Statutory: 43,200
Funding to support the study of long-term health impacts of COVID-19
Total: $1,376,600
Budget 2022
- Key messages
o Our government recognizes the emerging long-term impacts that COVID-19 has
had on the lives of many Canadians, including those with long-term
complications due to the virus, and that multi-year studies are now critical as
this pandemic persists into its third year.
o That is why Budget2022 committed $20 million over five years, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support additional research on the
long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians.
- Purpose/objectives
o Establish an integrated, interdisciplinary, and equitable Canadian Post COVID-19
Condition Research This network will Network.
o This network will provide a platform to strengthen Canada’s capacity to
undertake and contribute to ongoing non-duplicative research, enable
comprehensive and timely understandingof the health impacts of post-COVID-
19, engage relevant stakeholders, knowledge users and partners and swiftly
mobilize high-quality research evidence
- Expected results
o Timely evidence to inform policies and practices and to support communities as
partof an equitable response to the post COVID-19 condition.
- Voted: 1,328,000
- Statutory: 48,600
Funding to support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows
Total: $1,275,800
Budget 2022
Horizontal Item
- Key messages
o Fostering equity, diversity and inclusion in academia and the skilled workforce
remains a priority for Canada. To achieve world-class research, we must address
systemic barriers that limit the full participation of all talented individuals.
o The Government of Canada through Budget 2022 was proud to announce $40.9
million over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $9.7 million ongoing to the
federal granting councils to support targeted scholarships and fellowships for
promising Black student researchers.
- Purpose/objectives
o To address the underrepresentation of Black researchers and trainees among
the applicants and awardees of the federal granting agencies programs.
o To increase meaningful participation of Black research trainees in Canada to
contribute to skills development and improving employment options and to
promote the funding within relevant stakeholders, partner organizations, and
the academic community
- Expected results
o This funding will increase the number and proportion of Black research trainees
directly supported by agencies’ scholarships and fellowships at the
undergraduate, master, doctoral and post-doctoral stages.
o Contributing to making Canada’s research culture more equitable, diverse, and
inclusive, and augmenting Canada’s innovation potential.
- Voted: 1,238,000
- Statutory: 37,800
Funding to support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative to advance research in
high-priority areas of women’s health
Total: $1,221,510
Budget 2021
- Key messages
o Our government is committed to fostering research excellence regarding the
influence of sex and gender on health and to apply these findings to identify and
address pressing health challenges facing men, women, girls, boys and gender-
diverse people.
o The Government of Canada, through Budget 2021, committed $20 over 5 years
to support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative.
o This new initiative will advance research in high priority areas and ensure new
evidence improves women's and gender-diverse people's care and health
outcomes.
- Purpose/objectives
o The National Women's Health Research Initiative will advance a coordinated
research program that addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of
women's health and will ensure new evidence improves women's and gender-
diverse people's care and health outcomes. It will also promote an
intersectional lens to research and care to tackle persistent gaps for all women,
including for Indigenous, Black, and racialized women, women with disabilities,
and members of Two-Spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender, queer, intersex,
and additional sexually and gender diverse (2SLGBTQI+) communities.
- Expected results
o Increasing research in women’s health and promoting the use of an
intersectional lens to address gaps in current research streams.
o Maximizing research impact within and beyond toensure evidence is integrated
into health policy, decision making, and planning to support community,
regional, provincial, territorial, and /or federal efforts regarding women's
health.
o Building capacity for the next generation of women's health researchers to
support the development of a sustainable women's health research ecosystem
in Canada.
- Voted: 1,056,000
- Statutory: 165,510
Funding for research security and the Research Support Fund
Total: $188,941
Budget 2022
Horizontal Item
- Key messages
o Our government is committed to ensuring that Canadian research and
intellectual property remains secure from foreign intelligence agencies looking
to advance their own economic, military, or strategic interests.
o That is why the Government of Canada was proud toannounce through Budget
2022 $159.6 million, starting in 2022-23, and $33.4 million ongoing for the
Research Support Fund to build capacity within post-secondary institutions to
identify, assess, and mitigate potential risks to research security; and to
enhance Canada’s ability to protect our research, and to establish a Research
Security Centre that will provide advice and guidance directly to research
institutions.
- Purpose/objectives
o This funding will be used to increase federal capacity for research security
including sustaining and expanding the implementation of the National Security
Guidelines for Research Partnerships. All operating funding, including 2 new
permanent FTEs.
- Expected results
o These investments will contribute to a safer Canadian research ecosystem
where Canadian researchers are equipped with the tools to safeguard
intellectual property from theft and foreign intelligence agencies looking to
advance their own strategic interests.
- Voted: 155,363
- Statutory: 33,578
Funding fora COVID-19 outpatient therapeutic study
Total: $5,000,000
Transfer from HC
- Key messages
o Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-
19 and the Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an
unprecedented pace.
o Through CIHR, our government has been working hand in hand with domestic
and international partners including on research to evaluate the safety and
effectiveness of novel therapeutic treatments for COVID-19.
- Purpose/objectives
o Toward the end of 2021, the Government of Canada announced purchase
agreements to access emerging antiviral medications as treatment options for
patients who present with mild to moderate COVID-19 and who are at high risk
of developing serious disease.
o To effectively roll out these new antiviral medications, there is a pressing need
to further study the outcomes, including effectiveness, comparative
effectiveness, and cost effectiveness of administering these treatments-as well
as any other treatments which may become available-to non-hospitalized
patients in the Canadian health care system.
o The total value of the collaboration is $11.25 million, with $5 million from the
Department of Health and $6.25 million from CIHR, all in 2022-23.
o This transfer from Health Canada will help support the Operating Grant: COVID-
19 Outpatient Therapeutic Studies with the following objectives:
o Support an adaptive platform trial to evaluate the effectiveness, practical
challenges, and outcomes of administering therapeutics for COVID-19 to non-
hospitalized patients in Canadian healthcare settings.
o Generate evidence on treatment effectiveness in diverse populations.
o Provide rapid evidence to inform clinical and health system management and
public health response, and/ordecision-making and planning within and across
jurisdictions in Canada and internationally.
- Expected results
o Allow for the effective roll out of new antiviral medications with timely research
evidence on effectiveness, comparative effectiveness, and cost effectiveness of
administering these treatments-as well as any other therapeutics which may
become available-to non-hospitalized patients in the Canadian health care
system.
- Voted: 5,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to support pediatric outcome improvement through coordination of research networks
Total: $3,000,000
Transfer from PHAC
- Key messages
o The Government of Canada recognizes the importance of investing in research
to inform the response to the COVID-19pandemic.
o Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, investments in the
Pediatric Outcome imProvement through COordination of Research Networks
(POPCoRN) are establishing central coordination and collaboration activities
with collaborating sites located across Canada to increase the availability of
high-quality and real-time evidence to support research on the effectiveness
and relative safety of the COVID-19 vaccines in children and youth.
o This additional investment leverages this research platform that is monitoring
COVID-19 infections, vaccination, and social impacts among children and youth
to also initiate a serosurvey study on children and youth.
- Purpose/objectives
o The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, through PHAC, identified the POPCoRN to
receive supplementary funding of $3,000,000 in 2022-23 to rapidly initiate a
serosurvey study on children and youth.
o This transfer from PHAC will help support a research network that brings
together pediatric health researchers from 16 research sites across Canada. The
evidence generated will help protect children and youth against the serious
health effects of the pandemic.
- Expected results
o This important initiative will continue providing the evidence required to
support the health and wellbeing of young Canadians in light of the current and
future impacts of COVID-19.
- Voted: 3,000,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to support the Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative
Total: $485,174
Transfer from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
- Key messages
o Fostering equity, diversity and inclusion in academia and the skilled workforce
remains a priority for Canada. To achieve world-class research, we must address
systemic barriers that limit the full participation of all talented individuals.
o CIHR iscommitted to fostering an equitable, diverse, and inclusive health
research ecosystem that values the perspectives and contributions of all and
promotes research excellence.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to return unused funds for theSSHRC-led Race,
Gender and Diversity Initiative.
o CIHR originally transferred $3.6 million to SSHRC for the initiative. SSHRC will
return a total of $635,174 to CIHR as follows: $485,174 in 2022-23 and $150,000
in 2023-24.
o The main goal of the Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative is to fund community-
based and community-led research partnerships with postsecondary institutions
that are grounded in the lived experience of underrepresented and/or
marginalized groups and that analyze the causes and persistence of systemic
racism and discrimination.
- Expected results
o Support for social sciences and humanities projects on the themes of race,
gender and diversity with a focus on health.
o Contributing to making Canada’s research culture more equitable, diverse, and
inclusive, and augmenting Canada’s innovation potential.
- Voted: 485,174
- Statutory:-
Funding to evaluate decriminalization of personal possession of illicit substances
Total: $332,500
Transfer from HC
- Key messages
o Our government continues torecognize the importance of funding innovative
and timely research that will improve health outcomes for people experiencing
challenges related to mental health and substance use.
o This includes a funding opportunity launched by CIHR to support an
independent evaluation of the impacts of the recent exemption in British
Columbia granted under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act, removing the
criminal penalties for the possession of small amounts of certain controlled
substances for personal use by adults18 years of age and older. This represents
an investment of $2.85 million over 5 years.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of the transfer is to provide grant funding for the evaluation of the
impacts of the exemption in British Columbia on people who use drugs, the
general population, police forces and the criminal justice system, as well as an
evaluation of the economic consequences.
o This transfer represents the first year of a six-year transfer from HC for a total of
$2,850,000 from 2022-23 to 2027-28.
- Expected results
o This activity will evaluate the impacts of the exemption in BC on people who use
drugs, the general population, police forces and the criminal justice system, as
well as an evaluation of the economic consequences.
o The findings from the evaluation will help build the evidence base related to
harm reduction policies related to substance use.
- Voted: 332,500
- Statutory:-
Funding to support policy research for health system transformation
Total: $300,000
Transfer from PHAC
- Key messages
o Our government is committed to supporting a strong and vibrant health
research ecosystem.
o That is why, through CIHR, in partnership with the Ontario Ministry of Health,
the New Brunswick Health Research Foundation, and the Saskatchewan Health
Research Foundation, we are providing ongoing support for policy research to
help transform the research health system.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to fund two policy research projects (up to
$150,000 for each project for one year) that are designed to generate policy
research aligned to decision makers’ evidence needs to inform macro-level
policies to support high-performing health care and public health systems and
advance the Quadruple Aim (improved population health outcomes, better
patient and provider experience, and increased value) and health equity in
Canada.
- Expected results
o This funding opportunity is expected to generate evidence to inform macro-
level policies to support high-performing health care and public health systems
in Canada with the aim of advancing the Quadruple Aim–improved population
health outcomes, better patient and provider experience, and increased value –
and health equity.
o It will also foster the creation of new or strengthening of existing partnerships
and collaborations between researchers, policymakers and knowledge users
with lived experience to align research with policy priorities and work together
in pursuit of evidence-informed health systems transformation.
- Voted: 300,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
Total: $245,500
Transfer from HC
- Key messages
o Our government is committed to funding a strong research ecosystem in order
to support evidence-based decision making.
- Purpose/objectives
o The funding will support the generation of advice on complex science issues,
championing science for researchers, support specific flagship science initiatives
and participation in the Network of Departmental Science Advisors.
- Expected results
o Produce the requiredpolicy research to allow decision makers to make
informed decisions about the health care and public health systems in Canada
- Voted: 245,500
- Statutory:-
Funding to support the Healthy Youth Initiative
Total: $100,000
Transfer from theDepartment of Indigenous Services
- Key messages
o Our government understands the impact that the COVID-19 pandemic has had
on youth in Canada.
o We are dedicated to ensuring that the supports youth need are both available
and accessible across the country.
o Our government is committed to supporting the health and wellness of youth,
in order to help them achieve their full potential.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the Healthy Youth Catalyst Grants
funding opportunity to support generation of key evidence to promote the
health and wellness of youth, supporting them to achieve their full potential.
The funding from ISC-FNIHB is to fund 1 grant for 1 year in the priority area of
Indigenous youth.
o This funding will help identify and develop emerging research foci relevant to
Canada’s Youth Policy
o It will help foster networking and collaboration across the health research
ecosystem.
o It will build capacity for youth engagement in healthresearch.
- Expected results
o Increased research on the health and wellness of youth across the country.
o Stronger youth engagement in health-related research.
o Increased health related data on youth across the country, enabling better
informed policy decisions impacting youth.
- Voted: 100,000
- Statutory:-
Funding to support research on priorities outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief Public Health Officer
report
Total: $99,500
Transfer from PHAC
- Key messages
o Our government understands that the COVID-19 pandemic has been the biggest
public health crisis that our country has confronted in a century.
o We are committed to continuing to address the repercussions of the pandemic
while ensuring that our public health system is better equipped to protect all
people living in Canada from future challenges.
o These investments will help to ensure that our post-pandemic future is different
than our pre-pandemic past.
- Purpose/objectives
o This funding will support research on priorities outlined in Canada’s 2021 Chief
Public Health Officer report.
o The research supported by this transfer will help ensure that the conditions are
in place for Canada to be ready for current and future public health challenges.
- Expected results
o This funding will help ensure that public health systems are better equipped to
capably address the complex challenges facing the sector.
- Voted: 99,500
- Statutory:-
Funding to support a health system impact fellowship
Total: $46,500
Transfer from PHAC
- Keymessages
o Our government understands the value of a strong research ecosystem in
Canada and is committed to providing meaningful opportunities for researchers
throughout the health system
o We are committed to investing in doctoral trainees and post-doctoralfellows
given their important role in creating a strong health system
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the Health System Impact Fellowship
which provides doctoral and post-doctoral awardees with a paid experiential
learning opportunity within health system and related organizations where they
will dedicate the majority of their time towards a program of work that
advances the organization’s impact goals and contributes to improved health
system performance.
o Thisfellowship will create a platform for collaboration and interdisciplinary
training in public health and AI approaches.
o This will facilitate a community of practice across Canada at provincial and
federal public health agencies to understand and apply AI approaches to
address public health challenges.
- Expected results
o This Fellowship will allow doctoral trainees and post-doctoral fellows to apply
their research and analytic talents to critical health system challenges outside of
the traditional scholarly setting.
o This will provide an enriched training environment for PhDs and post-doctoral
fellows through experiential training and networking opportunities.
- Voted: 46,500
- Statutory:-
Funding to support European Union Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research on
the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases
Total: $33,235
Transfer from PHAC
- Key messages
o The Government of Canada is committed to understanding the full impact of
COVID-19 on the health of all Canadians.
o Through this transfer, the Government of Canada is proud to support the work
of the European Union Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Research on the
impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative diseases.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support a funding opportunity to develop, as
part of the EU Joint Programme-Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND)
call, an expert working group on the impact of COVID-19 on neurodegenerative
diseases.
o PHAC’s Centre for Surveillance and Applied Research (CSAR) is supportive of the
JPND call since it will promote an international perspective to advance the
surveillance and data pillar of the National Dementia Strategy and explore the
emerging need to examine the impact of COVID-19 on neurological diseases and
health, including dementia.
- Expected results
o This investment will support collaborative research in the field of
neurodegenerative diseases and ultimately lead to better understanding of the
overall impact of COVID-19 on the health of Canadians.
- Voted: 33,235
- Statutory:-
Funding to support the Mobilizing Principles for Equitable Global Health Research
Total: $93,600
Transfer from CIHR to the International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
- Key messages
o Our government continues to contribute to an equitable and just world through
collaborative research opportunities.
o As a means of continuing this work, CIHR is collaborating with IDRC to integrate
principles in the Canadian research system to promoteequitable global health
research.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the funding opportunity Mobilizing
Principles for Equitable Global Health Research, aimed at integrating equitable
global health research principles across theCanadian research system and
ensuring that global health research is practiced in an equitable way.
o The total value of collaboration is $624,000 over four years from 2022-2023 to
2025-2026 and this is the first of four-year transfers to IDRC. CIHR'sshare totals
$312,000 (same for IDRC).
- Expected results
o The investment will contribute to adherence to principles of equitable global
health research in practice and strengthen the quality and impact of Canadian
global health research.
- Voted:(93,600)
- Statutory:-
Funding to support the delivery of the international AIDS Conference
Total: $200,000
Transfer from CIHR to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
- Key messages
o Our government committed to the fight against HIV/AIDS and continues to
invest in a comprehensive approach to addressing this issue, including through
research and public awareness programs.
o Our role as hosts of a major global platform on HIV/AIDS for the first time since
2006 will allow us to highlight Canada’s progress onglobal HIV targets and align
the agenda with the our work and that of global stakeholders.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the delivery of the major international
AIDS conference.
o The Centre for Communicable Diseases and Infection Control of the PHAC will
be leading the delivery process through the AIDS 2022 Interdepartmental
Working Group.
o The conference is major global platform on HIV and hosting it is an opportunity
to highlight Canada’s progress towards meeting global HIV targets.
o This transfer, and total value of the collaboration, is for 2022-23 only.
- Expected results
o The funding will contribute to hosting a major global HIV/AIDS conference in
Canada and highlight the county’s progress towards ending the epidemic.
- Voted: (200,000)
- Statutory:-
Funding to support Phase II of the Joint Canada-Israel Health Research Program
Total: $210,603
Transfer from CIHR to the International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
- Key messages
o Our government supports efforts to addressglobal health security priorities,
including infectious disease prevention and response.
o We understand the pivotal role of fundamental research in addressing the
health issues of people in Canada and abroad
o That is why our government, through the work of CIHR, is pleased to support
the initiative attracting global talent for cutting-edge biomedical and global
health research, focused on the intersection of non-communicable diseases and
infectious diseases.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer isto support the Phase II of the Joint Canada-Israel
Health Research Program 2021 Funding Opportunity, delivered in collaboration
with IDRC and the Azreili Foundation.
o The objective of Phase II is to support fundamental biomedical science and
global health research at the intersection between non-communicable chronic
diseases and infectious diseases.
o The total value of collaboration for CIHR is $1.5 million over 5 years and this
represents the first transfer.
- Expected results
o The transfer will support the world-class biomedical and global health research
on the intersection of non-communicable diseases and infectious diseases.
- Voted: (210,603)
- Statutory:-
Funding to explore the development of a common grants management solution through the Tri-
Agency GrantsManagement Initiative
Total: $1,140,433
Transfer from CIHR to the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
- Key messages
o Our government understands the importance of harmonizing and modernizing
its systems to support a vibrant research ecosystem.
o Through this transfer, we are taking steps to modernize the grants management
system for CIHR, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC)
through the Tri-AgencyGrants Management Initiative.
o This transfer will help provide NSERC the with the required funding to enable
this important work on CIHR’s behalf.
- Purpose/objectives
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the work on exploring the
development of a common grants management solution for CIHR, the NSERC,
and SSHRC through the Tri-Agency Grants Management Initiative.
- Expected results
o The purpose of this transfer is to support the work on exploring the
development of a common grants managementsolution for CIHR, the NSERC,
and SSHRC through the Tri-Agency Grants Management Initiative.
- Voted: (1,140,433)
- Statutory:-
Funding to support women's health and economic well-being for a post-COVID-19 recovery
Total: $2,080,000
Transfer from CIHR to theInternational Development Research Centre (IDRC)
- Key messages
o The Government of Canada through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) is committed to understanding the full impact of COVID-19 on the health
of all Canadians and developing strategies for effective and equitable responses
to health emergencies.
- Purpose/objectives
o The funding will support actionable research on the way women’s health and
work intersect and interact in the context of preparation, response, and
recovery from major health emergences such as COVID-19 globally.
o This represents the second installment of a total $11.08 million contribution of
CIHR over four years from 2021-2022 to 2024-2025.
- Expected results
o This transfer will support global health research to generate evidence to
understand how women’s health and work intersect and interact in preparation,
response and recovery from health emergencies such as COVID-19 and
development of recommendations for increased health and economic well-
being.
- Voted: (2,080,000)
- Statutory:-
