Created: 2020-10-26T15:40:50.039053
Name: Standing_Senate_Committee_on_Social_Affairs,_Science_and_Technology
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/4190afd1-9b1b-4be6-a800-14ad2dbca1ff/resource/f4e88475-d5db-4476-b0f0-4b4ec878ba30/download/soci-june-26th-english.pdf
Package ID: 4190afd1-9b1b-4be6-a800-14ad2dbca1ff
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances at the Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology regarding its study on the government's response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
APPEARANCE AT SOCI
Part A:
Opening Remarks
Part B:
1. Acute Respiratory Disorder
2. Black Canadians Support Measures
3. Border Measures
4. Communications
5. Correctional Facilities
6. Data Sharing and Collection
7. Dexamethasone
8. Digital Solutions
9. Drug Shortages
10. Drugs/Vaccines
11. Early History
12. Exposure Notification Launch
13. False Claims
14. Family and Gender Based Violence
15. Health System Capacity
16. HHR
17. Immunity Task Force
18. International Issues
19. Kearl Lake Outbreak
20. Labelling (English only)
21. Long Term Health Care Settings
22. Medical Assistance in Dying
23. Medical Devices
24. Mental Health Tools
25. Modelling
26. MSM
27. NESS
28. PMPRB Amendments
29. PPE Guidance
30. PPE Procurement
31. Protection of CFIA Inspectors
32. Race Based Data Collection
33. Reagent Procurement
34. Recovery Plan / New Normal
35. Research
36. Respirator Recalls
37. Spartan Test Kits
38. Substance Use / COVID
39. Temporary Foreign Workers
40. Test Kits
41. Testing Capacity
42. Trikafta
43. Vaccine Research and Timelines
Opening Remarks for
the Honourable Patty Hajdu
Minister of Health
Appearance before the Senate Committee on Social
Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI)
June 26, 2020
Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 5 minutes
Speech length: 651 words (5 minutes)
Check against delivery
Introduction
Madam Chair and Honourable Members of the
Committee:
I am pleased to be here today to update you on the
Government of Canada’s response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
I know this is an issue that the Committee has been
following carefully, and I am happy to provide further
details to you today.
Evolving response
Our response to this crisis has always been informed by
the best and most recent data available — and we adjust
our approach as circumstances change and as more
information becomes available.
The good news is that our collective response is working.
Across the country, transmission has slowed — and
provinces and territories are beginning to gradually ease
restrictions.
Thanks to the tremendous leadership of the Public Health
Agency of Canada and Health Canada, the close
collaboration of the provinces and territories, and the help
of Canadians, we’ve been able to bring the pandemic
under control in Canada.
But this does not mean that we are out of the woods.
As our Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Tam, has said, we
will likely see continued cases and outbreaks in some
areas as public health measures are relaxed.
And we still have work to do in some regions of the
country and in congregate settings — such as long-term
care homes or on farms with seasonal agricultural
workers.
Stigma
As community settings start opening, we can expect to
see transmission of the virus continue — and likely even
increase.
At this critical time, we need to remind all Canadians that
there is no shame in getting sick.
As a country, we need to combat the rise in stigma
experienced by COVID positive Canadians.
The reality is that, despite taking every precaution, it is still
possible to fall ill.
In fact, many of us will carry this virus without ever being
aware of it.
So it is more important than ever that Canadians who
need testing or treatment seek it out — without fear or
embarrassment.
Identifying and isolating new cases will be key in
containing future outbreaks. Testing is essential.
When someone gets tested, they are doing their part to
limit the spread of COVID-19. By being tested, they could
be saving lives.
So when we are out speaking to Canadians, at every
opportunity, we need to emphasize that we are all in this
together, and we need to support each other.
This is not just about being kind — it’s about protecting the
public’s health.
Data
In addition, as the epidemic has unfolded across the
country, it has also become clear that we need more
information on certain groups at higher risk for exposure
to, or severe outcomes of, COVID-19.
In partnership with various partners and stakeholders, a
number of efforts are underway to improve our knowledge
of the impact on COVID-19 on different populations and
communities, and critical to this is that it is done in a way
that respects privacy laws and individual autonomy.
Activities include working with provincial and territorial
partners to improve the collection of data on race/ethnicity,
and other key variables, within the national data set for
COVID-19, as well as undertaking specialized surveys
among key populations such as healthcare workers and
seniors in long term care.
Mental Health
We know that mental health is just as important as
physical health — no less so when we are in the middle of
a pandemic.
COVID-19 is impacting vulnerable Canadians, particularly
those who do not have ready access to their regular
support networks. This has had an impact on Canadians’
overall mental wellness and has increased the risks
associated with family violence and substance use.
To support Canadians during this difficult time, we have
developed a number of digital tools to help Canadians stay
healthy and informed.
For example, the Wellness Together Canada portal was
developed to link Canadians to mental health and
substance use supports. As of June 19, more than
230,000 Canadians have accessed the portal.
And through the Public Health Agency of Canada,
additional supports will be provided to Kids Help Phone for
mental health support for young people.
Conclusion
We have already come so far.
As Canadians, we have come together over the past few
months and made some hard sacrifices to flatten the
curve.
It has not been easy — but that hard work is paying off.
We still have a long road ahead of us, but I have every
reason to believe that Canadians will continue doing their
part to fight COVID-19 with compassion, empathy and
kindness.
It is who we are — and it is how we will keep our
communities safe and healthy through the next phase of
the pandemic and beyond.
Thank you.
Acute Inflammatory illness in children temporally linked with COVID-
19 (Kawasaki Disease)
SYNOPSIS
Reports of multi-system inflammatory disease in children with COVID-19 have been
issued in the U.K., Italy, the U.S. and elsewhere around the world. Alerts cite features of
toxic shock syndrome and incomplete Kawasaki disease, with some children
experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms and cardiac inflammation.
In Canada, there have been media reports of children with the syndrome at Ste. Justine
hospital in Montreal, Quebec, at Sick Kids in Toronto, and in Alberta as well as other
places. Several provinces had made it a reportable condition and are attempting to
quantify numbers.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
 Acute inflammatory illness in children is being reported in Canada and abroad,
and we are working with our network of pediatricians to keep Canada’s
physicians informed of these cases to support detection of cases and care of
children.
 We are advising Canadians to contact their healthcare provider if their child
shows symptoms, such as fever, gastrointestinal illness or their child seems very
unwell.
 We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable information about COVID-19
to prevent the further spread and to protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
BACKGROUND
An acute inflammatory illness has recently been reported in a small number of children
worldwide, temporally associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In Canada, there have
been media reports of children with the syndrome at Ste. Justine hospital in Montreal,
Quebec, at SickKids hospital in Toronto, and in Alberta and other places.
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include persistent fever, inflammation, poor function in one or more
organs, and other clinical and laboratory features not attributable to other infections.
Many affected children were hospitalized and some required intensive care. To date, all
children affected in Canada have done well and recovered. Some children have
required ICU admissions.
Linkage to COVID-19
Many children with this inflammatory syndrome did not test positive for COVID-19.
Globally, nasal tests for the COVID-19 virus were often negative, however blood tests
for antibodies were sometimes but not always positive. While the tests themselves may
have had varied accuracy, the fact that patients who tested negative for COVID-19 virus
and sometimes test positive for antibodies suggests that inflammatory complications
were delayed, occurring when the virus was no longer detectable on nasal swabs.
Clinicians in Canada are aware of this potential syndrome and must maintain a high
index of suspicion to identify cases. What is causing them, is unknown. It is suspected
an immune response to COVID-19 activates an inflammatory process in genetically
susceptible children. But other mechanisms are possible as well. The global pediatric
medical community is rapidly studying this issue. Canada and PHAC have
representation on the WHO expert group that is now looking at this issue.
So far, children have had far less COVID-19 disease than adults. Even young people
can have serious outcomes or potentially death, so it is important that everyone take
precautions to prevent infection.
Surveillance
As part of the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) surveillance of COVID-19,
there have been three different ways the disease activity in children have been
monitored:
• the reporting of all cases to provinces, then to PHAC;
• a network of Pediatric Emergency Department physicians in Children’s hospitals
who report on COVID-19 cases; and
• the Canadian Pediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a collaboration between
PHAC and the Canadian Paediatric Society.
The CPSP COVID-19 surveillance protocol is being modified to capture cases of this
Kawasaki-like syndrome/multi-system inflammatory syndrome, even in the absence of a
positive test for COVID-19 to increase available data concerning this emerging
condition.
Federal Role
PHAC continues ongoing monitoring, intelligence gathering and international
engagement to inform Canadian public health action. Canada also continues to
collaborate with federal, provincial, and territorial partners to share information about
COVID-19 in Canada. PHAC has a number of systems in place to monitor community
spread and severe outcomes related to COVID-19 in pediatric populations.
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA INITIATIVES TO SUPPORT BLACK CANADIANS
Public Health Agency of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black
Canadians Fund is investing $10 million over 5 years to partner with community-based organizations,
researchers and others in Black communities to generate new evidence on culturally focused programs
and interventions that address mental health and its determinants for Black Canadians.
This Fund consists of two separate streams: the Incubator Stream provides up to 12 months of funding
to support capacity-building activities. Currently, eight projects have received $75,000 each in grant
funding. Once completed, these eight projects will have the opportunity to apply for additional funding
for intervention implementation. The Implementation Stream, provides up to $800,000 of funding over
four years for larger scale community-based projects that have the readiness and capacity to be
implemented. Currently, eight projects have received implementation funding and are expected to be
complete in 2023. Funded incubation and implementation projects are led by Black community
organizations and/or academic experts. Their aim is to develop and implement culturally appropriate
initiatives that can improve mental health and underlying social conditions that support positive mental
health for Black Canadians in Canada.
A number of additional program elements support the successful delivery of the Mental Health of Black
Canadians Fund, including: an Expert Working Group - 11 Black Canadians reflecting mental health
practitioners, researchers and lived experience works with PHAC to inform strategic funding decisions;
capacity building activities and events to support funded projects; Knowledge Sharing Network (under
development) to link the broader community of practice and research.
PHAC also has several grants and contributions programs that support projects for Black Canadians,
including:
 The Healthy Living and Chronic Disease Prevention – Multi-sectoral Partnerships
program, which supports projects that promote healthy living and prevent chronic
diseases. Through this program, PHAC is supporting the Healthy Living in St. James
Town project. This project aims to improve health self-efficacy of South Asian and
African residents of St. James Town in Toronto, who are twice as likely to have diabetes
and hypertension compared to established Canadians.
 The HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund, which supports projects intended to
reduce sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections among key populations, including
racialized people and migrants. Under this contribution program, PHAC currently
supports several organizations across Canada that work with African and Caribbean
Canadians.
PHAC has a range of upstream investments that reach at-risk families, including racialized populations
(e.g. the Canadian Prenatal Nutrition Program, Community Action Program for Children, Mental Health
Innovation Fund, Family and Gender Based Violence programming).
Employment and Social Development Canada
Budget 2019 provided to Employment and Social Development Canada $25 million over five
years starting in 2019-20, for projects and capital assistance to celebrate, share knowledge and
build capacity in Canada's vibrant Black Canadian communities. This investment will help
stakeholders to create the first national institute for Black Canadians. The Canadian Institute for
Persons of African Descent will work to advance initiatives that impact Black Canadians at a
systemic level.
Department of Canadian Heritage
Budget 2019 committed $45 million to Canadian Heritage’s Anti-Racism Strategy and an Anti-
Racism Secretariat. The Strategy’s key purpose is to find ways to counter racism in its various
forms, with a strong focus on community-based projects. Budget 2019 also provided $25 million
over five years to Employment and Social Development Canada for projects and capital
assistance to celebrate, share knowledge and build capacity in Canada's vibrant Black
Canadian communities. This investment will help stakeholders create the first national institute
for Black Canadians. The Canadian Institute for Persons of African Descent will work to
advance initiatives that impact Black Canadians at a systemic level.
The Community Support for Black Canadian Youth Initiative provided $9M in funding for
projects that address the unique challenges faced by Black Canadian youth by:
- combating discrimination through awareness raising and/or digital literacy;
- providing opportunities for Black Canadian youth, and empowering them
through the promotion of Black history, culture and identity; and
- developing leadership skills and civic engagement.
Priority is given to organizations and associations serving the Black community in Canada,
especially those with a mandate to serve Black Canadian youth. Specific consideration will be
given to organizations led by the Black community.
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada has put in place successive border measures in
response to COVID19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to prevent imported cases of COVID19? How are
you protecting Canadians at the border?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action at the border to limit the introduction
and spread of COVID-19 and to protect the health of Canadians.
 We have enacted emergency orders under the Quarantine Act to restrict
discretionary entry into Canada from abroad, including the U.S., and to
strengthen measures to reduce the importation risk from other countries.
 All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no matter their country of
origin or mode of entry – are required to quarantine for 14 days.
 There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine so that critical
infrastructure, essential services and economic supply chains continue between
Canada and the United States. Essential workers will be permitted to enter
Canada, including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
 Anyone not excluded from mandatory quarantine or isolation when entering
Canada must have a plan and suitable location where they can isolate or
quarantine for 14 days. They must wear an appropriate non-medical mask or
face covering while in transit to their final destination.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
 Individuals who do not have an appropriate isolation or self-quarantine plan will
be directed to a federally designated Quarantine Facility.
 Hotels have been designated as Quarantine Facilities in a number of cities,
including Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto, and Montreal.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WE SCREEN TRAVELLERS
 As travellers enter the country, they receive information on the symptoms of
COVID-19. They must acknowledge that they understand the quarantine
requirement and provide contact details for follow-up.
 Border Services Officers conduct preliminary screening of all travellers based on
criteria and questions developed by the Public Health Agency of Canada. Those
who show symptoms of COVID-19, or who indicate that they do not have a
suitable plan for quarantine, are directed to an official from the Public Health
Agency of Canada for further assessment.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH ALBERTA TO DATE
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with provinces, including
British Columbia and Alberta, towards a more integrated model at airports,
minimizing duplication of effort, and streamlining information collection. The
Public Health Agency of Canada is also exploring the possibility of shared
quarantine space with some provinces and territories.
 As the COVID19 situation continues to evolve, supplementary health screening
measures, such as those implemented by other jurisdictions, may be considered.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the RCMP and provincial
law enforcement agencies to verify compliance with the Mandatory Isolation
Order.
 The Government takes a compliance promotion approach to inform Canadians of
their obligations. Overall, we have found that Canadians have been responsive.
 We aim to contact all travellers subject to mandatory isolation by phone. If
travellers cannot be reached or show indication of non-compliance with their
obligations, they are referred to local law enforcement for follow-up.
 We also provide handouts at the border, and contact travellers through e-mail
and text message throughout their isolation to remind them of their obligations.
 Penalties include a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment for 3 years, or both,
for failure to comply with this Order. Fines for non-compliance typically range
from $275 to $1000. At the Public Health Agency of Canada’s recommendation,
local law enforcement may choose to issue warnings prior to issuing a ticket.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
 We recognize the importance of having sufficient presence of the Public Health
Agency of Canada at Canadian points of entry.
 As of May 21, the Public Health Agency of Canada has an initial presence at 17
key points of entry, including the four major international airports designated to
receive international flights (Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto, and Montreal).
 By July 1, the Public Health Agency of Canada plans to have an initial presence
at 36 points of entry, which cover 90% of all traffic into Canada.
 All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7 access to quarantine
officer support through the remote centralized notification system (CNS).
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL EXEMPTIONS FOR FAMILY REUNIFICATION
 In response to concerns expressed by Canadians, as of June 8, 2020 23:59
EDT, the Government of Canada is permitting foreign nationals who are
immediate family members of Canadian Citizens and Permanent Residents entry
to allow them to reunite with their families.
 This applies to immediate family members who do not have COVID-19 or exhibit
any signs or symptoms of COVID-19 and who intend to remain in Canada for at
least 15 days.
 Family members who are admitted into Canada must quarantine for 14 days.
IF PRESSED ON AMERICAN TRAVELLERS TO ALASKA
 US Citizens are permitted to transit from the contiguous United States to Alaska
and vice-versa for non-discretionary purposes (e.g. going for work, returning
home, etc).
 US Citizens are subject to Canada’s Mandatory Isolation order while in transit, so
persons travelling through must quarantine and respect Canada’s measures,
such as staying in a hotel room and wearing a non-medical mask. They are not
to take the opportunity to vacation.
 Recent media reports have highlighted instances of US citizens misrepresenting
their purpose for entry in order to vacation in different parts of the country,
notably Alberta. This is a ticketable offence both federally and under various
provincial orders. As law enforcement has become aware of these cases, they
have taken action to enforce Canadian law, in some instances issuing tickets in
excess of $1000 to each offender.
BACKGROUND
Since February 3, the Governor in Council has made fourteen Emergency Orders under
the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce
risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the
border to reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and
provincial partners to facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods
and services, while continuing to protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• All foreign nationals entering Canada by air;
• All travellers from the United States (U.S.), across all modes, for non-essential
travel including recreation and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than
the U.S., with some exceptions, including temporary foreign workers and international
students; and
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S. with signs or symptoms of respiratory
illness.
Canada has updated its temporary border agreement with the U.S. until July 21, 2020.
All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no matter their country of origin
or mode of entry - are REQUIRED to isolate or quarantine for 14 days in a suitable
location.
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, (many of which have low volumes of
travellers), 12 international airports, 4 commercial marine ports, and 3 rail stations.
PHAC is increasing the presence of designated officers, including quarantine officers, at
priority points of entry across Canada. By July 1, PHAC plans to have officers deployed
to 36 high volume points of entry, including major land borders that cover 90% of
travellers.
There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine/isolation which permit essential
workers to enter Canada, including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including
food and medical supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services
Agency (CBSA) is working with other federal partners to share information with
commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that commercial traffic is not impeded.
Enforcement:
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement linked to ensuring that travellers are
abiding by the requirement to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where
compliance cannot be confirmed, referrals are made to the RCMP. Maximum penalties
for failing to comply with the mandatory isolation/quarantine order include a fine of up to
$750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person
while willfully or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be
liable for a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
The Contraventions Act has now been changed to give law enforcement partners
(including RCMP, provincial and local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to
people who do not comply with the Quarantine Act, with fines ranging from $275 to
$1000.
Announcement from Alberta Government:
On May 20, 2020, Alberta announced new safety measures for travellers arriving at the
Calgary and Edmonton international airports from outside Canada. These travellers will
be required to pass through a provincial checkpoint where they will need to complete an
Alberta isolation plan. Travellers will undergo a thermal scan, as elevated body
temperature is a potential symptom of COVID-19.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial Special Advisory Committee:
The Government of Canada continues to work collaboratively with partners at all levels
of government to respond to COVID-19 in order to protect the health of Canadians.
The Special Advisory Committee, composed of the Council of Chief Medical Officers of
Health and senior public health officials from all jurisdictions, has been activated since
January 2020 to focus on coordination of federal, provincial and territorial response
efforts across Canada.
The Committee is co-chaired by Canada’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Theresa
Tam, and by Dr. Saqib Shahab, Chief Medical Health Officer of Saskatchewan.
The Committee focuses on policy and technical public health aspects of the response
as per the FPT Public Health Response Plan for Biological Events, informed by lessons
learned from past public health responses and approved by all jurisdictions in 2017.
On May 1, 2020, the Special Advisory Committee released recommendations on next
steps for Canada in a document entitled Foundations for Living with COVID-19 in
Canada: Lifting of Restrictive Public Health Measures. One criteria for lifting of
restrictive public health measures identified by the Committee is avoiding the risk of
importation of cases.
The Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19 reports to the Conference of Deputy
Ministers of Health and to Health Ministers from all provinces and territories.
Deputy Ministers and Health Ministers have been working closely bilaterally and through
their respective multilateral tables on key aspects of the pandemic response, such as
the provision of personnel protective equipment and other supplies, testing and sharing
of best practices. Engagement is taking place frequently (several times a week).
COMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC EDUCATION ON COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 Communications and public education on COVID-19 are key to maintaining
Canadians trust and confidence in the Government’s response, and ensuring
Canadians continue to be aware of the risks to their health and steps they can
take to protect themselves, their families and their communities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians are informed
about COVID-19 to protect themselves and stop the spread of this virus?
KEY MESSAGES
 Since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the Government
of Canada has worked closely with provinces and territories
and stakeholders to provide Canadians with the information
they need to protect themselves, their families, and their
communities.
 To complement online content, the Government of Canada
continues to update the Canada COVID-19 mobile app,
which provides users with information and resources on the
disease, and allows them to track their symptoms daily.
 The Wellness Together Canada portal for mental health and
substance use provides access to authoritative information
and connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
 We have also used a wide variety of channels to provide
information and updates to Canadians.
 These include:
o the dedicated website Canada.ca/coronavirus and other
linked pages on the COVID-19 response, which have
had more than 202 million visits since their launch;
o regular briefings to the media;
o a toll-free information line [1-833-784-4397] with
interpretation service available in 200+ languages open
from 7 a.m. to midnight, 7 days a week;
o regular public advisories to inform Canadians and the
media about emerging issues and to dispel
misinformation about health products [natural health
products, drugs and medical devices];
o an email notification service, which provides
subscribers with links to critical information on the
Government of Canada’s COVID-19 website;
o social media;
o TV, radio, print and digital advertising; and
o a nation-wide mail-out sent to all households across the
country to reach Canadians who may not have access
to or use online technology.
IF PRESSED ON INFORMATION AVAILABLE ONLINE
Through our website, Canadians can access:
 guidance and advice for travellers, healthcare professionals,
essential workers, Indigenous communities and all
Canadians;
 factsheets and infographics on a variety of topics, in a wide
range of languages;
 a self-assessment tool to check for symptoms of COVID-19;
 a dashboard showing how the outbreak is evolving in
Canada; and
 information on Health Canada’s regulatory actions to support
greater access to health products.
IF PRESSED ON RECOVERY STEPS IN CANADA
 During the reopening phase, we will continue to share
important information with all Canadians online on
Canada.ca/coronavirus, as well as through the Canada
COVID-19 app, email notifications, social media and regular
briefings with the media.
IF PRESSED ON THE WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA PORTAL
 During these difficult times, it is critical that Canadians have
access to effective tools to support their mental health and
well-being. The Wellness Together Canada portal provides
Canadians with free access to a virtual network of psycho-
social information services and supports in both official
languages.
 As of June 19, more than 230,000 Canadians have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal. This
includes access to educational information for mental health
literacy, self-guided therapy, moderated peer-to-peer support
and coached therapy, and one-to-one counseling by phone
or text.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA COVID-19 APP
 The Canada COVID-19 app provides access to trusted,
evidence-based information about the COVID-19 pandemic
across Canada.
 The app has more than 604,800 users as of June 20. It
builds on what provinces and territories are doing.
 It does not track personal information, nor is it a surveillance
tool. The protection of Canadians’ information is a priority for
the Government of Canada, and any tool used to collect
healthcare information undergoes a rigorous privacy
assessment.
IF PRESSED ON PUBLIC EDUCATION FUNDING
 The $50 million in funding for the Public Health Agency of
Canada is supporting ongoing communications efforts and
the implementation of a comprehensive national public
education campaign for COVID-19 that provides Canadians
with credible information and encourages behaviours that
protect individuals and overall public health.
 The public education campaign includes advertising, social
marketing, information resources, partnerships and targeted
outreach to at-risk populations.
 Of that $50 million budget, $30 million is set aside for paid
advertising around the public education campaign for
COVID-19.
 Advertising allows us to communicate important COVID-
related information with a large number of Canadians at one
time about how to stay safe and healthy during this
pandemic.
 As of June 1, 2020, PHAC spent more than $4.7 million in
advertising placements in fiscal year 2019-20 and has
committed almost $17 million in advertising for 2020-21. Of
these commitments, more than 80% of the placements were
made in Canadian media, which includes television, print,
radio, out-of-home, social media and other digital platforms.
 Public education plays a critical role in our response to
COVID-19 as it helps to:
o increase awareness and understanding about
symptoms and treatment;
o provide information on preventive measures such as
self-isolation; and
o address misinformation and public concerns.
IF PRESSED ON EFFORTS TO COMMUNICATE WITH VULNERABLE POPULATIONS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s national public
education campaign includes targeted outreach to
vulnerable populations, such as the elderly and those with
underlying medical conditions.
 To help protect these vulnerable populations, the
Government has ensured that key information on infection
prevention is available to them and their caregivers, in clear
and relatable terms, and in multiple formats, including having
simultaneous interpretation into ASL and LSQ for all media
briefings.
 Similarly, we have been supporting outreach to language
minority populations. We are reproducing 20
communications resources, including fact sheets and
infographics into 22 languages, including Farsi, Simplified
Chinese, and 10 Indigenous languages.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
The Government of Canada is working collaboratively with partners at all levels of government
to respond to COVID-19. The communications tactics outlined above aim to meet the following
objectives:
 Provide Canadians with timely and accurate information about the COVID-19 situation in
Canada and the risks to their health, and persuade Canadians to take specific actions to
protect themselves and minimize illness and death and disruption to society.
 Communicate the actions the Government is taking in concert with the provinces and
territories to prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada and its
related impacts, in order to maintain public trust and confidence in the Government’s
response.
 Detect and address misinformation with the latest evidence and information in order to
reduce fear, anxiety, stigma and other reactions that can lead to further societal,
economic and other disruptions.
Key Statistics
 More than 202 million web visits since launch, as of June 21.
 More than 604,800 users of the Canada COVID-19 App, as of June 20.
 More than 138,900 calls answered on the COVID-19 toll free line since the
launch, as of June 22.
 More than 169,600 calls received on the COVID-19 toll free line since the
launch, as of June 22.
 National postcard mailout sent to 15.5 million households across Canada.
FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has taken measures to prevent introduction of COVID-19 into
federal correctional institutions across Canada; as well as to strengthen their capacity to rapidly
identify and contain any outbreaks that may occur; and to ensure that federal inmates have
access to appropriate COVID-19 health care as all Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the federal government doing to prevent the introduction and transmission of
COVID-19 in federal corrections facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work
closely with Correctional Service Canada to strengthen
measures to prevent introduction and transmission of
COVID-19 into federal correctional institutions across
Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada and Correctional
Service Canada are working with local and
provincial/territorial public health authorities across the
country to ensure that all of the appropriate public health and
infection prevention and control practices are in place to
prevent or rapidly control further outbreaks.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working with
Correctional Service Canada and provincial public health
laboratories to ensure that federal correctional institutions
have access to the COVID-19 laboratory testing capacity
necessary to rapidly identify and manage cases.
 Correctional Service Canada is collaborating closely with
local and provincial/territorial public health authorities to
ensure that federal inmates have access to appropriate
COVID-19 health care, including hospital based care if it is
required.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 OUTBREAKs AT Federal Correctional Institutions …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
officials at Correctional Service Canada, as well as with local
and provincial public health authorities to bring outbreaks at
federal correctional facilities under control.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is in daily contact with

Correctional Service Canada, and has mobilized experts in
epidemiology, infection prevention and control,
environmental and workplace health and safety to
institutions that have experienced COVID-19 outbreaks to
support Correctional Services Canada and local public
health authorities in bringing those outbreaks under control.
In addition to site visits and reviews of Correctional Service

Canada practices regarding infection prevention and control,
environmental health, and workplace health and safety, the
Public Health Agency of Canada has developed a suite of
supporting materials including an institution self-assessment
tool, standardized assessment templates and webinars for
Correctional Service Canada personnel.
BACKGROUND
Correctional Service Canada (CSC) and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
are focusing on preventing and containing the spread of the virus across correctional
institutions by:
 Assessing and strengthening measures to prevent and contain the transmission
of the virus;
 Reviewing infection prevention and control practices;
 Reviewing workplace health and safety practices;
 Implementing recommendations to improve infection prevention and control,
environmental health, and workplace health and safety measures;
 Establishing a proactive laboratory testing strategy to test all inmates and staff at
outbreak sites; and
 Establishing a proactive sentinel laboratory testing strategy for CSC staff located
in communities experiencing increase COVID-19 transmission.
COVID-19 Outbreaks
CSC has been working in concert with PHAC, as well as with provincial and local public
health authorities to identify and implement additional measures required to control
outbreaks at facilities in British Columbia and Quebec, and to prevent or contain
outbreaks elsewhere.
CSC has 43 federal correctional institutions located in 7 provinces across Canada. As of
May 28, there have been outbreaks in 5 facilities. Only one outbreak, at the Federal
Training Centre Medium Institution in Quebec is currently active, but is resolving. All
others have resolved (Joliette QC, Port Cartier QC, Grand Valley Institution ON, Mission
BC).
CSC data on testing of inmates is available publicly at: https://www.csc-
scc.gc.ca/001/006/001006-1003-en.shtml.
DATA SHARING AND COLLECTION
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on COVID-19 cases, including
deaths, through agreements with the provinces and territories, and is working to collect
additional data to improve our understanding of the overall impact of COVID-19 in
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How does the federal government work with provinces and territories on the
collection of data on deaths and active cases and have any improvements been
made to date throughout the COVID-19 crisis?

KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada recognizes the critical
importance of data to enable our evidence-based response
to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on
COVID-19 cases, including deaths, through agreements with
the provinces and territories.
 Federal/Provincial/Territorial data sharing is cooperative, and
the Government of Canada as well as the provinces and
territories are sharing all available data relevant to the
COVID-19 response.
The Public Health Agency of Canada, together with other

federal and provincial and territorial partners, is working to
collect additional data to improve our understanding of the
overall impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON MLISA
 The Multi-Lateral Information Sharing Agreement (MLISA) is
a Federal/Provincial/Territorial legal agreement that covers
information sharing for infectious disease surveillance,
response, and case management, as well as information
sharing for public health events and public health events of
international concern.
 All provinces and territories signed on to this agreement by
2016.
 Federal/Provincial/Territorial COVID-19 Special Advisory
Committee and its Technical Advisory Committee determine
data collection protocols and oversee data-sharing
requirements during this outbreak.
IF PRESSED ON RACE/ETHNICITY DATA
 PHAC recognizes the importance of information on race or
ethnicity to further our collective understanding of COVID-19
among vulnerable populations.
 The Agency is working with provincial and territorial public
health authorities and other national partners to determine
the feasibility of collecting and sharing an expanded list of
information including risk factors, race/ethnicity and other
socio-economic factors.
 It will be critical that this work be done in a way that respects
privacy laws, ensures individual autonomy (in choosing
whether or not to provide this information to the health care
system), and follows a process that includes consultation
with implicated communities to ensure that it does not further
stigmatize people.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) worked collaboratively with Provincial and
Territorial public health authorities to develop and implement surveillance system for
COVID-19. Since the beginning of the pandemic, PHAC and its provincial and territorial
counterparts meet regularly to discuss data element to be collected. The Technical
Advisory Committee (TAC), the Scientific Advisory Committee (SAC) and the
Surveillance Expert Working Group all worked collaboratively to develop surveillance
objectives, reporting guidance and the case reporting form. Following agreement on
surveillance objectives and data elements, the case report form was prepared and each
province and territory implemented data collection tools based on these objectives and
data elements.
The COVID-19 national case report form includes data elements on cases, including
demographics (age, sex, Indigenous status), diagnosis dates, exposure, and outcomes
(such as hospitalization, ICU admission and deaths).
Provinces and Territories share a cumulative list of confirmed and probable case data to
PHAC, which includes newly identified cases, on a daily or weekly basis; the timing of
these transfers vary depending on the jurisdiction. Currently, provinces and territories
are sharing their data in an electronic format, through the Secure File Exchange, which
is then uploaded into the national COVID-19 surveillance database. Updates on
previously reported cases (i.e., whether a case has recovered or died) are also sent to
PHAC and changes are captured in the database.
These data provide the Agency with an ability to asses the overall impact and burden on
the health system, as data include information on severity of illness, including mortality
and hospitalizations, admissions to intensive care units (ICU) and the number of cases
on mechanical ventilation.
The limitations of this data source are the lack of data completion for some data fields,
and the lack of race-based and socio-economic data. The Agency is working with
various partners and stakeholders to expand the information sources to better
understand the impact of COVID-19 on different populations. Despite the challenges to
data collection, provinces and territories share data on new cases with the PHAC every
day. There is basic information on 99% of the almost 100,000 cases of COVID-19 in
Canada.
The federal government and the provinces and territories have a long history of
cooperating and sharing information in the face of infectious disease outbreaks and
public health events of international concern. The Multi-Lateral Information Sharing
Agreement (MLISA) was finalized in 2015. All provinces and territories, as well as the
federal Government, are signatories to this agreement. MLISA provides a formal
framework for collaboration, for example, ensuring consistency in level of detail of
information shared and setting out the allowed uses of the information exchanged.
During the COVID-19 outbreak, the Federal/Provincial/Territorial COVID-19 Special
Advisory Committee and its Technical Advisory Committee determine data collection
protocols and oversee data-sharing requirements.
F/P/T data sharing is voluntary and is effective. All jurisdictions have been cooperatively
sharing relevant and available data related to COVID-19. Any identified data gaps are
the result of data availability. All jurisdictions recognize the importance of working
together to increase our collective knowledge of COVID-19.
Race-Based and Sociodemographic Data
PHAC recognizes the importance of information on race or ethnicity. At the beginning of
the COVID-19 response, the collaborative process with provinces and territories to
develop the case report forms focused on the minimum data elements that would be
critical for monitoring the evolution of the epidemic and that would be feasible for
collection by front-line health care workers during an epidemic situation. While the
national COVID-19 case report form currently does not include any questions on race or
ethnicity, occupation, or dwelling type, the form does include a section for identifying
and classifying cases as Indigenous (First Nations, Metis, Inuit). This section is
completed only when the affected person self-identifies as a member of one of the three
Indigenous groups, and data in this section are often incomplete or missing.
The Agency is working with PTs and other national partners to determine the feasibility
of collecting and sharing an expanded list of information including risk factors,
race/ethnicity and other socio-economic factors. These indicators will help to further
PHAC’s understanding of COVID-19 among vulnerable populations and to monitor
trends going forward. Due to the sensitive nature of race and ethnicity, this work must
be done in a way that respect privacy laws, ensures individual autonomy (in choosing
whether or not to provide this information to the health care system), and a process that
includes consultation with implicated communities to ensure that it does not further
stigmatize people.
PHAC is also in the process of developing tools that will incorporate existing data from a
variety of sources on key populations who are more vulnerable to COVID-19 and its
impacts, including subgroups by social, economic and demographic factors.
DEXAMETHASONE
SYNOPSIS
 The RECOVERY trial in the UK with low-dose dexamethasone has shown
encouraging results in hospitalised coronavirus (COVID-19) patients that
required oxygen supplementation or were on a ventilator. For patients on
ventilators, the treatment was shown to reduce mortality by about 1/3, and for
patients requiring only oxygen, mortality was cut by about 1/5, according to
preliminary findings shared with WHO.
 The benefit was only seen in patients seriously ill with COVID-19 and was not
observed in patients with milder disease.
 While we have no clinical trials with dexamethasone for COVID-19 in Canada,
this drug is marketed and readily available in hospitals, so Canadians will have
immediate access to it through off-label use.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to dexamethasone
for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 Currently there are no drugs specifically authorized to treat
or prevent COVID-19 in Canada.
 Dexamethasone is a steroid that has been available in
Canada since the 1960s and can be used off-label to treat
severely ill patients with COVID-19
 Canada is assessing the promising results from the
RECOVERY study.
 Health Canada is actively monitoring supplies of this drug in
Canada and is in contact with the manufacturers to assess
current supply levels.
 The Department will take action if needed, in collaboration
with the province and territories, industry and key
stakeholders to help ensure continued supplies of
dexamethasone in Canada.
IF PRESSED on what steps taking steps to make this available in Canada
 Rigorous testing of new treatments through clinical trials is a
key pillar of scientific research.
 A body of evidence becomes credible when multiple,
reputable studies reach similar conclusions and when these
conclusions stand against critical reviews by experienced
health professionals and scientists from various disciplinary
backgrounds.
 As of June 17, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 43
clinical trials for treatments targeting COVID-19 using both
existing (marketed) drugs and new drugs. An up-to-date list
of all these trials is available on Health Canada’s website.
If pressed on shortages:
 The oral tablet format of dexamethasone was added to
Health Canada’s list of Tier 3 shortages on May 1 based on
its current indications for use (e.g., post-chemotherapy, brain
edema, some myeloma, lymphoma regimens). Tier 3
shortages are those with the greatest impact on supply.
Drugs on this list are in high demand or in shortage.
 Apotex and Pharmascience are the only two companies in
Canada that market the Dexamethasone oral tablets. Apotex
is reporting shortages of various strengths with estimated
end dates of October 30, 2020. Pharmascience is reporting
shortages of various strengths with estimated end dates of
September 25, 2020, September 30, 2020 and October 1,
2020.
The IV format of the drug is marketed by four companies in

Canada (Sandoz, Sterimax, Omega and Pharmascience)
and none are currently reporting shortages. Health Canada
is following up with these companies to gather and assess
information related to current supply levels in Canada.
BACKGROUND
Trial results announced on June 16, 2020 showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s
to reduce inflammation in diseases such as arthritis, cut death rates by around a third among
the most severely ill COVID-19 patients admitted to hospital.
For patients on ventilators, the treatment was shown to reduce mortality by about 1/3, and for
patients requiring only oxygen, mortality was cut by about 1/5, according to preliminary findings
shared with WHO. The benefit was only seen in patients seriously ill with COVID-19 and was
not observed in patients with milder disease.
As a result, the WHO said it was moving to update its guidelines on treating people with COVID-
19 to reflect results of a clinical trial that showed a cheap, common steroid can help save
critically ill patients. Although the dexamethasone study’s results are preliminary, the
researchers behind the project said it suggests the drug should immediately become standard
care in severely stricken patients. The agency said it was looking forward to the full data
analysis of the study in coming days.
Generically, glucocorticoids are often used in refractory cases of sever illness in Canada and
the rest of the world. It is widely available, inexpensive and used for a variety of conditions. In
this context, indications for its use include those with critical disease including ARDS (COVID or
non-COVID) who are failing on a ventilator.
These steroids are not used routinely as the evidence for viral pneumonias has not been strong
and sometimes suggests harm. Patients that have comorbidities (including COPD, asthma,
adrenal insufficiency and shock), who have the more severe manifestations may benefit more
from their use.
This study showed the survival benefit of dexamethasone in COVID-19 patients was in the
patients that had the most severe disease, supporting the above generic use. The timing of its
use, the exact indications and contraindications will need to be further assessed to optimise
dexamethasone’s use.
Digital Supports and Virtual Care
SYNOPSIS
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada is putting in place a range
of digital supports to help Canadians get the information, resources and care they need. On
May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5 million to support Canadian health systems to
accelerate their efforts to meet health care needs through virtual tools and approaches. This
funding will also help to support a suite of digital tools, including an online self-assessment tool,
a mobile app to enhance self-assessments and provide a hub for trusted information and
resources and an online portal for access to virtual psychosocial supports.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the
resources they need during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Canadians need ready access to digital tools and resources
to help during the COVID-19 pandemic, including education,
information, mental health and substance use supports,
alerts and screening tools.
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories, vendors and stakeholders to make
these tools widely available to Canadians and their families.
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced that the
Government of Canada is committing $240M to help
Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches.
 This will enable Canadians to safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-
conferencing, to have their health needs met. It also means
they can continue to access specialist services throughout
this time of uncertainty.
 As well, through this investment we have already
implemented a suite of digital health tools, including:
o An online self-assessment tool that helps Canadians
understand potential COVID-19 symptoms and when to
seek medical care;
o A mobile app called “Canada COVID-19,” which
provides reliable information and resources for
Canadians and encourages Canadians to monitor their
health on a regular basis through a tool to record
possible COVID-19 symptoms.
o Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of
virtual mental health and substance use supports
available through the Canada COVID-19 app and
Canada.ca website.
 We will continue to work with all of our partners to ensure
that Canadians have access to up-to-date information, tools
and resources on COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
 The Government of Canada is working with provinces and
territories to support the rapid uptake and use of virtual care
services.
 This means that Canadians can continue to have their
regular health needs met during this unprecedented time in a
safe and secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-
conferencing, in addition to face-to-face visits.
 Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada will help
reduce the pressure on health systems and provide
Canadians with needed health services and authoritative
information in a safe and secure manner.
Health Canada is engaging in discussions with provinces

and territories to identify where support is needed most.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
 Privacy considerations were – and continue to be – front and
centre at every stage of these initiatives.
 Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are
inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
 The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is
creating stress and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly
those who do not have ready access to their regular support
networks.
 That is why the Government has launched a new online
portal for mental health and substance use supports:
Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for
Canadians to access self-directed tools and find credible
information on mental health and substance use issues.
 It also connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online
counselling.
 Use of the portal will be closely monitored to ensure that
updates will best align with the needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL PLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
 Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented
time for Canadians, and are continuing to explore how we
can best take action in innovative ways.
We will continue to work closely with provinces and

territories and other partners to evaluate needs for digital
supports.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools
for Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed
supports for health systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and
territories to assist health services to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a
distance.
 Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to begin to identify where support is
needed most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020)
 Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada,
this tool is available to all Canadians through the Canada.ca website. To date, the self-
assessment tool has been accessed over four million times.
 It is intended to complement PT self-assessment tools and is empowering Canadians to
make informed decisions on the appropriateness of COVID-19 testing and when to access
other resources like telehealth, primary care providers and emergency departments.
 The self-assessment tool is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020)
 Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app provides an
integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and engage on issues
related to COVID-19. It quickly became the number one medical app on both the App and
Google Play Store.
 On April 11, the app launched its daily symptom tracker, which enables users to take an
active role in their self-care through the daily recording of potential COVID-19 symptoms.
With enough users, the symptom tracker can help to provide useful data to allow public
health authorities to track the symptoms of the population as a whole, providing an indicator
of how the disease is evolving in neighbourhoods, regions, and provinces.
 Canada COVID-19 is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April 15,
2020)
 Through this portal, Canadians are able to access digital tools to help them monitor and
manage their mental health and substance use needs, and access trained mental health
professionals through digital platforms.
 Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and connect
users to promotion or prevention resources. This will enable individuals to determine
their level of need, as well as self-manage their mental health and substance use.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources promote
mental health and prevent poor mental health. These will focus on enhancing
protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and social networks) and
addressing risk factors (e.g., substance use, social isolation, discrimination and
stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential chat sessions,
phone calls and online counselling with peer support workers, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals.
 The portal is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
BlueDot
 Health Canada and PHAC have put in place contracts with BlueDot to enhance and expand
upon existing expertise to provide further insights and understanding into the emergence,
spread and public health risks of COVID-19
 This work is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
 The Government of Canada has put in place an opt-in email subscription service called “Get
Updates on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to those Canadians who
would like to be alerted to updates on the COVID-19 situation in Canada.
Health Canada continues to explore other digital tools with a view to providing Canadians with
the information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during the COVID-19
pandemic. This includes resources for children to help them better understand the disease and
stay safe and healthy.
DRUG SHORTAGES
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 is creating global supply chain challenges and increased demand for
drugs used in supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly
in the context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at
risk.
 While current signals indicate that supply levels may be stabilizing, pressures
continue to exist for certain drugs. The need for vigilance in maintaining the
national drug supply for the long term continues. Health Canada continues with
its surveillance activities and engagement with key supply chain players to
mitigate impacts of any drug shortages.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does
not create drug shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication
is a top priority for the Government of Canada. Significant
efforts are being made through a whole-of-government
approach to respond to drug shortages during the COVID-19
pandemic.
 We have amplified our monitoring activities. We are
engaging provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and
patient groups - in some cases on a daily basis. Together,
we are assessing supply chain vulnerabilities to ensure
action is taken to help prevent and minimize the impact of
shortages.
 On March 30, 2020, I signed an Interim Order to allow for the
exceptional importation of products to help prevent or
alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19. When
drugs are not available, the department has a legal pathway
to bring alternate supplies of drugs to the Canadian market.
 We are taking other steps to help mitigate and prevent drug
shortages. Public Services and Procurement Canada has
issued eight Requests for Information signaling Canada’s
interest in procuring and building a reserve of critical drugs in
shortage.
 We are also working closely with key international regulatory
partners (US, EU, UK and Australia). This has resulted in
earlier risk identification and response planning.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES…
 Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the
impact of any drug shortages related to COVID-19.
 Through this work, we have been able to secure additional
supplies of needed drugs for Canada. For example, we have
worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to
additional supplies of drugs such as muscle relaxants (e.g.
cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g.
propofol) to help support COVID-19 patients.
IF PRESSED ON REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION (RFIs)…
 The RFIs were posted to identify additional supply that is not
already earmarked to meet Canada’s current needs.
 The initial RFIs focus on critical drugs currently in shortage –
drugs that have the greatest potential impact on the health
care system. These drugs include sedatives, muscle
relaxants and inhalers.
The Government will also be looking to procure other drugs,

vaccines, and drugs that are showing promise in Clinical
Trials.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and
health care professionals, and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages where
possible and minimize their impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors, practitioners, and
the federal government. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces
and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies,
which may include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative products available
in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are
available and whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in
determining the potential impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Bill C-13, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act
On March 25, 2020, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act was brought into force to
support the availability of drugs and medical devices by providing the Government with the
authority to make regulations to address any future shortages of therapeutic products, including
drugs and medical devices. This includes the importation of drugs and medical devices not
authorized for sale in Canada to address certain shortages, such as for personal protective
equipment or drugs required to treat COVID-19, and changes to the Patent Act to allow for
compulsory licensing in health emergencies in the period up to September 30, 2020.
Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in Relation to COVID-19
On March 30, 2020, the Minister of Health authorized an Interim Order which sets up a
regulatory framework to help prevent and alleviate shortages of drugs, medical devices, and
foods for a special dietary purpose.
It allows for the exceptional importation and sale of products that may not fully meet Canadian
requirements, such as those related to licensing and labelling, but are manufactured according
to comparable standards.
Health Canada designates the products eligible for importation and sale under the Interim
Order. Companies with an establishment licence may import these products after notifying
Health Canada five days in advance.
The Interim Order also requires that any shortages of critical medical devices related to COVID-
19, such as ventilators, be reported to Health Canada and publicly communicated. Public
reporting of shortages helps manufacturers and the health care system plan and react to supply
disruptions, in order to mitigate the impact on patients.
These new tools allow Health Canada to address critical supply issues in an expedited manner
when shortages occur, and help to protect the health and safety of Canadians during the
pandemic.
Through this work, Health Canada has been able to secure additional supplies of needed drugs
and medical devices for Canada. For example, the department has worked with multiple
companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of drugs such as muscle relaxants (e.g.
cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g. propofol) to help support COVID-
19 patients.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of years,
capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more coordinated and effective
approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms in place to manage drug shortages, and
has leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to
identify shortage signals earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19.
ACCESS TO DRUGS AND VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
medical system, and there is a need for drugs and vaccines to support the
response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to drugs and
vaccines for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history. Health Canada is proactively
doing all it can to respond to the pandemic in its role
as a health product regulator.
 At this time, there are no drugs or vaccines that have
been proven safe and effective for the treatment or
prevention of COVID-19. However, on June 19,
Health Canada received a new drug submission for
remdesivir, the first drug to apply for authorization
specifically for the treatment of COVID-19. Health
Canada has begun an expedited review of the clinical
data to determine whether the benefits of the drug
outweigh its risks, as well as the most appropriate use
of the drug.
 As of June 24, 2020, Health Canada has authorized
44 clinical trials for treatments targeting COVID-19
including the first clinical trial in Canada for a vaccine
specifically developed to prevent COVID-19. An up-
to-date list of all these trials is available on Health
Canada’s website.
 Health Canada is expediting the review of all drugs
and vaccines to address COVID-19. Further, on May
23, 2020, we introduced an Interim Order that makes
clinical trials for COVID-19-related drugs and medical
devices more flexible for sponsors and more
accessible to Canadians. We are taking these actions
while continuing to ensure that these products are
safe, effective and of high quality.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE AVAILABILITY
 Health Canada is closely monitoring global vaccine
development and is in active discussions with several
vaccine manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory
and scientific advice for vaccine trials that may launch in
Canada.
 On May 15, 2020, Health Canada approved the first clinical
trial for a vaccine specifically targeted against the virus that
causes COVID-19. The safety and optimal dose for the
CanSino vaccine will be assessed before it is used in larger
groups of volunteers. Health Canada will monitor the
progress of this trial closely.
 Earlier in May, Health Canada also approved another clinical
trial using a vaccine known as BCG vaccine, which may
have a role in reducing the severity of COVID-19.
 While recognizing the urgent need for a vaccine, Health
Canada will require all products to demonstrate a high level
of safety, efficacy and quality before coming to the Canadian
market.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
 Since no drugs have yet been proven to be safe and
efficacious for COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that
any potential treatments for this disease be investigated
through clinical trials. The Department is working hard to
facilitate and expedite as many of clinical trials for COVID-19
in Canada as possible, without compromising the quality
standard of these trials.
 On May 23, 2020, I approved an Interim Order, which
supports clinical trials investigating new products, or
repurposing marketed products, for COVID-19. Among its
benefits, the Interim Order reduces the administrative burden
for sponsors without compromising the safety of participants,
and makes it easier to set up trials across Canada to
facilitate access. As of June 24, Health Canada has
authorized three clinical trials submitted under the Interim
Order.
 Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new drugs
are safe and effective in humans. Clinical trials ensure the
quality of the study, protection of the patient, and the proper
collection and retention of outcomes. It is the best
mechanism to provide trial volunteers access to new drugs
before they are approved.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL DRUG TREATMENTS
 At present, there is insufficient evidence to recommend any
specific anti-COVID-19 treatment for patients outside of
clinical trials.
 Results from large, well-designed studies are needed to
make any conclusions on the safety and efficacy of any
drugs or vaccines.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
 Remdesivir is the first drug to apply for authorization
specifically for the treatment of COVID-19. Health Canada
has begun an expedited review of the clinical data to
determine whether the benefits of the drug outweigh its risks,
as well as the most appropriate use of the drug.
 We are working collaboratively with international
counterparts and will leverage available knowledge to the
extent possible to support a faster review of the submission.
 Should remdesivir receive authorization for use in Canada,
Health Canada will work with the company to ensure access
to the drug for Canadians.
 The available evidence must always demonstrate that the
drug is safe, effective and of high quality before Health
Canada will authorize the drug for use by Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
 Hydroxychloroquine is a malaria drug being investigated as
a potential treatment for COVID-19 through clinical trials.
Risks associated with this drug can be better managed
through screening of trial candidates and close monitoring.
 In view of recent results showing a lack of efficacy, Health
Canada has requested additional information from clinical
trial sponsors in order to determine if the clinical trials we
have approved should continue.
 Patients and healthcare professionals are reminded to report
any suspected side effects to Health Canada. We will
continue to closely monitor the safety and effectiveness of
hydroxychloroquine and other drugs used in the treatment of
COVID-19, and will take appropriate and timely action,
including informing Canadians if and when any new health
risks are identified.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with the US Food and Drug Administration, the
European Medicines Agency, and the World Health
Organization, amongst others, to share information and to
raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for vaccines and treatments. The objective is to
work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to
stay informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the
health product industry to proactively identify, track and
provide support to sponsors of clinical trials for vaccines and
treatments for COVID-19.
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health
professionals and Canadians are looking for the latest
information about health products for COVID-19. The
department has created a new website for the health product
industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval
and who to contact for questions. We are also making sure
information relevant to health professionals and Canadians
is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON UNAPPROVED PRODUCTS
 The most appropriate way to determine what treatments may
be effective for COVID-19 is through properly designed and
conducted clinical trials. Health Canada is expediting the
review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food and Drugs
Act and the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and provide the Government
with additional powers.
The amendments will:
 help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
 seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for
Canadians; and
 allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is
needed to respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered in other
jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may not fully meet
some of the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act — such as packaging
requirements.
Mobilizing manufacturing capacity
Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders in other sectors of our economy, many of
which are scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to provide much needed tests or
medical supplies. We are taking a whole-of-government approach to mobilize industry, providing
them with information and support for research, market approval, manufacturing and supply.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new website for
the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to
contact for questions. Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on
the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials, potential diagnostic
tests, treatments and vaccines related to COVID-19.
Clinical Trials
Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials are
conducted to determine whether new drugs, diagnostics or treatments are both safe and
effective in human beings. Several existing drugs have been repurposed to assess their
potential in treating or preventing COVID-19, while other new drugs are under development.
Since no drug treatments have been proven safe and efficacious for COVID-19, Health Canada
recommends that any treatments be investigated in clinical trials.
Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15 days. As
of June 24, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 44 clinical trials for treatments targeting
COVID-19, most of which are repurposing existing drugs.
Until a vaccine or drug is available on the Canadian market, another option for access is Health
Canada's Special Access Program. This Program is available to practitioners requiring access
to unapproved drugs that could be used in the treatment of the infection. Our goal is to ensure
that Canada is prepared for whatever challenges come our way.
Remdesivir
Remdesivir is an antiviral drug being evaluated in several clinical trials taking place in Canada
and globally as a potential treatment for COVID-19. On June 19, Gilead Sciences Inc. (Gilead),
the manufacturer of remdesivir, filed a drug submission with Health Canada for authorization of
remdesivir for the treatment of COVID 19. It will be added to the Submissions Under Review list,
which is available to the public.
On April 29, 2020, Gilead issued a news release stating that early results from a study showed
that remdesivir helped COVID-19 patients recover more quickly. The scientific article was later
released in the New England Journal of Medicine on May 22, 2020. In a separate media
briefing, Dr. Anthony Fauci, Director of the U.S. National Institute of Allergy and Infectious
Diseases (NIAID), noted that the trial showed a significant positive effect on the virus. The FDA
has issued an Emergency Use Authorization for remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19 in the
U.S. On April 30, the European Medicines Agency announced a rolling review of remdesivir and
accepted Conditional Marketing Authorization Application on June 9, 2020. On May 7, 2020,
Japan approved remdesivir for severe COVID-19 patents under an exceptional approval
pathway based on the U.S. Emergency Use Authorization. On June 10, 2020, Singapore also
granted conditional market approval for remdesivir. There has been significant media coverage
on this issue.
Hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine is an antiparasitic drug approved in Canada for the treatment of malaria, as
well as autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. Health Canada has
authorized clinical trials on the use of this drug in COVID-19, and is aware of other ongoing
clinical trials across the world.
 An article in the May 22, 2020 edition of “The Lancet” features a study which showed
increased mortality and cardiac arrhythmias in hospitalised patients taking chloroquine
and hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19. This paper was later retracted
amid concerns with the validity of the data.
 On June 3, a Canadian-led study published their results in the New England Journal of
Medicine, concluding that HCQ did not prevent infection when used as post-exposure
prophylaxis within 4 days after exposure.
 On June 5, Investigators of the RECOVERY trial (the UK arm of the SOLIDARITY trial)
issued their preliminary results and concluded that there is no beneficial effect of HCQ in
patients hospitalized with COVID-19. As such, they have decided to stop recruitment to
the hydroxychloroquine arm of this trial.
On June 17, 2020, the World Health Organization announced that hydroxychloroquine will no
longer be part of its global SOLIDARITY trial. Their decision was based on the evidence that
hydroxychloroquine in that trial did not result in the reduction of mortality of hospitalized COVID-
19 patients, when compared with standard of care. This decision does not impact other ongoing
clinical trials.
EARLY HISTORY (WARNINGS AND STEPS TAKEN) IN COVID-19
OUTBREAK
SYNOPSIS
On December 31, 2019, Canada received its earliest warning when the Public Health
Agency of Canada was alerted by the Global Public Health Intelligence Network
(GPHIN) of an illness originating in Wuhan, China. The Government of Canada quickly
alerted provincial Chief Medical Officers of Health followed by enhanced border
measures. The World Health Organization confirmed on January 12, 2020 that the
illness was a novel coronavirus, following which the Government activated its
emergency operations centre and implemented screening processes at three
international airports. Chief Medical Officers of Health were convened well in advance of
the first Canadian presumptive case identified on January 25, 2020.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What warnings did the Government of Canada receive regarding COVID-19, and
what steps were taken in response?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada was alerted of an illness in
Wuhan, China on December 31, 2019. Within two days the
Chief Public Health Officer had alerted Medical Officers of
Health across the country.
 Between that point and Canada’s first presumptive case of
COVID-19 in late January, the Government convened all
Canadian Ministers of Health and Chief Medical Officers of
Health, implemented screening processes at airports, and
issued a travel alert.
 Timely intelligence gathering, in collaboration with domestic
and international partners, allowed early and coordinated
action by the Government of Canada to protect the health
and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
 Since learning of COVID-19, we have been working with
public health authorities across Canada to ensure our
response is timely, effective, and evidence based.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has taken many steps
to get Canadians the information they need quickly. In
January, the Agency launched a website and opened a 1-
833 number for the public to ask questions on COVID-19.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has directly addressed
the questions and concerns of tens of thousands of
Canadians on various aspects of COVID-19 since the
beginning of January.
 As the situation evolves, we will continue to provide
Canadians with accurate and up-to-date information.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) operates the Global Public Health
Intelligence Network (GPHIN), which is an early-warning and situational awareness
system for potential public health threats worldwide—including outbreaks of infectious
disease.
Canada first became aware of a respiratory illness originating in Wuhan, China via a
GPHIN alert received on December 31, 2019. This information was shared by the Chief
Public Health Officer on January 2, 2020 with all provincial and territorial Chief Medical
Officers of Health.
The World Health Organization (WHO) posted its first event notification on January 5,
2020, to its secure Event Information Site (EIS) for International Health Regulations
(IHR) National Focal Points regarding a cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology
reported in Wuhan City, Hubei Province of China. The WHO found there was limited
information to determine overall risk and advised against the application of any travel or
trade restrictions against China.
Precautionary steps were taken as Canada sought additional information from the
WHO. On January 7, 2020, PHAC issued a Travel Health Notice, and on January 9,
2020, PHAC issued a Public Health Alert on the Canadian Network for Public Health
Intelligence, an extranet for communication with public health partners.
Confirmation of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China was announced by the WHO
on January 12, 2020. On January 14, 2020, Dr. Tam convened a special teleconference
of the Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health (CCMOH) to discuss situational
updates and domestic preparedness in relation to the outbreak. PHAC activated its
Health Portfolio Operations Centre on January 15, 2020 to Level 2 to actively monitor
early warning signs and to prepare for possible containment and mitigation of a possible
outbreak. On January 22, 2020, screening processes were implemented in international
airports in Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver for travelers arriving from China.
Progressive escalation followed Canada’s first presumptive case. Canada’s first
presumptive case was identified on January 25, 2020. Following this, critical public
health emergency management infrastructure was mobilized for the COVID-19
response, including:
- First meeting of the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Special Advisory Committee on
COVID-19 on January 28, 2020;
- First meeting of Federal-Provincial-Territorial Ministers of Health on January 24;
and,
- First meeting of the G7 Ministers of Health on February 3, 2020.
In addition, the following travel measures were implemented:
- Travel advisory against non-essential travel to China (January 29, 2020); and,
- Enhanced screening measures at major international airports including all
travelers from the Province of Hubei, China (February 9, 2020).
Canada reached its 100th confirmed case on March 11, 2020.
Exposure Notification Mobile App
SYNOPSIS
On June 18, 2020, the Prime Minister announced a voluntary national exposure notification app
that will use Bluetooth and mobile technology to notify users that they have been exposed to
someone who has tested positive for COVID 19. It is based on the COVID Shield model, which
was developed by volunteers at Shopify and leverages technology from Apple and Google for
Bluetooth-enabled exposure notification apps. If one user tests positive for COVID-19, their
contacts will be quickly and anonymously notified, and directed to the right resources.
Health Canada is leading the development and promotion of this app (along with Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada and the Canadian Digital Service within Treasury
Board Secretariat) and is working with the Province of Ontario to implement and test in the
coming days. Other provinces and territories to follow as they are ready.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why is the Government of Canada developing and implementing an exposure
notification app?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is developing a new nationwide
mobile app to detect exposure to COVID-19 across Canada.
 The exposure notification app is among a suite of tools and
guidance developed by the Government of Canada to help
slow the spread of COVID-19.
 The app is private, secure, and easy to use.
 It uses Bluetooth technology to anonymously alert users if
they have been in contact with another user who
subsequently tests positive for COVID-19.
 If someone tests positive for COVID-19, their health care
provider will give them a unique temporary code, which will
enable them to anonymously upload their status to a national
network with the app.
 We encourage as many Canadians as possible to use this
app once it is launched, as it will keep all of us safer and
healthier as we ease restrictions and restart the economy.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
 The protection of Canadians’ privacy is a priority for the
Government of Canada. The Office of the Privacy
Commissioner has been engaged on this app.
 The use of the app is voluntary and information is shared
anonymously. It is the choice of each Canadian to decide
whether to use the exposure notification app.
 The app uses Bluetooth technology, does not record users’
locations and does not disclose the identity of users.
 The app will undergo a thorough privacy assessment, and all
data provided to the app will be securely stored and
protected.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN THE APP WILL BE READY FOR DOWNLOAD
Canadians across the Country will be able to download the

app at launch, with Ontario being the first province to
distribute the temporary codes to people who test positive for
COVID-19.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and

territories to allow them to distribute temporary codes in their
jurisdictions.
We will work collaboratively with each jurisdiction to make

this happen as quickly as possible.
The app will still be useful to people in jurisdictions that have

not yet started distributing temporary codes, as it will inform
them if they come into contact with a visitor from a
participating jurisdiction that has tested positive for COVID-
19.
IF PRESSED ON COST
 The Government of Canada has benefited from the
volunteer efforts of Shopify, which has developed the code
at its own cost, and from Blackberry, which is reviewing the
security of the source code on a pro bono basis.
 The bulk of the cost of this app will be to work with provinces
and territories to support the integration of the app within
their existing systems, and to set up the necessary systems,
such as technical support, so that Canadians can use the
app with confidence.
This will be a very important tool to support Canadians as we

move into the recovery phase, ease restrictions and restart
the economy.
IF PRESSED ON EQUITY/AVAILABILITY FOR CANADIANS WITHOUT
SMARTPHONES
This is just one tool and among a suite of tools being used

by the Government of Canada to help slow the spread of
COVID-19.
Moreover, if enough people use the app, all Canadians will

benefit.
For example, if a user receives a notification, they may

decide not to visit an elderly relative.
This means that that relative will have been protected from

potential exposure, even if they do not own their own mobile
device.
BACKGROUND
On Thursday, June 18, the Prime Minister announced the development of a national exposure
notification app.
The app, originally developed by the Government of Ontario, will help Canadians and public
health officials identify and isolate the spread of the virus more quickly. Use of the app will be
voluntary. If someone tests positive for COVID-19, a health care provider will give them a
unique temporary code, so they can upload their status anonymously to a national network.
Other users who have downloaded the app and come in contact with that person will be notified,
through the app, that they may have been exposed to the virus. The app will also provide users
with information on steps they can take to keep themselves and others safe, and Canada is
working with the provinces and territories so they can customize public health information based
on their own jurisdiction.
The Canadian Digital Service is leading the development of the app, in collaboration with the
Ontario Digital Service and building upon technology developed by Shopify volunteers. The app
will undergo a security review by BlackBerry. It incorporates Bluetooth technology provided by
Apple and Google to anonymously record instances where users have come into close contact.
To protect confidentiality and privacy, the app will not disclose the identity of users. This
information will never be shared with any other entity, will not be stored by the app, and will
never leave the user’s phone. No personal information is collected by the app, and it does not
track the user’s location to ensure the privacy of all Canadians.
The app will be available to Canadians for free download in the coming weeks, with health
authorities in Ontario being the first to distribute the unique, temporary codes to people who test
positive for COVID-19.
HEALTH PRODUCTS MAKING FALSE OR MISLEADING CLAIMS
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada has identified health products making false or misleading claims to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19 through proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received. This activity is illegal and Health Canada has been taking actions
to stop this.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing about health products on the market claiming to
treat, prevent or cure COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of all Canadians is Health Canada's
top priority and we are taking measures to protect
consumers from illegal, false or misleading advertising of
products claiming to mitigate, prevent, treat, diagnose, or
cure COVID-19.
 To date, Health Canada has not authorized any product to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19. Selling health products that
make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19 is illegal in Canada.
 As a result of proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received, Health Canada has identified a wide
range of health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19. Health Canada takes this matter very
seriously and is taking action to stop this illegal activity.
 Health Canada has issued compliance letters to multiple
companies directing them to immediately stop selling such
products and remove references to these products from their
websites. Health Canada has also been working with major
online retailers to stop the posting of these products on their
sites.
 On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory
warning Canadians about the risks of buying health products
that make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19.
 To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a
table which lists products and corresponding companies or
advertising media found to engage in non-compliant
marketing, which are currently under review or have been
resolved. Health Canada took compliance and enforcement
action against these organizations, as required.
The Department is also coordinating with other government

agencies, such as the Competition Bureau and the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, to address the issue of false and
misleading claims related to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada has followed up on hundreds of cases
regarding health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19 identified through proactive monitoring
activities or complaints received.
 Various compliance and enforcement options are available
to manage the risk posed to public health and safety by false
or misleading claims related to COVID-19, including on site
inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public
communications or product seizures.
 In certain circumstances, when the regulatory enforcement
responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance, Health
Canada may refer its findings to the Public Prosecution
Service of Canada for potential prosecution.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
Status of Products to Treat or Cure COVID-10
Health Canada has not approved any product to treat or cure COVID-19. Selling or advertising
health products making false or misleading claims is illegal in Canada under Sections 9 (1) and
20 (1) of the Food and Drugs Act . Health products that have been authorized for sale by Health
Canada will have an eight-digit Drug Identification Number (DIN), Natural Product Number
(NPN) or Homeopathic Drug Number (DIN-HM).
Health Canada’s Actions in Addressing Products Making False or Misleading Claims
Health Canada has followed up and taken action on numerous cases regarding health products
making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 identified through proactive monitoring
of online sites or complaints received.
Companies have been sent compliance letters and directed to immediately stop selling such
products and to remove references to these products from their websites. Health Canada has
been actively monitoring websites and working with major online retailers to ensure products
making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 are removed from their sites.
On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory to warn Canadians about the risks
associated with products making false and misleading claims related to COVID-19. Canadians
were encouraged to report any information on potential false and misleading advertising or the
sale of products that have not been approved by Health Canada. To keep Canadians informed,
Health Canada has posted a table which lists products and corresponding companies or
advertising media found to engage in non-compliant marketing, which are currently under
review or have been resolved. Health Canada took compliance and enforcement actions against
these organizations, as required. This list is updated bi-weekly.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of potential non-compliance with the Food and
Drugs Act or its associated regulations, it takes steps to confirm whether non-compliance has
occurred and takes action based on the risk to the health of Canadians. A number of
compliance and enforcement options are available to manage the risk posed to public health
and safety by false or misleading claims related COVID-19 including on site inspections,
regulatory letters, recalls, public communications or product seizures. Recently, Health Canada
inspectors, in collaboration with the RCMP, seized over 1500 unapproved kits from a resident in
British Columbia, who had acquired and sold some of them online without authorization. Health
Canada determined that these kits were not authorized for sale in Canada, meaning that the
Department has not evaluated their safety and effectiveness. In certain circumstances, when
the regulatory enforcement responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance Health
Canada may also refer its findings to the Public Prosecution Service of Canada for potential
prosecution.
The Department will continue to monitor and take action as needed to ensure that health
products making false and misleading claims to diagnose, prevent, treat, or cure COVID-19 are
removed from the market.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
SYNOPSIS
Family violence accounts for almost a third of violent crime reported to police. The
emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic create
additional risks for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families.
KEY MESSAGES
 Gender-based violence, including family violence, is a
serious public health issue that can have lasting impacts on
both physical and mental health of Canadians.
 Our Government has invested nearly $200 million over the
last five years to establish the Strategy to Prevent and
Address Gender-Based Violence.
 We are also investing approximately $6 million annually in
community-based projects that support the health of
survivors of family violence.
 In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, our Government
has announced new initiatives that can help reduce the risk
and impacts of family violence; including funding for Kids
Help Phone, shelters and sexual assault services, income
support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable
organizations.
BACKGROUND
The consequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short and
long-term mental and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs.
These can include: behavioural problems in children; drug and alcohol use and
attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and lack of stable employment in
adulthood; and, depression and financial problems in older adults. In addition, spousal
violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created increased risks for the health and safety of many
vulnerable Canadians, as children and families face increased stress, and may have
difficulty leaving abusive relationships or accessing support or prevention programs.
One-third of Canadians reported that they were very or extremely concerned about
family stress from confinement, and 8% of Canadians reported that they were very or
extremely concerned about the possibility of violence in Canadians homes. Among
people over the age of 50, 6% reported increased verbal and physical conflict during the
COVID pandemic. Additional data will be gathered to clarify the degree to which
Canadians are personally experiencing violence during confinement.
New Government Initiatives that will help address pressures on vulnerable families in
the context of COVID-19 include:
 $7.5 million investment to the Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis
support for children and youth;
 $50 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
 multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and
families, including the enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based
Violence, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is investing more than $8 million
per year to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child maltreatment,
and equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to survivors
Supporting the Health of Survivors of Family Violence
In addition to these new investments to prevent gender-based violence, PHAC invests
over
$6 million per year to support the health of survivors of family violence, through
guidance and training for professionals, and through the delivery and testing of health
promotion interventions for survivors. These projects are measuring their impact on
health outcomes such as anxiety, depression and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Family Violence Initiative
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative (FVI), which brings together
12 departments and agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family
violence. On behalf of the FVI, PHAC hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a
web-based source of current information on family violence for health professionals and
the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to supports and services available
in each province and territory.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family
relationships and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts surveillance on family
violence; and supports analysis to understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
 Management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health
care system?
KEY MESSAGES
 As a result of the unprecedented efforts taken so far to
implement public health measures across Canada and to
free up hospital capacity, Canada’s hospitals have not been
overwhelmed by COVID-19 as was initially feared.
 Provinces and territories moved early to free up capacity to
meet projected needs, such as cancelling elective surgeries
and transferring patients into other settings.
 As provinces and territories resume health care services,
such as elective surgeries, they are being cautious and
taking into account the need to maintain sufficient capacity to
meet demand from COVID-19 cases.
 Provinces and territories also continue to use publicly funded
virtual care services and online screening assessments to
take pressure off of emergency departments and supporting
physical distancing.
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5 million in
funding to develop, expand, and launch virtual care and
mental health tools to support provinces and territories in
their work.
 These investments will be used to, among other things,
create digital platforms and applications, improve access to
virtual mental health supports, and expand capacity to
deliver health care virtually, including projects to reach
vulnerable Canadians.
 Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have
worked with provinces and territories to model potential
pressure points related to the availability of beds and
ventilators, which in turn informed decisions on how to
allocate resources.
 We will continue to work with provinces and territories as
they implement their recovery plans to ensure health care
system capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health
system capacity
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model
demands on health systems under different modelling
scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national
level with support from the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
 At this time, provinces and territories have indicated that
they have sufficient hospital capacity to address COVID-19
for their epidemic control scenarios.
 But we know too that in our worst case scenario models, our
systems would be severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
 That is why governments are now thinking very carefully
about how best to de-escalate public health restrictions in a
way that will avoid future spikes in demand for health
services as we live with COVID-19 in the new normal.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
 A committee of federal/provincial/territorial Deputy Ministers of Health is meeting
regularly to address challenges in responding to the pandemic and to share best
practices for the health care system response.
 This joint work builds on the work provinces and territories are already doing to put
into action the pandemic plans and procedures they prepared for use in times like
this, based on international experiences and guidance. Provinces and territories
have taken a range of actions to increase system capacity and meet projected
needs. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically reconfiguring spaces to
fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
 Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care
services and online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on
emergency departments and is also complementing physical distancing measures.
Provinces and territories are also running training exercises and simulations, and are
hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
 At the same time, because the surge of COVID-19 cases has been lower than
predicted by provinces to date, there is currently capacity sitting idle. Once the
services cancelled to free up extra capacity are reintroduced into the system – like
elective surgeries – addressing pent up demand for those services will pose its own
challenges for system capacity. Governments will share best practices for when and
how best to ease restrictions in a way that will best balance the needs of COVID-19
and non-COVID-19 patients.
HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE CAPACITY DURING COVID 19 (NEW QP)
SYNOPSIS
 Provinces and territories have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms to support
the COVID-19 response. While health human resources capacity to respond to
acute care needs appears to be sufficient for now, the disproportionate impact of
COVID-19 on long-term care facilities has created a significant health human
resources challenge for some jurisdictions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of healthcare
providers, particularly in long-term care homes?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada remains committed to
working with provinces and territories to support
residents in long-term care and to protect the health
and safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
 The situation described by the Canadian Armed
Forces in specific long-term care homes is not
acceptable. We are supporting provinces and
territories to help address these serious concerns.
 While we will continue to provide surge capacity in
key areas through the Canadian Armed Forces, we
are helping provinces and territories find sustainable
solutions to staffing shortages in long-term care.
 We are also collaborating with the Canadian Red
Cross to coordinate training and deployment of
volunteers identified through the national volunteer
recruitment campaign, to help ensure our elders are
safe and receiving quality care.
BACKGROUND
Health is a shared responsibility between federal, provincial, and territorial
governments. The provinces and territories are responsible for the administration and
delivery of health care and the management of their health workforces.
Provincial and territorial efforts to increase HHR supply
Since early March, jurisdictions have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms that allow
experienced health care professionals who are not currently practicing to be deployed in
the COVID-19 response. This included physician and nurse retirees, students and some
internationally educated health professionals. Some jurisdictions have also created their
own surge inventories (e.g., Ontario).
Québec has recently announced plans to launch a recruitment campaign for up to
10,000 Quebecers to become orderlies (i.e. personal support workers) in its long-term
care homes (called Centres d'hébergement et de soins de longue durée). Québec will
be offering three months of paid training to anyone interested in working in long-term
care. Students will be paid $21/hour, or $760/week, and if hired following training, their
salaries will increase to $26/hour, or $940/week; the equivalent of $49,000/year.
Government of Canada National COVID-19 Recruitment Campaign
In April 2020, the Government of Canada, through the Public Service Commission,
created an inventory of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in key areas during
the pandemic. The Government of Canada is working with the Canadian Red Cross to
respond to requests for assistance through the inventory; the Canadian Red Cross is
providing jurisdictions with support for security, medical verifications and training of
volunteers.
To date, contact referrals have been provided to the majority of jurisdictions who have
made requests for contact tracing including: Prince Edward Island (183), Nova Scotia
(1,302 referrals), Saskatchewan (992 referrals), the Northwest Territories (50 referrals),
Québec (1,550 referrals), and Ontario (21,833 referrals), while Manitoba and Nunavut’s
requests are still pending.
The Public Service Commission is also working with the Canadian Red Cross to
establish teams of 20-25 individuals to be assigned to various long-term care sites
based on need. It is expected that approximately 3,000 resources are required in long-
term care sites in Ontario and Québec. The Public Service Commission has also
contacted students from the Federal Student Work Experience Program (FSWEP)
available to work in support worker positions in Montreal long term care homes. To
date, 77 referrals have been hired by the Integrated University Health and Social
Services Centre (CIUSSS) in Montreal (31 from the volunteer inventory and 46 from the
student inventory). In Ontario, the Public Service Commission and the Canadian Red
Cross are helping staff positions in long-term care homes to work in three areas: public
health, emergency management and personal support work.
Impacts of COVID-19 on health human resources in long-term care facilities
Prior to COVID-19, long-term care facilities were already facing health human resources
challenges. Personal support workers, who provide the majority of hands-on care, are
an unregulated workforce and characterized by low pay, poor benefits, and part-time
work. Increased pressures on this workforce due to the pandemic has led to acute
staffing shortages in Ontario and Québec.
In May 2020, 1,675 Canadian Armed Forces personnel were deployed to 35 long-term
care facilities in Ontario and Québec to provide surge staffing support. On May 22, the
Canadian Armed Forces reported serious concerns in the long-term care homes in
which they were assisting, related to neglect of residents, lack of adherence to policies,
inadequate training and medical supplies, and deficiencies in infrastructure.
In response, the Government of Ontario has announced it will be launching an
independent commission into Ontario’s long-term care system beginning in July 2020.
The Québec Ombudsman is also launching a systemic investigation into the Québec
Ministry of Health and Social Services and long-term care homes within the public
health network. The investigation is expected to be completed by autumn 2021, with a
progress report in autumn 2020.
On May 28, Ontario announced it will be extending the mandate of the Incident
Management System Long-Term Care Table, which was established in April, to further
protect seniors and staff in long-term care homes by coordinating operational support to
these facilities. The table is composed of health care professionals who make
immediate decisions to deal with issues related to staffing levels, infection management
and resources during the COVID-19 outbreak. It meets daily to organize efforts across
providers and government.
Operational Framework for Mutual Aid Request (OFMAR)
Inter-jurisdictional sharing of skilled health workforces is also being explored with the
provinces and territories through the potential use of the Operational Framework for
Mutual Aid Surge Requests, which is facilitated by the Public Health Agency. This
Framework sets out principles and guidelines to enable sharing of health assets,
including workforces. It holds potential to help address the immediate needs in long-
term care facilities now that jurisdictions have completed their initial pandemic modeling
and may be in a better position to assess with confidence what surge capacity they
might be able to offer to jurisdictions in greater need.
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to
oversee the coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys and research
that will tell us how widely the virus has spread in Canada and provide reliable
estimates of potential immunity and vulnerabilities in Canadian populations. The
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is under the guidance of a Secretariat led by Dr. Tim
Evans of McGill University, along with a Leadership Group representing provincial and
territorial stakeholders and expertise, and co-chaired by Drs. David Naylor and
Catherine Hankins. Over the next two years, at least one million blood samples will be
collected and tested for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. The Task Force will
also support a number of targeted research studies to advance our understanding of the
immunological response to the disease. Knowledge of the level of immunity in the
general population, and in at risk populations such as the elderly and healthcare
workers, will guide important public health decisions and immunization strategies once a
vaccine becomes available.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 When will the testing for the surveys begin?
 Who will be part of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force Leadership Group?
 How will privacy and confidentiality concerns regarding the results of these blood
tests be addressed?
 How will research projects be chosen for funding under the COVID-19 Immunity
Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is studying how
widespread COVID-19 infection is in the Canadian
population.
 Their studies will contribute to estimates of the potential level
of immunity in the population as a whole and in groups that
are at higher risk of infection, such as health care workers
and older Canadians.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities will provide
the rigorous data needed to inform and plan future public
health interventions, including the deployment of vaccines to
the Canadian population.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is actively connecting
Canada with international work and research, contributing to
and benefiting from findings of serological studies conducted
in other countries.
 We are allocating up to $300 million for this work over the
next two years.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
 The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
reflects key agencies of the Government of Canada and
includes representation from several provincial Ministries of
Health as well as experts from across Canada in matters
related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology,
infectious diseases, public health, and clinical medicine.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force operates under the
direction of a Leadership Group composed of experts who
are recognized for their scientific leadership, international
public health experience in knowledge translation and
networks, and experience leading complex initiatives.
 The Leadership Group, which includes Canada’s Chief
Public Health Officer and Canada’s Chief Science Advisor,
had its first meeting on April 28th, 2020, where the initial
roles and priority areas of work and processes were
established.
 Since then, the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force Leadership
Group has identified methodological approaches and key
priorities for serological testing and research activities.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website has a new web
portal called “Sero-Tracker”, that makes Canada part of a
global collaboration that tracks and summarises serological
studies and provides their findings from around the world.
 Resourcing of projects is underway, with the Biobanque
Québécoise de la COVID-19 receiving funding on June 15th
to enhance blood sampling and antibody testing for COVID-
19 in Québec and contribute samples, data and analytical
outcomes to a larger network of biobanks and researchers
across Canada.
BACKGROUND
As the first wave of COVID-19 begins to peak in Canada, it is important not only to
marshal all available resources to manage the immediate surge of patients needing
care, but also to anticipate what lies beyond the peak. In Canada, we do not know the
degree of immunity to COVID-19 in the population.
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of
large numbers of people will provide the data needed to understand the scale of
infection in the Canadian population. This approach will help us capture not only
symptomatic individuals, but also asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic people who we
are not aware of, as they did not seek healthcare. The importance of coordinated, rapid
and representative national surveys cannot be understated. They provide critical
information on the current spread of COVID-19, and help us prepare for possible future
waves of infection, both in the general population or vulnerable groups.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific
groups such as public-facing workers or among children and youth can inform the best
timing of decisions for safe return to work and to school. The results of these studies
can help to direct proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or
even disease-preventing therapies should they become available, and inform targeted
surveillance efforts to contain and stop further outbreaks.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19
serology surveillance and targeted research studies, has been established to catalyze,
support, and harmonize the design and rapid implementation of population-based
studies that will generate reliable first estimates of SARS-CoV-2 immunity, overall and
in vulnerable populations across Canada. This work will also contribute to what is
happening globally, for example, as part of the World Health Organization’s Solidarity II
Studies, a global initiative that provides standardized protocols pools findings from
large-scale antibody studies around the world.
Le groupe de travail sur l’immunité face à la COVID-19 veille à ce que les mécanismes
nécessaires concernant la vie privée, la confidentialité et les considérations éthiques
guident l’orientation et la mise en œuvre de cette initiative. The COVID-19 Immunity
Task Force website provides details of activities and findings, connects and engages
scientists within Canada and globally, and links with CanCOVID Network, a platform
mandated by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor to expedite communication and
collaboration between the scientific, healthcare and policy communities during the
COVID-19 crisis.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is actively interacting with various groups to
ensure representation and input, including an Indigenous Advisory Circle, Federal,
Provincial and Territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health, and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
On May 12th, 2020, Health Canada authorised the first of a number of anticipated
commercial serological tests for COVID-19, which will allow the COVID-19 Immunity
Task Force to focus on processes to initiate testing of samples in the sero survey
studies.
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international
partners bilaterally, through the G7 the G20 and the World Health Organization, to help
inform our domestic response and to contribute to global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-
19?
KEY MESSAGES
 With the outbreak evolving rapidly around the world, we are
working closely with our international partners, including the
World Health Organization, to protect the health and safety
of Canadians and the global community.
 We remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government
and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19. The Prime
Minister and my cabinet colleagues are also engaged with
their international counterparts.
 Since early February, I have been engaging my G7
counterparts on a weekly basis to share information on
public health measures, to learn from others’ experiences
and best practices and identify possible joint actions to
tackle this outbreak.
 Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international
counterparts, including the United States and the United
Kingdom, to discuss our respective COVID-19 responses.
These discussions are valuable opportunities to learn from
each other and strengthen our domestic and international
responses.
 On the research front, our Government has been working
closely with many international partners, such as the World
Health Organization and the Global Research Collaboration
for Infectious Disease Preparedness, to support the
development and testing of vaccines, therapies, diagnostics
and public health responses to COVID-19.
On May 4th, Canada also joined several countries in co-

hosting the launch of the Coronavirus Global Response, an
online pledging event to raise $8 billion US to help
researchers and innovators develop solutions to test, treat
and protect people and to prevent the further spread of
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the U.S. Terminating its Relationship with the WHO
 Canada is aware of the recent decision from the White
House to immediately terminate their relationship with the
WHO. Canada remains strongly committed to constructive
engagement in multilateral institutions, including the WHO,
which are now, more than ever, essential to help us
accomplish together more than any one country can do
alone. We will continue to work with other Member States to
ensure that the WHO is a strong, accountable and well-
governed institution.
 Canada has no plans to cut funding to the WHO. Canada
has and will continue to be a strong supporter of the WHO.
Since February 11, our government has provided $15.5
million to WHO, and a further $9 million to Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), the regional WHO office for the
Americas, to prepare and respond to COVID-19 events.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global
response
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest
in making it a strong, accountable, and well-governed
institution.
 This includes after-action reviews, which will be important at
all levels following this crisis and can provide critical insights
to support necessary change
 As highlighted in the Resolution recently adopted at the
World Health Assembly, a comprehensive post-crisis review
of the global response should be undertaken when the time
is right – as soon as feasible.
IF PRESSED on Dr. Bruce Aylward’s appearance before HESA
 Dr. Aylward is an international civil servant employed by the
WHO as a Senior Advisor to the Director General; he does
not represent the Government of Canada at the WHO and is
not a Government of Canada employee.
 We understand that the WHO has received such requests
from several different countries, and that WHO makes efforts
to answer technical questions from interested parties where
possible.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
 I have engaged regularly with my U.S. counterpart,
Secretary Azar, through the G7 forum. I have also held
bilateral calls with him to discuss our respective COVID-19
responses, including testing, guidance for essential workers,
supply chains, research and recovery planning.
If pressed: Interim Report of the Independent Oversight and Advisory
Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health Emergencies Programme
 The recommendations of the IOAC provide a good
foundation for further post-crisis discussions as to how
global responses to health emergencies can be improved.
 For example, the IOAC recommends an independent
assessment of the COVID-19 response, examining both
Member States and the WHO Secretariat, should be
undertaken “at an appropriate time”, to assess performance
during the response and to identify lessons for the future.
Canada has made it clear for many weeks now that it would
support a comprehensive review of the global response
post-crisis.
 There will many lessons that the global community will learn
from this pandemic, and the IOAC has an important role to
provide independent, evidence-based recommendations in
this regard.
BACKGROUND
Canada has engaged with international partners to learn from the experience of others
and best practices, to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts to fight against COVID-19. For instance, Canada, through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role in establishing the World Health
Organization (WHO) global research and innovation roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is
also supporting the Canadian Treatments for COVID-19 Trial (CATCO), which is
contributing to the WHO SOLIDARITY trial seeking to find effective treatments for
COVID-19. Further, CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Diseases (GloPID-
R), which continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-moving collaboration that is
needed across a multiplicity of players domestically and internationally. Since February,
Canada has participated in weekly G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19,
which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the
U.S. Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s impact across sectors, the Prime Minister
and other Ministers are engaging regularly with their international counterparts,
including Finance, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Employment.
On May 4, Canada joined the European Union, France, Germany, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Japan, Saudi Arabia as the current G20 presidency and Italy as the future
G20 presidency in co-hosting an international online pledging event, the Coronavirus
Global Response. Canada is pledging over $850 million towards the fundraising target
of $8 billion USD to support the development of rapid coronavirus diagnostics,
treatments and vaccines.
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the World Health
Organization (WHO), averaging over $70 million annually for the past 10 years in
assessed and voluntary contributions to support the work of the organization. The WHO
has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the COVID-19
response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their preparedness and
response efforts. Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and evidence-based guidance
during this rapidly evolving pandemic.
On April 14, U.S. President Donald Trump announced that the U.S. will temporarily
suspend funding to WHO while the U.S. Administration conducts a review of the
organization due to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the pandemic and a
perceived bias towards China. Subsequently on May 29th President Trump announced
that the U.S. was terminating its relationship with the WHO and would look to divert the
funding allocated to the organization elsewhere. However, as of June 5th, no formal
notice regarding U.S. “terminating” its relationship with the WHO has been served, and
U.S. officials have indicated that they are continuing to engage with the WHO to urge
the organization to take immediate, specific steps to appease their complaints.
Canada has consistently expressed support for an independent, comprehensive review
of the global response post-crisis, which would consider the actions of all actors and
partners, including the WHO, to be undertaken at an appropriate time. At the 73rd
session of the World Health Assembly (WHA), which convened virtually on May 18th-
19th, Canada co-sponsored a resolution on COVID-19, which provides a consensus-
based foundation for next steps in the global COVID-19 response and includes a call to
initiative, at the earliest appropriate moment, an independent, comprehensive review of
the WHO-coordinated international health response to COVID-19.
Canada’s view is that the focus should continue to be on the global pandemic response
and the health of people in vulnerable situations around the world, with an emphasis on
facts and evidence based approaches.
The Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health
Emergencies Programme, which provides oversight and monitoring of the development
and performance of the Programme, recently published an Interim report on WHO’s
response to COVID-19: January-April 2020.
The Interim report is a compilation of observations of how various structures and
processes functioned during the early months of the pandemic. It provides an overview
of the first months of the pandemic before issuing a series of recommendations on the
International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005), the WHO’s Health Emergencies
Programme and the WHO Incident Management System, leveraging of the WHO
Collaborating Centres, access to therapeutics and vaccines, ongoing public health
measures support and independent review of the COVID-19 response.
Dr. Theresa Tam is a member of the IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity
and exercise their responsibilities with full regard for the paramount importance of
independence.
COVID-19 OUTBREAK IN KEARL LAKE, ALBERTA
SYNOPSIS
An outbreak of COVID-19 was declared at the Imperial Oil Kearl Lake, Alberta worksite
on April 14, 2020. There are 114 cases linked to this worksite, 44 of which are
residents in jurisdictions outside of Alberta (BC, SK, MB, NS, NB and NL). Three cases
have been hospitalized. There are no deaths reported.
The outbreak end date is June 14 2020 and will be declared over on June 15, 2020 if no
additional cases are reported.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government of Canada doing to help minimize the impact of this outbreak
on Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with Alberta
and the other affected provinces and territories in preventing further
spread associated with this outbreak.
 Industry stakeholders and Alberta Health Services have put
measures in place to reduce transmission, protect their workforce and
prevent further spread of COVID-19 to the community.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to provide
increased capacity for epidemiological and laboratory analysis to our
provincial and territorial colleagues.
BACKGROUND
Kearl Lake is a large oil sands worksite approximately 70 km north of Fort McMurray.
Numerous companies have workers on the site, with Imperial Oil being the largest. The
site also has a work camp for employees – accommodations provided by Civeo
Corporation. The work camps function as a residence for workers, most of whom fly in
from across the country for seven-day on, seven-day off shifts.
Cases of COVID-19 began to emerge on the site in mid-March. An outbreak was
declared by Alberta Health (AH) on April 14, 2020. Of the 114 cases that have been
observed:
- 44 cases are residents from other jurisdictions (including BC, SK, MB, NS, NB
and NL);
- 88% are male;
- Cases between 24 and 68 years of age;
- Three cases have been hospitalized, two of which have been admitted to ICU;
and,
- No cases have died.
The outbreak end date is June 14 2020 and will be declared over on June 15, 2020 if no
additional cases are reported.
Control measures
Public Health Alerts (PHA) on the outbreak have been issued to all provinces and
territories by AH throughout the duration of outbreak.
As part of COVID-19 preparedness activities, the site had undertaken a number of
precautionary measures prior to the outbreak (such as: closing the buffet at the camp,
increasing cleaning measures, enforcing hand hygiene practices, and temperature
screening) to prevent the emergence of COVID-19.
Since the outbreak was declared on April 14, further control measures were put in place
by Alberta Health Services (including the masking of food service workers, and the end
of communal dining). The latest illness onset was May 17, 2020. AH considers the
outbreak ongoing at this time and outbreak measures will remain in place at the site.
Mass voluntary testing was undertaken for asymptomatic individuals on the site from
April 19 to 23, 2020. A total of 1,888 tests were completed and 28 individuals tested
positive from this mass testing.
On April 25, 2020, the government of Alberta released the COVID-19 Information
Guidance for Managers and Operators of Industrial Work Camps.
Jurisdictions are providing a range of public messaging and advice to workers returning
from Kearl Lake, from self-monitoring to mandatory self-isolation for 14 days.
Cases in other jurisdictions
Forty-four of the 114 cases are being reported by BC, SK, NS, MB, NB and NL. A
cluster of cases linked to the Kearl Lake worksite have been identified in the First
Nations community of La Loche, Saskatchewan. The Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) is working with Saskatchewan to understand the size of the cluster.
AH has shared a list of personnel who were on the site or at the work camps with
affected jurisdictions to facilitate contact tracing. AH will be receiving daily line list of all
people on the site moving forward. PHAC is currently working with Alberta Health and
all other jurisdictions, to determine the process for notification of personnel on site
moving forward.
PHAC’s National Microbiology Lab is supporting with genetic sequencing of the cases to
help understand transmission, and to help identify any sub-clusters of transmission
among the cases.
ENGLISH-ONLY LABELLING ON CERTAIN IMPORTED HEALTH
PRODUCTS
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
health care system, and there is an urgent need for certain health products, such
as hand sanitizers and disinfectants, in support of the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why has Health Canada temporarily allowed English-only labelling on some
imported health products during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of
Canadians, and the Department is doing everything possible
to facilitate access to products needed to slow the spread of
COVID-19.
 In light of the unprecedented demand and urgent need for
products to help limit the spread of COVID-19, Health
Canada is facilitating access, on a temporary basis, to
certain imported health products labelled in only one official
language to increase access to products that are in high
demand.
 At the beginning of the pandemic, many global suppliers had
indicated that they are labelling products in English only to
expedite production and that they would ship only to
countries that would accept English-only labelling.
 Importers are required to post bilingual label text on their
websites and provide sellers with a means to inform
consumers, at the point of sale, of where they can access
bilingual information on the product.
 As of June 8, 2020, all importers who were not previously
providing bilingual text to consumers under the interim
measure are also required to do so.
 All Canadian manufacturers of these products must use
bilingual labelling. As of June 8, 2020, licensed Canadian
manufacturers of hand sanitizers who were previously using
unilingual labelling under the interim measure are required to
use bilingual labelling.
 Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing
any non-compliance identified.
 Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular
supply stabilizes.
IF PRESSED…
Technical Grade Ethanol
 Health Canada is aware that there is a critical shortage of
pharmaceutical and food-grade ethanol for use in hand
sanitizers. To meet this shortage, we have temporarily
authorized the use of certain sources of technical-grade
ethanol in hand sanitizer products.
IF PRESSED…
Bilingual Language Requirements for Domestic and Imported Products
 Health Canada is focused on expediting review and approval
of hand sanitizers and disinfectants to address the COVID-
19 pandemic, while continuing to ensure that these products
are safe and effective for Canadians.
 All importers of these products through the interim measure
must have bilingual labelling text available to consumers. As
of June 8, 2020, importers previously authorized are
required to have bilingual label text available on their
websites and a means for sellers to inform consumers of this
website at the time of sale.
 All Canadian manufacturers of these products must use
bilingual labelling. As of June 8, 2020, licensed Canadian
manufacturers of hand sanitizers who were previously using
unilingual labelling under the interim measure are required to
use bilingual labeling.
BACKGROUND
Interim measures
In March and April, 2020, Health Canada implemented a number of interim measures to
facilitate expedited access to products that do not fully meet regulatory requirements
(e.g., labelling) set out in regulations under the Food and Drugs Act. These measures
have enabled access to the Canadian marketplace, health care settings, and
commercial and industrial settings.
The interim policies included facilitating the importation of:
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are already authorized for sale in
Canada but are not fully compliant with Health Canada requirements (e.g.,
English-only labelling, different packaging from what was authorized); and
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are not authorized for sale in Canada,
but are authorized or registered in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory
frameworks and quality assurances.
Importers of disinfectants and hand sanitizers are required to post bilingual labels on
their website and to provide sellers with a means to inform consumers, at the time of
sale, of the website where bilingual label text is posted. This could be made available
through a sticker applied directly to the products, or posters or signage with take-away
pamphlets at the point of sale.
Given the increase in availability of hand sanitizers, domestic manufacturers of hand
sanitizers must always use bilingual labelling on their products. As of June 8, 2020,
existing product license holders who were previously using unilingual labels under the
interim measure are required to use bilingual labelling.
Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing any non-compliance
identified.
Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular supply stabilizes.
Stakeholder Engagement
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the natural health product and
food industry to proactively identify, engage and provide support to manufactures,
packagers, labelers and/or importers of hand sanitizers and disinfectants in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Health Canada brought together industry partners to facilitate the supply of key
ingredients and to maximize the domestic production of hand sanitizers and
disinfectants, and companies who do not typically operate in health product
manufacturing such as distilleries, breweries and refineries producing hand sanitizers.
International Collaboration
Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships and working with the
United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive and the United States Food and Drug
Administration to share information on best practices and evidence-based approaches
for hand sanitizers and disinfectants.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
SYNOPSIS
Recent figures from the Public Health Agency of Canada show that 82% of all COVID-
19 deaths in the country are connected to long-term care and seniors’ residences; some
jurisdictions have been particularly hard-hit (e.g. Quebec, Ontario).
On May 26 and 27, the provinces of Ontario and Quebec each released a Canadian
Armed Forces report that outlined key findings about the long-term care homes at which
the military has been assisting to maintain staffing levels and help with infection control
and prevention. Both reports detail serious concerns around infection prevention, safety,
staffing and levels of care.
Families of residents in long-term care facilities have publicly reported their frustration
and concern regarding how their loved ones are cared for, as well as the poor
conditions in the residences. Families are calling for increased accountability and
systematic changes in how long-term care facilities are operated. A number are bringing
legal action against facilities over their COVID-19 response.
On June 5, the day following the weekly First Ministers’ Conference Call, the Prime
Minister mentioned that the Government is ready to work with PTs on a safe restart
agreement to provide support, including potential funding over the next critical six to
eight months. This could include support for seniors and vulnerable populations and
provide additional personal protective equipment for healthcare workers on the
frontlines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What actions is the federal government taking to support provinces and territories in
addressing major issues in long-term care facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to taking the

necessary actions to continue to protect the health and
safety of all Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 In particular, the federal government is taking a number of
steps to respond to the significant challenges faced by long-
term care facilities across the country.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided infection
prevention and control guidance to help prevent COVID-
19 infections among residents and workers in long-term care
and assisted-living facilities, as well as in home care,
including the appropriate use of personal protective
equipment.
 The Government of Canada continues to facilitate
procurement of personal protective equipment to be
used across the health care system, including in long-term
care facilities.
 With the support of the Public Service Commission, Health
Canada has worked closely with the Canadian Red Cross to
recruit and train paid volunteers from the National Inventory
to work in LTC facilities in Montreal. Over 70 volunteers
have been placed so far.
 The military continues to work with all levels of government,
including the governments of Quebec and Ontario, in the
fight against COVID-19. I would like to express my gratitude
to them for the tremendous work they have been doing.
 As the Canadian Armed Forces are getting ready to leave
the province of Quebec, the Canadian Red Cross is
recruiting and training up to 1,000 paid volunteers to support
in epidemic prevention and control, basic care for long-term
care residents and long-term care site administration.
 Up to $3 billion in federal funding will be provided in support
to provinces and territories to increase the wages of low-
income essential workers, which can include front line
workers in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
 Our Government is ready to work with provinces and
territories on a safe restart agreement to help support
seniors and our most vulnerable populations.
 We will continue working in close collaboration with
provincial and territorial governments in order to address the
crisis in long-term care institutions.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE GUIDANCE …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance on infection
prevention and control in long-term care facilities is designed
to limit the possibility of introducing COVID-19 into these
facilities by recommending that only those who are essential
to the care of residents can enter the facility.
 Staff in long-term care facilities are encouraged to take steps
to protect the residents by monitoring their health twice a
day, following routine infection control practices and wearing
a mask for the duration of their shifts.
 This guidance also recommends that staff restrict their work
to only one facility in order to prevent transmitting COVID-19
between facilities.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT…
 Ensuring health care workers have access to adequate
personal protective equipment and training has been a key
focus for our collective efforts over the past few months.
 The Government of Canada is working to ensure health care
workers have the personal protective equipment and medical
supplies they need. We are doing this through collaborative
bulk procurement with the provinces and territories, building
domestic production capacity, and identifying potential
alternatives and ways to extend product life.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
have worked with provinces and territories to identify needs
of personal protective equipment in long-term care facilities
and seniors’ residences.
 While we have seen improvements in recent weeks, we
need to continue our efforts.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL VOLUNTEER RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN …
 The Government of Canada is supporting provinces and
territories by facilitating an inventory for recruitment and
mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in
the following key areas:
- Case tracking and contact tracing;
- Health system surge capacity; and
- Case data collection and reporting.
 When the recruitment campaign ended on April 24, there
were 53,769 volunteers registered in the inventory from
which provincial and territorial governments can draw upon
as needed.
 We are also collaborating with the Canadian Red Cross to
coordinate training and deployment of volunteers identified
through the national volunteer recruitment campaign, to help
ensure our elders are safe and receiving quality care.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL SUPPORT TO LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES …
 The situation in long-term care facilities is not something any
Canadian wants to see to continue. We all agree that the
status quo is not an option.
 While long-term care is primarily a provincial / territorial
responsibility, our Government is ready to work with
provinces and territories on a safe restart agreement, which
could include funding support to protect seniors and other
vulnerable populations.
 The Government of Canada will continue to work in
collaboration with provinces and territories to understand
and help address immediate needs in order to increase the
resilience of long-term care facilities and help ensure that
long-term care residents have a dignified life.
BACKGROUND
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities:
There are currently three processes ongoing related to Ontario LTC facilities:
1) Ontario has announced the intent to launch an independent commission into its
long-term care system;
2) the Ontario’s ombudsman is launching an investigation into the province’s
oversight of long-term care homes; and
3) the Ontario Patient Ombudsman has also launched a systemic investigation into
the resident and caregiver experience at Ontario’s long-term care homes with
outbreaks of COVID-19.
In Quebec, there are also three processes ongoing:
1) the three major medical professional orders launched an inquiry into conditions
discovered in long-term care homes during the COVID-19 outbreak;
2) the Chief Coroner for Québec has launched a public inquiry into deaths that
occurred in CHSLDs during the COVID-19 outbreak; and
3) Québec’s ombudsperson (Protecteur du citoyen) is also investigating the
government COVID-19 response in long-term care facilities.
Families are also seeking class action against long-term care facilities.
There have been additional calls for investigations including a request from the Nova
Scotia New Democratic Party to have a public inquiry examining COVID-19 at
Northwood long-term care home in Halifax.
Ontario Long-Term Care Association Report:
According to the Ontario Long-Term Care Association, preliminary data shows that
three and four-bed rooms in older buildings were hardest hit among the 30% of long-
term care facilities that have experienced outbreaks in Ontario. The Ontario Long-Term
Care Association is calling on the Government of Canada to provide immediate support
to provinces by increasing procurement of personal protective equipment and access to
rapid testing, addressing workforce issues through a national human resources
strategy, and providing capital investment to build and redevelop long-term care homes
and create immediate solutions to help distancing in existing homes.
Government of Canada Actions:
Seniors are at an increased risk of more severe outcomes from COVID-19. Much like
populations in nursing homes in other countries, residents in Canada’s long-term care
homes are frail, have multiple chronic diseases, and require significant support with the
activities of daily living.
While long-term care is primarily a provincial and territorial responsibility, including the
oversight of publicly and privately operated long-term care homes, the federal
government is taking a number of steps to respond to the significant challenges faced
by long-term care facilities across the country in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
To help manage the spread of the virus and its impacts, the Chief Public Health Officer
of Canada worked together with provincial and territorial Chief Public Health Officers to
prepare guidance documents on the prevention and control of COVID-19 in long-term
care facilities, as well as in home care settings. These documents were released on
April 13 and April 24 respectively, and are available on the Government of Canada’s
website. Links are below:
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-
coronavirus-infection/prevent-control-covid-19-long-term-care-homes.html
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-
coronavirus-infection/health-professionals/infection-prevention-control-covid-19-
interim-guidance-home-care-settings.html.
Given the rates of illness and death in long-term care facilities, the federal government
is continuing to work with provinces and territories to better understand the gaps related
to personal protective equipment. In addition to recent survey of provinces and
territories, the Government of Canada expects to launch a more comprehensive survey
of personal protective equipment allocation in long-term care facilities.
On April 5, the Government of Canada announced a National Recruitment Campaign to
seek volunteers to assist with case tracking and contact tracing, case data collection
and reporting; and health system surge capacity through building an inventory.
Information on the campaign was available online at https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
service-commission/national-covid-19-recruitment-campaign-we-need-you.html. The
campaign closed on April 24.
The federal government is also working with the Canadian Red Cross to support the
coordination and training of volunteers. The Public Service Commission is also working
with the Canadian Red Cross to establish teams of 20-25 individuals to be assigned to
various long-term care sites based on need. To date, 32 candidates have been placed
in Québec including: five health specialists hired by the Canadian Red Cross and 27
support workers hired by the Integrated University Health and Social Services Centre
(CIUSSS) in Montreal. In Ontario, the Public Service Commission and the Canadian
Red Cross are helping staff positions in long-term care homes to work in three areas:
public health, emergency management and personal support work.
The federal government has also recognized the important work done by health care
workers in long-term care facilities and has taken steps to make sure that its response
to the COVID-19 crisis addresses their needs. On May 7, the Prime Minister announced
that up to $3 billion in federal funding will be provided in support to provinces and
territories to increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which can include
front line workers in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
In May 2020, 1,675 Canadian Armed Forces personnel were deployed to 35 long-term
care facilities in Ontario and Québec to provide surge staffing support. On May 22, the
Canadian Armed Forces reported serious concerns in the long-term care homes in
which they were assisting, related to neglect of residents, lack of adherence to policies,
inadequate training and medical supplies, and deficiencies in infrastructure.
Inter-jurisdictional sharing of skilled health workforces is also being explored with the
provinces and territories through the potential use of the Operational Framework for
Mutual Aid Surge Requests (OFMAR), which is facilitated by the Public Health Agency.
This Framework sets out principles and guidelines to enable sharing of health assets,
including workforces. It holds potential to help address the immediate needs in long-
term care facilities now that jurisdictions have completed their initial pandemic modeling
and may be in a better position to assess with confidence what surge capacity they
might be able to offer to jurisdictions in greater need.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) IN THE CONTEXT OF THE PANDEMIC
SYNOPSIS
● Although variations exist across the provinces and territories, practitioners
generally continue to do MAID assessments and procedures in the context of the
pandemic by adapting their practice approaches to respect social distancing and
to ensure their safety and that of their patients.
● The Government tabled draft legislation (Bill C-7) in response to the Quebec
Court decision striking down the eligibility requirement of a reasonably
foreseeable death. Bill C-7 was introduced on February 24th, 2020, but Second
Reading was not completed before the pandemic was declared. Parliament is
not likely to re-commence debate around Bill C-7 until after May 25, when the
Parliamentary agenda may broaden beyond COVID-related items.
 The original 2016 MAID legislation requires that a review of the provisions of the
legislation, as well as the state of palliative care, be referred to one or more
committee(s) of Parliament by the start of the fifth year after the day on which the
legislation receives royal assent (i.e., no later than June 17, 2020).
Parliamentarians will need to consider the scope and timing of the review when
regular parliamentary business resumes.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
● How has the COVID pandemic affected MAID in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
● Access to MAID services continues despite some challenges
for individuals seeking MAID and for providers who deliver
MAID services during the pandemic.
● Provincial and territorial governments and regulatory bodies
have adapted policies and guidelines to facilitate MAID
delivery – using virtual means in some instances.
● The legislative changes proposed in Bill C-7 will address
some of the challenges that have been encountered during
the pandemic, such as the easing of witnessing
requirements.
● The federal government was granted an extension to the
Quebec court deadline to address amendments to the
Criminal Code. We aim to meet the deadline of July 11,
2020, in order to provide a consistent legal framework for
MAID for all Canadians.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, a Quebec Superior Court ruled in favour of two plaintiffs
(Truchon/Gladu) who had challenged the federal requirement that an individual’s natural death
be reasonably foreseeable (RFND) and the provincial requirement for a person to be at the end
of life under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms. The Government of Canada and
the Quebec provincial government did not appeal the decision.
The Court originally suspended its judgement until March 11, 2020. At the request of the
Government of Canada, the date of invalidity was extended to July 11, 2020. While the decision
applies only in Quebec, if legislative changes are not passed prior to this date, there will be a
difference in eligibility for MAID between Quebec and the rest of Canada. A further extension
could be requested in light of limited ability by Parliament to address the Bill during the
pandemic. No decision has been made on this matter.
On February 24, 2020, the Government tabled proposed amendments to the Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) which:
● remove the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order
to be eligible for MAID, while excluding eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental
illness;
● introduce a two-track approach to safeguards based on whether or not a person’s natural
death is reasonably foreseeable:
● allow “waiving of final consent” for eligible persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable
and who may lose capacity to consent before MAID is provided; and
● expand data collection through the federal monitoring regime to provide a more complete
picture of MAID in Canada
Review of Bill C-7 is currently at Second Reading pending the reconvening of the House. Until
at least May 25, 2020, Parliamentary activities are limited to COVID-related business. After this
date, more information should become available about the process and timelines for future
debate of the Bill.
In the meantime, individuals in Quebec who meet all eligibility requirements (other than RFND)
are able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their request for
MAID considered. As of May 8, 2020, three Quebec residents have applied for exemptions to
receive MAID. Decisions are still pending.
MAID DELIVERY DURING THE PANDEMIC
Provinces/Territories are experiencing challenges with MAID delivery to varying degrees
depending upon the frequency of MAID requests and severity of COVID within their jurisdiction.
The key challenges and concerns have been:
● Obtaining individuals to act as witnesses to a MAID request and practitioner access to the
individual requesting MAID, either due to institutional policies limiting visitors or limited
supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) available to facilitate a safe encounter.
● Residents of faith-based institutions with restrictive MAID policies unable to move to another
location to receive MAID due to cancelled or limited transfers.
● Availability of drug supply used in MAID provision because the same drugs are also used as
sedatives for the ventilation of COVID-19 patients.
In response to correspondence from the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and
Providers (CAMAP) encouraging use of virtual witnessing/assessment, Minister Lametti
confirmed in a letter that provisions in the Criminal Code do not pose a barrier to the use of
electronic tools to facilitate assessing or witnessing a person’s MAID request.
Many provincial governments and health professional regulatory bodies have responded by
releasing pandemic-adapted guidelines/policies to address some of these challenges such as
supporting the use of virtual witnessing and virtual MAID assessments, and preserving back-up
MAID kits to prevent disposal of unused drugs.
Some MAID practitioners are reporting additional MAID inquiries from individuals concerned
about their options in the context of COVID. There is a general sentiment among MAID
practitioners and Dying With Dignity Canada (DWDC) that, given the time required to address
the procedural requirements for MAID, it is not a feasible option for COVID positive patients with
a poor prognosis. Quality palliative care accompanied by palliative sedation is the best
approach in these circumstances.
Jean Truchon, one of two plaintiffs implicated in the Quebec Superior Court decision in
September 2019, received MAID on April 7, 2020, approximately 2 months earlier than he had
planned, due to concerns about contracting COVID-19.
MAID MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID came into force in November 2018 and set out the
framework for mandatory reporting for all physicians, nurse practitioners and pharmacists who
participate in MAID.
As per the Regulations, data is now being collected on all assessments for and the provision of
MAID, to provide a full picture of MAID in Canada. The federal monitoring regime provides the
only consistent and comparable national data set on MAID.
The Regulations require the federal Minister of Health to produce a report at least once a year
using the information collected on MAID. The first report is expected in spring 2020 and will
report on a full year of data collected under the new regime.
COVID-19 MEDICAL DEVICE AUTHORIZATIONS
SYNOPSIS
 As an emergency public health measure, the Interim Order for Medical Devices
has allowed expedited access to COVID-19-related medical devices in Canada
since March 18, 2020. Health Canada has also expedited the process for issuing
Medical Devices Establishment Licences in the fight against COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the devices
needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada will continue to leverage all regulatory tools
to ensure Canadians have access to safe and effective
health products to fight COVID-19.
 To date, we have authorized 285 COVID-19 medical devices
including:
- 26 testing devices; and
- 259 devices including personal protective equipment,
decontamination devices for N95 respirators,
ventilators, reagents, and swabs.
 A medical device is authorized after Health Canada
completes a scientific assessment, ensuring that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness.
 Health Canada also continues to expedite applications for
medical device establishment licences for products such as
masks, gowns, respirators and ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on mobilizing manufacturing capacity
 Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders who are
scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to
provide much needed tests or medical supplies.
 Across the federal government, we are mobilizing industry
and providing support for research, market approval,
manufacturing and supply.
 We are working closely with provinces and territories to
ensure that they have the medical devices that they need.
IF PRESSED … on N95 respirators decontamination
 Extending the use of personal protective equipment through
decontamination is one way of helping Canada meet supply
needs.
 Health Canada is looking at ways to safely and effectively
decontaminate single use N95 respirators.
 Health Canada has authorized devices to decontaminate
N95 respirators under the Interim Order for Medical Devices.
IF PRESSED … on issue with KN95 respirators filtration performance and US FDA
actions
 On May 7, US FDA issued a revised guidance indicating that
certain respirators from China may not provide adequate
respiratory protection.
 Health Canada will ensure that any companies that have
distributed impacted products in Canada take appropriate
action to stop selling these respirators, notify customers and
relabel existing stock as “face masks” instead of
“respirators”.
 Should additional safety concerns be identified, Health
Canada will take appropriate action and inform Canadians,
as necessary.
IF PRESSED … on investigational testing and special access
 As of June 22, Health Canada has authorized:
- Four five investigational testing authorizations, and five
four applications are under review; and
- 42 38 Special Access Program applications for COVID-
19 test kits, ultrasonic systems, endotracheal tubes and
ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on exceptional import and sale of COVID-19 devices
 The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and
Foods for a Special Dietary Purposes helps prevent or
alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19.
 Under this IO, as of June 22, Health Canada has added 127
102 medical devices to the List of Medical Devices for
Exceptional Import and Sale.
 Importers with medical device establishment licences can
import these medical devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
BACKGROUND
Streamlined regulatory processes
The Interim Order for medical devices signed on March 18, 2020, allows expedited
access to COVID-19-related medical devices, including diagnostic test kits. Health
Canada can also consider approvals granted by foreign regulatory authorities in
deciding whether to approve an application for the importation or sale of COVID-19-
related medical devices. Use of existing devices, where the approved, intended use was
not originally COVID-19-related, can also be expanded under this Interim Order.
The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in relation to COVID-19 helps prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
directly or indirectly related to COVID-19. Under the Interim Order, the Minister can
permit the exceptional importation and sale of products that do not fully comply with
Canadian requirements, but are manufactured according to comparable standards.
In recent weeks we have:
• addressed shortages by permitting the importation and sale of medical devices
that are not approved in Canada, subject to certain requirements;
• facilitated access to products that may not fully meet current regulatory
requirements, such as bilingual labelling, including personal protective equipment
(such as masks and gowns), swabs, hand sanitizers, and hard-surface
disinfectants
• amended the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent Act to support efforts to help
prevent and alleviate shortages.
Health Canada continues to monitor and assess the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
products allowed for import and sale under these special measures.
Decontamination of N95 respirators
Health Canada has authorized several decontamination systems: Stryker’s Sterizone
VP4 Sterilize,; ASP’s Sterrad sterilization systems, Cleanworks’s Clean Flow Healthcare
Mini sterilizer; and Ecolab’s Bioquell. The Department continues to evaluate new
decontamination method applications submitted under the Interim Order for medical
devices. A series of webinars was held with provincial and territorial healthcare
partners, industry and healthcare professionals to provide information and guidance on
the decontamination and re-use of N95 respirators.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING
COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The Government is committed to increasing access to
mental health and substance use resources and supports for
Canadians whose regular services are not accessible.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address the increased
stress, worry, and anxiety that Canadians are experiencing
due to COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is
creating stress and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly
for those who do not have ready access to their regular
support networks. That is why the Government has launched
a new online portal that provides access to a virtual network
of psycho-social supports.
 This new portal, called Wellness Together Canada,
provides 24/7 access to free evidence-based tools and
resources for Canadians in all provinces and territories, and
in both official languages, to help meet their needs for
mental health and substance use supports.
 Wellness Together Canada makes it easy for Canadians to
access self-directed tools and find credible information on
mental health and substance use issues. The portal also
connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions, phone calls or online counselling.
 As of June 19, more than 230,000 Canadians have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal. This
includes Canadians from all provinces and territories
representing varied age groups with diverse mental health
and substance use needs.
 These supports will complement, and not replace, existing
provincial and territorial services.
 Use of the portal will be closely monitored to ensure that
updates best align with the needs of Canadians.
 The portal adds to the suite of virtual tools ensuring that
Canadians have access to information, resources, and other
supports during this difficult time, such as the self-
assessment tool and the Canada COVID-19 mobile app
IF PRESSED ON THE COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCESS
THAT HEALTH CANADA UNDERTOOK TO AWARD THE
CONTRACT FOR WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA….
 Health Canada with Public Services and Procurement
Canada launched a competitive process to provide funding
through a targeted request for proposals (RFP).
 A targeted approach was necessary due to the scope and
complexity of services required and the urgency to provide
mental health and substance use supports to Canadians
during COVID-19.
 Key mental health and substance use organizations across
the country were informed of the RFP who were known to
have the experience and capacity necessary to deliver on
the requirements of the contract in an extremely short
timeline.
 Health Canada received a total of three bids through the
submissions process. A group of three evaluators reviewed
each bid against the technical evaluation criteria
independently, after which a group evaluation was
performed to reach consensus on the final bid scores.
 The consensus scores were used by Public Services and
Procurement Canada in conjunction with the financial
component of each bid to identify the successful bid.
 The contract was awarded to a consortium of organizations
that included Stepped Care Solutions, Kids Help Phone, and
Homewood Health, who formed a joint-venture corporation
to deliver on the full scope of the contract requirements.
IF PRESSED ON THE COSTS AND DURATION OF THE
WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA PORTAL…
 The total cost of creation and deployment of the portal was
$16.61M. These costs were allocated according to the three
streams of services described in the Statement of Work:
- $1.1M is allocated to Stream 1 – Triage and Self-
Monitoring Tools. This includes platform and tools
implementation and maintenance, mental health self-
assessment integration, as well as alignment with
Stepped Care 2.0 principles.
- $0.9M is allocated to Stream 2 – Mental Health
Promotion. This includes e-MH and peer support
applications, as well as Stepped Care 2.0 training and
compliance with standards.
- $14.21M is allocated to Stream 3 – Triage and Psycho-
social Support. This includes 24/7 phone and text
triage, single session counselling, multi-session
counselling, and online peer support.
- In addition, $0.4M is allocated to joint venture
governance.
 The initial contract is for the four month period beginning
April 8, 2020. There is an option to renew the contract for
two additional four-month periods.
 In order to continue to meet the needs of Canadians, Health
Canada is currently pursuing an amendment to the current
contract to increase the total value to $22.12M. This
amendment will augment supports to expand the portal’s
reach and capabilities in needed areas.
IF PRESSED FOR INFORMATION ON THE CONSORTIUM OF
ORGANIZATIONS MANAGING THE PORTAL…
 The portal is the result of the work of a broad consortium of
organizations, including Stepped Care Solutions, Kids Help
Phone, and Homewood Health, with support from
Greenspace Health and other partners.
 Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-
sector team of clinician-researchers, knowledge users and
end-users who are among Canada’s thought leaders and
pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental
health
 Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service
offering support to young people via phone, text and live
chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering
virtual mental health solutions.
 Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development
and delivery of national, evidence-based mental health,
trauma, and addiction treatment and services, with an expert
team and national network of more than 4,500 clinical
professionals.
 Greenspace Health is a leader in mental healthcare
technology. and will act as the central online portal.
 The portal receives support from additional partners and
stakeholders, such as Bell Let's Talk, Canada Health
Infoway, Mental Health Commission of Canada, Canadian
Psychological Association, and Medavie.
IF PRESSED ON THE CAPACITY OF THE PORTAL...
 The portal provides 24/7 access to free evidence-based
resources and supports to Canadians in all provinces and
territories to help meet their needs for mental health and
substance use supports.
 The portal will offer Canadians different levels of support
depending on their needs, ranging from information and self-
assessment tools, to the opportunity to chat with peers and
other mental health professionals.
 In addition, there are more than 6000 service providers
employed with Homewood Health and Kids Help Phone who
will deliver psycho-social support services via call, text and
chat through the portal
 The service providers cover a range of health professions,
including social work and psychology, with diverse
backgrounds in counselling psychology, clinical social work,
crisis management, child psychology, sexuality,
marital/family therapy, trauma, substance use, and other
clinical focuses.
 The vast majority of these service providers are licensed
mental health and substance use professionals.
IF PRESSED ON THE PORTAL REGISTRATION PROCESS
AND COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION...
 Canadians can access some information and support
services on the portal without creating an account.
Registration on the portal gives access to interactive
programs and courses where people can participate actively
in their learning.
 As well, registration provides the option of a self-assessment
and allows participants to track their progress over time. This
immediate feedback and continuous monitoring is known to
produce better engagement and outcomes.
 The Wellness Together Canada portal is powered by
Greenspace Health, a health technology platform that
manages and stores health information.
 The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health
information legislation and standards to maintain the security
and confidentiality of personal information.
 All data is owned by the individual user on the platform.
Users can choose to delete their account and associated
data at any time.
 Personal Information is not sold or disclosed to other parties.
 In order to continually enhance the portal so that it meets the
needs of Canadians, portal data is analyzed and interpreted
by the consortium to inform on additions and changes to
mental health and substance use programming.
 Health Canada only receives reports that contain non-
identifying aggregate information on usage to monitor
progress and support improvements to the portal.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH PORTFOLIO’S OTHER
ACTIONS TO ADDRESS IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON
CANADIANS’ MENTAL HEALTH…
 The Government has invested $240.5M toincrease access
to virtual services and digital tools to support Canadians’
health and wellbeing during COVID-19. This includes:
- $25M for the original investment into Wellness Together
Canada.
- $15M to support the growing family of digital products
that includes the Canada COVID-19 app.
- $200M to expand virtual care services across Canada
in partnership with provinces, territories and other
federal partners, such as Canada Health Infoway.
 The Government has published guidance material to help
the public take care of their mental health. We are also
providing $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to respond to the
increased demand for counselling and suicide prevention
services for children and youth.
 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is currently
supporting 99 research projects on COVID-19, including nine
projects studying the mental health impact of the current
pandemic ($3.4 million from CIHR and partners). These
important projects will look at mental health during and after
the pandemic and will generate new evidence to combat
misinformation, stigma and fear. They will help inform policy
making and offer new evidence-based treatments and
services to all Canadians.
 The Government has provided $9 million to United Way
(through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
 Statistics Canada launched a survey of Canadians related to
COVID-19; Wave 2 of this survey will include more questions
on mental health and results will be available in May.
 Taken together these efforts will help ensure vulnerable
Canadians have access to the health services they need
during the serious health threat posed by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO
DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
 The COVID-19 pandemic is affecting women, men and high-
risk sub-populations differently across a range of sectors.
 That is why the Wellness Together Canada portal provides
all Canadians with facilitated access to mental health and
substance use services and supports in the context of
COVID-19.
 These services are designed to meet the needs of varying
age groups and specific populations, such as those in
isolation, sexual minorities, postsecondary students, and
Indigenous people.
 The portal provides services that are delivered virtually,
which helps to reduce the impacts of stigma by having the
option to remain anonymous while receiving support.
 In addition, for counseling services, service providers use
instantaneous interpretation on the phone for up to 200
languages and dialects. They also provide teletypewriter
services for an additional level of telephone support for those
with hearing impairments.
 We continue to closely examine usage of the portal to
monitor outreach to diverse and at-risk populations.
 With feedback from persons with lived experience, new
resources and content will be added to the portal on a
regular basis to continue meet the needs of our diverse
Canadian populations.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE PAN-CANADIAN
SUICIDE PREVENTION SERVICE …
 Budget 2019 announced $25 million over 5 years, and $5
million per year ongoing, to implement and sustain a fully
operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service. This
will provide people across Canada with access to bilingual,
24/7 crisis support from trained responders, using the
technology of their choice: voice, text or online chat.
 In July 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada launched
a call for applications for funding for organizations interested
in leading a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service. This
solicitation ended on October 31, 2019. A decision is
expected soon.
BACKGROUND
The global COVID-19 pandemic has already had a significant health, economic, and
social impact on Canadians, with many experiencing stress and anxiety about an
uncertain future. Though it is unclear how long this pandemic will affect Canadians, the
impact on mental health and substance use will be long term and evolve through the
varying stages of the pandemic.
Lessons from the SARS Outbreak in 2003
Following the SARS outbreak, it was reported that more than 40% of the population
reported increased levels of stress in family and work settings during the outbreak, with
16% showing signs of traumatic stress levels. Based on these estimates and other
considerations unique to the COVID-19 pandemic, it is anticipated that approximately
11 million Canadians will experience high levels of stress in family and work settings,
and close to 2 million will show signs of traumatic stress.
These are conservative estimates given that SARS only significantly impacted two
major cities in Canada and did not force states of emergency and self-isolation in most
jurisdictions.
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians social distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for
virtual services, such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and
provinces/territories are not able to absorb the increased demand. These services are
overwhelmed and experiencing significant delays in supporting those who require
immediate assistance.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their
mental wellbeing, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when
deemed necessary. Canadians need to be re-assured that there are supports available
to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Commitments
Increasing Mental Health System Capacity
Health Canada has invested $16 million in the development and services offered
through Wellness Together Canada, a free 24/7 portal for mental health and substance
use supports. This portal provides Canadians with access a suite of digital tools to help
them monitor and manage their mental health, and find live access to trained mental
health professionals through digital platforms (e.g., phone, text, chat). Health Canada is
currently pursuing an amendment to the current contract to increase the total value to
$22.12M. This amendment will augment supports to expand the portal’s reach and
capabilities in needed areas.
The funding for the portal is part of the $240.5M investment (described below) to
increase access to virtual services and digital tools to support Canadians’ health and
wellbeing during COVID-19.
Increase Access to Virtual Services and Digital Tools
The Government has invested $240.5M to increase access to virtual services and digital
tools to support Canadians’ health and wellbeing during COVID-19.
The funding has been allocated as follows:
 $25M has been allocated for Wellness Together Canada, an online mental health
and substance use portal that provides Canadians with free resources, tools, and
professional support services to help with wellness and resilience, as well as
their mental health and substance use issues. To date, $16M has been awarded
through the contract with the consortium responsible for establishing and
providing servings through the portal.
 $15M has been allocated to support the growing family of digital products that
includes the Canada COVID-19 app, which helps people track their symptoms,
receive the latest updates, and access trusted resources.
 $200M has been allocated to expand virtual care services across Canada in
partnership with provinces, territories and other federal partners, such as Canada
Health Infoway. Discussions are taking place with provinces and territories on
how best to allocate these resources to meet the needs of Canadians.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’
access to mental health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces
and territories to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex
needs, and spread proven models of community mental health care and culturally
appropriate interventions linked to primary health services. In August 2017, an
agreement was reached with the provinces and territories on a Common Statement of
Principles for Shared Health Priorities (CSOP) that confirmed these priorities. Bilateral
agreements have since been finalized with each jurisdiction that set out details of how
they will use federal funding in future years, consistent with the CSOP.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion
Innovation Fund, the Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to
address multiple risk and protective factors to promote mental health for children, youth,
young adults and populations susceptible to mental health inequities (e.g., low-income
families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, LGBTQ2+, people living
with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC is providing $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to respond to the increased demand
for counselling and suicide prevention services for children and youth.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical
services for seniors.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
CIHR is currently supporting 9 research projects studying COVID-19 and mental health
($3.4 million from CIHR and partners) that will generate new evidence to inform policy
making
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada has provided funding to Crisis Services Canada in the
amount of $4.3 million over five years to support the development of the Canada
Suicide Prevention Service (CSPS). Budget 2019 announced an additional $25 million
over five years and $5 million ongoing to augment and sustain this service, with PHAC
launching a call for proposals on July 8, 2019 for organizations interested in leading the
CSPS. The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was made publicly available in
November 2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating
information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report
planned for release in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
The Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act received Royal Assent
in June 2018. The Act requires the development of a comprehensive federal framework
on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), to be tabled in Parliament by December 21,
2019 and published on Canada.ca within 30 days of tabling. To inform the development
of the federal framework, in accordance with the Act, the Minister of Health convened a
National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers of National Defence,
Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada, partners
and stakeholders, including people with lived-experience.
COVID-19 MODELLING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture. Modelling
is used for planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The Government
uses data and modelling to guide Canada’s response to COVID-19, and to help inform
public health and policy decisions to control Canada’s COVID-19 epidemic. Some
provincial and territorial public health authorities are also conducting their own modelling
to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19 related cases and deaths to aid in
their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and
provincial governments?
KEY MESSAGES
 Modelling is one of the tools that support planning our
response to the COVID-19 epidemic. The Public Health
Agency of Canada is conducting modelling studies that tell
us the number of COVID-19 cases that could occur
nationally depending on how effective we are in controlling
the epidemic.
 Surveillance data indicate that the measures we are taking
to slow the spread of COVID-19 are working, but models and
the experience of other countries suggest that we need to
continue to be vigilant.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works with the
provinces and territories to share their data to inform the
national COVID-19 model.
 We know that the COVID-19 epidemic varies across
provinces and territories. There is alignment with the national
level modelling results, but provincial models provide more
specific projections for planning within each of the provinces.
IF PRESSED…
 Many factors contribute to regional differences in the
epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
These include differences in the timing and patterns of

community spread, changes in laboratory testing practices,
and differing timelines for introduction of a range of public
health measures.
 Notwithstanding these variables, we are observing slowed
epidemic growth of COVID-19 across Canada, with a
declining epidemic in most, but not all, jurisdictions.
BACKGROUND
The COVID-19 epidemic in Canada comprises a number of different epidemics in the
different provinces and territories. The Public Health Agency of Canada regularly uses
data to update models for guiding public health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates
in the short-term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing
of public health measures to control the epidemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic
models. Forecasting models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in
Canada to estimate forward on how many new cases might be expected in the coming
week. Dynamic models do not use actual real-life case data, yet are useful in that they
permit a longer-term view based on our knowledge of how the virus behaves – this
helps us to visualize potential epidemic growth scenarios and impacts of control
measures that mitigate growth over time.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with
Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
• The Canadian Press has recently reported that Canada is facing a great blood
shortage due to the COVID-19 pandemic and that restrictions to blood donation
practices are preventing men who have sex with men (MSM) from donating
plasma and supporting the development of vaccines and treatments for COVID-
19.
• Canadian Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (H-Q) are responsible for
managing the supply of blood and blood products, including the supply of
commercially obtained plasma protein products for their respective jurisdictions.
They inform hospitals, Health Canada, and provincial/territorial Ministries of
Health of changes in blood inventory levels. Canadians can be reassured that
there is currently no shortage situation in Canada despite the pandemic.
• Presently, the blood operators are participating in COVID-19 research by
providing donated plasma through the screening of eligible donors, which
includes the 3-month deferral period for MSM. Health Canada and the provinces
and territories cannot change these screening policies, without an evidenced-
based submission from the blood operators.
• On April 30, 2019, Health Canada issued regulatory authorizations to CBS and
H-Q to change their blood donor deferral period for MSM from one year to three
months. This regulatory decision came as a result of proposals submitted by both
CBS and H-Q to Health Canada and was based on the latest scientific evidence.
CBS and H-Q implemented this policy on June 3, 2019.
• Health Canada continues to fund research that could inform future changes to
blood donation policies. This funding supports blood operators to generate the
scientific data required to support a submission to Health Canada for regulatory
authorization.
• Canada’s blood system is internationally recognized for its high safety standards.
It is, and will continue to be, one of the safest blood systems in the world.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
Canada’s blood supply is currently meeting demand, and
•
has been throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, thanks to
Canadians coming forward in large numbers to donate
blood.
Canada’s blood operators are working closely with provinces
•
and territories on the blood supply as health care systems
resume surgeries and procedures that were suspended due
to COVID-19.
We continue to encourage Canadians to make and keep
•
their appointments to donate blood as the need for blood is
constant.
In the current context of convalescent plasma research, I
•
have heard concerns from the community about restrictive
blood donation practices that prevent MSM from donating
plasma and supporting the development of vaccines and
treatments for COVID-19.
Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec are
•
responsible for providing the donor plasma for use in this
research through the screening of eligible donors and the
collection and processing of the plasma according to the
protocols already in place under their Health Canada
authorizations, including the deferral period for MSM.
Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot
•
mandate a policy change to donor screening requirements.
Blood operators must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety
based on up-to-date scientific data. Without this evidence,
the current screening policies cannot be changed.
Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
•
I’m proud that our government has been working on
•
reducing barriers preventing MSM from donating blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-
Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral period for
donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services,
starting in 2016, and in collaboration with Héma-
Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting
in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing
barriers to the donation of plasma.
The Department remains open to assessing future changes
•
to the MSM donor deferral policy, including its elimination,
provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada’s approval of the 3-month deferral policy is
based on scientific evidence and in no way compromises the
safety or quality of Canada’s blood supply.
 This change is in line with other jurisdictions that have
implemented a three-month deferral period for MSM:
England, Scotland, Wales and United States.
 There is no international scientific consensus regarding
donor deferral periods for MSM. Health Canada is aware
that certain jurisdictions have adopted policies based on the
recent sexual history of the donor while not having MSM-
specific deferral periods.
 I will continue to work with the Minister of Diversity and
Inclusion and Youth, and in partnership with Canadian Blood
Services and Héma-Québec, to build on existing progress to
implement a behaviour-based model of donation that
eliminates the blood ban for MSM.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
 This matter is presently before the court and further details
of Canada’s legal position will be provided to the court.
BACKGROUND
• In Canada: There are no regulations prohibiting MSM and other groups from
donating blood. Donor deferrals are policy decisions of the blood operators.
However, under Canada's Blood Regulations, CBS and H-Q are required to
make submissions to HC for any changes to their processes. HC must evaluate
and authorize any changes before they can be implemented. HC has no
authority to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed due to
perceived discriminatory aspects.
• The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with
another man even once since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC
authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change its MSM deferral criteria to a
five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM
from a five-year to a one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a
submission from CBS and H-Q to further reduce the MSM deferral period to
three-months.
• Over the past six years, the MSM blood donor deferral period in Canada
changed from a lifetime restriction to a three-month waiting period. At no time
was the safety of Canada’s blood system compromised. There has not been a
single known case of HIV infection from blood transfusion in Canada in 25 years.
• There are two main blood donor deferral strategies used internationally to
address the risk of HIV and other disease transmission. The first and most
common is a time-based deferral based on the higher-risk activities of specific
populations, such as the MSM deferral currently applied in Canada. The second
is an individual-based deferral that looks at higher-risk activities on a donor-by-
donor basis. This is often referred to as a behaviour-based deferral and when
used instead of MSM, this usually includes questions on new partners or multiple
partners of either sex.
• HC continues to engage with CBS and H-Q and receive information on research
findings as they become available.
• In June 2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen
the evidence base supporting a non-discriminatory approach to blood donations.
Results of these research projects are expected to be available by winter 2020,
to inform future blood donation policies. To continue to support a safe and non-
discriminatory approach to blood donation, Budget 2019 provided $2.4 million
over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing
barriers to the donation of blood plasma.
• As a result of federal funding, researchers from across Canada are currently
participating in a total of 19 research studies related to MSM blood donation, that
are in various stages of execution and completion. Among these studies,
alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are under evaluation for MSM.
• With federal funding, the operational feasibility of including MSM for plasma is
also being assessed at a time when CBS is increasing domestic collection of
plasma for “plasma-derived therapies” to treat Canadian patients.
• On June 8, 2020 Randall Garrison, NDP Member of Parliament, tabled motion
M-41, calling on the government to “take immediate measures to end the current
deferral policy governing blood and plasma donations from gay men, men who
have sex with men, and transgender women given the current blood shortages
during the COVID-19 crisis and the urgency of obtaining plasma donations for
research into prevention and treatment of COVID-19 and Canadian Blood
Services, Héma-Québec, and Health Canada should replace the current
discriminatory policy with a science and behaviour-based policy that protects the
integrity of the Canadian blood supply while treating all potential donors with
equal dignity and respect.” Six years ago, MP Garrison tabled a motion to end
the ban on MSM blood donations. Recent media reports referencing MP
Garrison’s latest motion
claim that Canada is facing a great blood shortage and that current MSM blood
donation policies are unscientific and discriminatory, and are preventing donors
from participating in COVID-19 research..
• The arrival of the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada introduced a wave of
uncertainty and concern that has affected every aspect of life in the
country. Although CBS recorded a significant drop in donations after the initial
COVID-19 lockdown in March, it acted quickly by strengthening routine cleaning,
infection-control and screening practices and by introducing enhanced health and
safety measures in all donor centres. Donors responded, and their remarkable
commitment successfully boosted the national inventory to record
levels as demand for blood products dropped due to postponed elective
surgeries and procedures.
• The need for blood is now rising again as hospitals resume procedures that were
put on hold due to COVID-19. And while supply is still meeting demand, donors
are being asked to book available appointments for the next several weeks, and
even months in advance, to ensure this continues in the longer term.
• To date, Health Canada has authorized three clinical trials of convalescent
plasma for the treatment of COVID-19. The largest is a multicentre trial designed
to determine the safety and efficacy of COVID-19 convalescent plasma, collected
from donors who have recovered from COVID-19 infection in reducing the risk of
intubation or death in adults who are admitted to hospital with COVID-19
respiratory illness. CBS and H-Q are responsible for providing the donor plasma
for use in this clinical trial.
International trends:
• There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for
MSM. Some countries, such as Austria and the Ukraine, maintain indefinite
deferral periods, while other countries, including France and Australia, have one-
year deferral periods. Others have adopted a 3-month deferral including England,
Scotland, Wales, and United States. Some countries, such as Spain and Italy, do
not have MSM-specific deferral periods. For example, in Italy the donor
screening includes a face-to-face interview in a private and confidential location
by a trained physician who is responsible for donor selection.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE (NESS)
MANAGEMENT
SYNOPSIS
A recent media story highlighted the disposal of approximately 2 million expired masks
and 440,000 expired gloves during the closure of the NESS warehouse in Regina in
2019. The masks and gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had passed the limit of
five years for their use, as recommended by the manufacturer.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 How can we be sure that the Government of Canada has the right system in
place to have the necessary stockpile of health supplies to support Canada in
pandemics and other emergencies?
 Why did the Public Health Agency of Canada dispose of N95 masks and gloves
in 2019?
 Why did the Public Health Agency of Canada close federal stockpile locations?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories to procure the necessary health
supplies to continue responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) was
initially built on the assumption that provincial, territorial and
local governments would be prepared for the most common
emergencies. Consequently, it was designed to provide
health emergency assets when local and provincial and
territorial resources were exhausted.
 Jurisdictions have traditionally sourced Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) directly from known suppliers, and the
NESS has historically only carried relatively small amounts.
 With the unprecedented nature of the current pandemic, the
NESS quickly stepped into a much more active role in
procurement. As we move forward, we will adjust, and
lessons learned will inform the future of the NESS.
IF PRESSED ON INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 The NESS reviews its stock regularly. Expired, obsolete, or
unusable items are disposed of as per Treasury Board
policy.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore
ways to optimize product life cycle management and
minimize the disposal of expired stock.
IF PRESSED ON WAREHOUSE FOOTPRINT
 A decision was made in 2013 to modernize and optimize our
warehouse national footprint.
 Currently, the Public Health Agency of Canada has
warehouses in six cities.
IF PRESSED ON STOCKPILING OF PPE AND THE CANADIAN PANDEMIC
INFLUENZA PLAN
 The Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan is a federal,
provincial, and territorial guidance document for the
healthcare sector. Its purpose is to assist jurisdictions with
their emergency planning.
 The most recent guidance from 2011 recommends that
availability of PPE supply should be addressed during
pandemic planning, and that stockpiling should be
considered.
 Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for
ensuring the provision of medications, supplies, and
equipment required for provision of pandemic health care
services.
 The NESS is intended to provide health emergency assets
when local and provincial and territorial resources have been
exhausted. It has historically carried only relatively small
amounts of PPE.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING LEVEL
 Since 2012-13, the operating budget of the NESS, including
salaries and operating has consistently been around $3
million annually.
 On top of the NESS core operational budget, there have
been investments made for particular initiatives, stocks of
supplies and medical countermeasures. Over the last 10
years, these investments have varied year over year, and
have amounted to over $79 million.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that
provinces and territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease
outbreaks, natural disasters and other public health events, when their own resources
are not enough. These supplies include a variety of items such as: medical equipment
and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
NESS Mandate
The fundamental assumption underpinning emergency management is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to a reasonable extent for the most
common emergencies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is
twofold:
 It provides surge capacity to provinces and territories at their request when their
own resources are not sufficient; and
 It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health
emergencies, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
NESS Funding
Since 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS has remained stable and has
been approximately $3 million a year. This funding is included in the overall funding
identified for the Health Security Infrastructure program area reported in Public
Accounts.
Additional funding has historically been provided to the NESS through internal
reallocation decisions and incremental funding decisions where the Public Health
Agency of Canada has received funding linked to specific purchases such as a four-
year investment in medical countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began
in 2015-16.
NESS Deployments
Over the past decade, the NESS has deployed assets to assist with a range of events
and emergencies, including the 2010 Olympics, 2013 Alberta Floods, Operation Syrian
Refugees, the Fort McMurray wildfires, and the 2018 G7 Summit in Quebec. The NESS
has also made international donations in support of the West African Ebola Outbreak,
Hurricane Harvey, and to China during the current COVID-19 outbreak.
NESS Requests for Assistance
We have so far been able to respond within 24 hours to all requests for assistance from
provinces and territories. Requests are assessed in consultation with the provinces and
territories and delivery dates and quantities are based on the availability of requested
supplies and urgency of the request.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and
warehouses strategically located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved
from nine warehouse locations across Canada to six. An independent assessment
indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’ role as timely surge
support.
As of 2019, all NESS holdings were consolidated in eight warehouses in six cities. In
Spring 2020, two additional warehouses were leased in Ottawa, given the volume of
supplies being donated to and purchased by the NESS as part of the federal
government’s COVID-19 response.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while
obsolete and expired supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
Regina Closure
In 2019, approximately 2 million expired masks and 440,000 expired gloves were
disposed of during the closure of the NESS warehouse in Regina. The masks and
gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had passed the limit of five years for their use,
as recommended by the manufacturer.
Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan PPE Guidance
The 2006 CPIP stated that plans are required to allow for a consistent 16-week supply
(i.e. two pandemic waves) of both influenza and non-influenza related materials to
address sporadic interruptions of supply chains (e.g. resulting from mail and courier
disruptions, border closures, supply limitations).
The 2011 CPIP indicates that methods to estimate PPE requirements are beyond the
scope of the CPIP, and notes that P/T governments are responsible for ensuring the
provision of medications, supplies, and equipment required for provision of pandemic
health care services.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations to provide the PMPRB with the tools and
information needed to protect Canadians from excessive medicine prices. The
amendments will come-into-force on January 1, 2021.
 These amendments will result in lower prices for patented medicines in Canada,
which are currently among the highest in the world. It is estimated that the
amendments will result in savings for governments and private payers of
approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. The brand-name pharmaceutical
industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced
access to medicines. On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched
consultations on draft guidelines to operationalize the amendments. Following
significant stakeholder feedback the PMPRB incorporated a number of
responsive changes into a revised draft of the Guidelines, which was released on
June 19, 2020 for a 30-day consultation.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations reduce access to
new medicines in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is committed to improving Canadians’
access to, and the affordability of, necessary prescription
medicines.
 These regulatory amendments will help Canadians to afford
the prescription medicines they need.
 Canada will continue to be an important market for new
medicines. In fact, many countries with much lower medicine
prices gain access to new medicines in the same time frame,
or even faster than Canada.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT ON PHARMACEUTICAL
INVESTMENTS IN CANADA
 Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical
industry investments, while having considerably lower prices
than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times
more investment dollars than Canada despite prices being
20% less.
 Our Government recognizes the importance of the life
sciences sector to the Canadian economy, innovation, and
quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the
innovation ecosystem in Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products, and significantly strengthened intellectual property
protection in recent trade agreements.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines
Consultation Process
 The PMPRB has published all written submissions it
received during its consultation with stakeholders and the
public on the draft Guidelines.
 The PMPRB made revisions to the draft Guidelines in
response to the significant stakeholder feedback it has
received.
 A revised draft of the Guidelines, was released on June 19,
2020 for a 30-day consultation.
 The current draft demonstrates that the PMPRB is very
committed to being responsive to stakeholder comments.
If Pressed on Delaying the Coming-into-Force of the
Regulatory Amendments
 We heard stakeholder concerns about the need to delay the
regulatory amendments’ coming-into-force date.
 Recognizing that the current priority is to retain full focus on
Canada’s COVID-19 response, the coming-into-force of
these amendments has been delayed by six months.
 These amendments will now come-into-force on January 1,
2021.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry
and Drug Access
 Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales
are expected to continue growing over the next ten years in
Canada.
 Drug companies are expected to launch their products in
Canada at the same rate as they do today. In fact, industry
sponsored studies have found that many countries with
lower prices than Canada have faster access to new
medicines, including the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
Kingdom and Norway.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
BACKGROUND
 The prices of patented medicines in Canada are regulated to be ‘non-excessive’
by the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), a quasi-judicial federal
agency created in 1987 under the Patent Act.
 On May 16, 2017, former Minister Philpott announced the Government of
Canada’s intention to modernize the PMPRB’s regulatory framework through
proposed amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations.
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced the final
amendments which were then published on August 21, 2019 in Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1,
2020.
 The most significant reforms to the regulations since their introduction in 1987,
these amendments lay the groundwork for national pharmacare by giving the
PMPRB the tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices and making
patented medicines more affordable.
 The amendments include three main elements:
 Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that
consider the price of patented medicines relative to their value and impact
on the Canadian health care system;
 Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of
all adjustments (e.g. rebates, discounts), so that the PMPRB is informed
of actual market prices in Canada; and,
 Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with
comparable consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine
markets as Canada. Specifically, the list of countries has been updated to
remove the U.S. and Switzerland, and to add Australia, Belgium, Japan,
the Netherlands, Norway, and Spain.
 The amendments also included a “grandfathering” provision, so that the new
price regulatory factors would not apply to any medicine that obtained a Drug
Identification Number in Canada prior to the August 2019 publication of the
amendments in the Canada Gazette.
 The Cost Benefit Analysis that accompanies these amendments estimates 10-
year savings to Canadian consumers of $13.2B ($8.8B net present value [NPV]).
This amounts to about a 10.8% reduction of patented medicine revenues in
Canada by year ten after implementation.
 An industry sponsored impact analysis of the PMPRB’s draft Guidelines
published on February 12, 2020 claims that the draft Guideline changes will have
an estimated impact to industry revenues of up to $41.8 B NPV over 10 years.
 On August 23, 2019, five brand-name pharmaceutical firms (the Canadian
subsidiaries of Merck, Janssen, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Servier) filed a
constitutional challenge against the amendments in the Superior Court of
Quebec, arguing that the federal government does not have the constitutional
authority to regulate pharmaceutical pricing, claiming that this authority rests
within provincial jurisdiction.
 On September 2, 2019, Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC), which represents
Canada’s brand-name pharmaceutical industry, and sixteen Canadian
subsidiaries of brand-name pharmaceutical companies, filed an application for a
judicial review of the amendments by the Federal Court of Canada.
 On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations on its
accompanying Guidelines, which will define operational implementation of the
amendments, including specific price tests that will be applied. The PMPRB’s
consultation included numerous opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
extended the consultation window to allow constructive engagements to
continue.
 On May 24, 2020, Vertex Pharmaceuticals wrote a letter to the Minister of Health
to indicate that the Canadian launch of their new Cystic Fibrosis drug, Trikafta,
was being delayed due to concerns about the amendments, and more
specifically, the detailed approach to their implementation that will be defined by
the PMPRB in their Guidelines. The letter asked that the coming-into-force of the
amendments be delayed by at least one year, until July 1, 2021, or later. It also
asks that the ‘grandfathering’ provision be moved to align with the new coming-
into-force date, rather than August 2019.
 On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were informed that the coming-into-force of the
regulatory amendments would be delayed by six months. The delay responds to
the circumstances of COVID-19, including increased demands on industry
stakeholders to manage Canada’s domestic drug supply chain. It also provides
the PMRPB additional time to complete its Guidelines consultations, which were
also disrupted by COVID-19. The amendments will now come-into-force on
January 1, 2021.
 On June 19, 2020, the PMPRB released revised draft Guidelines for a 30-day
consultation. The revised draft shows a high degree of responsiveness to
stakeholder concerns, in particular by:
 Balancing consumer protection with access to new medicines. This was
done by providing greater flexibility for the prices of medicines for rare
diseases and medicines with significant therapeutic benefit, so that price
limits aren’t an obstacle to the launch of new medicines in Canada; and
 Better aligning the impact of the Guidelines on prices and revenues with
the findings of Health Canada’s regulatory Cost Benefit Analysis. This
was done by adjusting screening and review procedures so that the
Guidelines are consistent with the impacts that were communicated as
part of the regulatory process.
 It is anticipated that the Guidelines will be finalized by September.
Guidance on the Use of Personal Protective Equipment
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work closely with Provinces and
Territories to provide infection prevention and control guidance for a variety of health
care settings, including long-term care facilities. The Agency has also provided advice
to workplaces and businesses on how to reduce the risk of COVID-19 infections in the
workplace, which may include the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why isn’t the Government recommending PPE, including N-95 masks, for all front-line
workers?
KEY MESSAGES
 The appropriate use of personal protective equipment or
PPE is one component of infection prevention and control.
 Working closely with provinces and territories, the Public
Health Agency of Canada has developed evidence-based
guidance on infection prevention and control for acute care
and long-term care settings, as well as home care settings,
including the appropriate use of PPE.
 The Agency has also provided advice to workplaces and
businesses outside the health sector on how to reduce the
risk of COVID-19 infections in the workplace, which may
include the use of PPE in some workplaces.
 The Government of Canada continues to emphasize that,
physical distancing, hand hygiene and coughing or sneezing
into your arm or sleeve are the most effective ways to
prevent transmission of the COVID-19 virus.
 Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering when you
cannot maintain a 2-metre physical distance from others, is
recommended as an additional measure you can take to
prevent further transmission of the virus to others.
 Non-medical masks for face coverings are not PPE, but they
are a way to prevent spread of the COVID-19 virus to others.
IF PRESSED ON USE ON NON-MEDICAL MASKS FOR HEALTHCARE WORKERS:
 Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical,
medical procedure masks and respirators such as N95
masks.
IF PRESSED ON WHY POSITION ON MASK USE BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC HAS
CHANGED:
 Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has
been changing as the evidence base and our understanding
of COVID-19 rapidly evolves. We are continually looking at
the evidence as it is being produced and working with our
partners across the country and around the world to learn
more.
 Wearing a non-medical mask is an additional measure we
can take to protect others, particularly when physical
distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g., grocery
shopping, in close settings such as public transit).
BACKGROUND
Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has been adjusted as the
evidence base and our understanding of COVID-19 evolves.
Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical, medical procedure masks
and respirators such as N95 respirators. It is extremely important that we have enough
supply of medical masks for healthcare workers where it is urgently needed for medical
procedures and to care for individuals who have COVID-19.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in healthcare settings
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) interim guidance on infection prevention
and control in acute healthcare settings was updated to ensure we provide
comprehensive recommendations based on the best available evidence. The guidance
emphasizes the need for environmental and administrative controls in facilities to
protect healthcare workers and patients, as well as the fundamental importance of
training in the use of PPE. It indicates that droplet and contact precautions are
appropriate for most patient care. Aerosol-generating medical procedures require N95
respirators along with other PPE. The guidance remains interim as it is subject to
revision based on new scientific evidence.
In new technical guidance, PHAC recommends that all healthcare workers in acute care
hospitals wear medical masks and eye protection/face shields for the full duration of a
shift in acute healthcare settings. Wearing a medical mask throughout the duration of a
shift is an important measure to help reduce the risk of transmission from a healthcare
worker to a patient. This recommendation applies to healthcare workers who are in
direct contact with patients, as well as environmental services staff working in patient
care areas. In addition, any healthcare workers who have COVID-19-related symptoms
should immediately go home and only return to work following the advice of their local
public health units.
Healthcare workers should refer to their province or territory’s guidance, as well as
facility policies on the use of masks, eye protection, and other PPE, including any PPE
conservation strategies that are in place.
Public use of non-medical face coverings
Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering in the community has not been proven to
protect the person wearing it. However, with the emerging information regarding pre-
symptomatic and asymptomatic transmission, and the goal to stop the spread of
COVID-19, wearing a non-medical mask is recommended to protect others when
physical distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g., grocery shopping, in close
settings such as public transit).
Wearing a non-medical mask in the community does not mean you should stop
practicing the public health measures that are known to work, such as physical
distancing. All of the recommendations regarding physical distancing, and hand
hygiene are based on what is known to work best to protect from infection. Non-medical
masks will not prevent COVID-19 spread without consistent and strict adherence to
good hygiene and public health measures, including frequent handwashing and physical
distancing.
PPE may be an important component of infection prevention efforts in non-healthcare
workplaces. However, the choice and use of PPE is based on occupational health and
safety advice specific to the job and workplace. PHAC provides information to help
employers and employees determine what infection prevention and control measures,
which might include PPE, are necessary in their workplaces.
PROCUREMENT OF PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
SYNOPSIS
The global COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented shortage in personal
protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies. To support the needs of
Canada’s frontline healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination
with the provinces and territories, launched a significant bulk procurement, engaging a
diverse number of new suppliers and manufacturers both internationally and through the
Government of Canada’s domestic “Call to Action” to increase domestic production.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of PPE and other
medical supplies?
 How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare
workers with the PPE required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of
COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is continuously working to
secure critical personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies
and medical equipment, and to expedite delivery of supplies
to our frontline healthcare workers.
 Canada is receiving PPE shipments, and is working rapidly
to allocate the supplies to the provinces and territories as per
an approach agreed upon by federal-provincial-territorial
Ministers of Health.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is also deploying PPE
and ventilators from its National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile in response to urgent requests for assistance from
provinces and territories.
 In addition, the Government of Canada is also receiving
offers of donations from international and domestic
organizations via the donations portal on the Government of
Canada COVID-19 website.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
GLOBAL SHORTAGE OF PPE SUPPLIES
 The Government of Canada, through the leadership of
Public Services and Procurement Canada, and Innovation
Science and Economic Development Canada, has
galvanized Canadian industry to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to
produce PPE and medical equipment and supplies, including
ventilators and rapid testing kits.
 Public Services and Procurement Canada has confirmed
contracts for a variety of PPE and other medical supplies
including over 120 million N95 respirators and equivalents
(e.g., KN95 respirators), 340 million surgical masks, 126
million protective gowns, and 39 thousand ventilators.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving staggered
delivery of shipments, and to date, has allocated
approximately
2.9 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95
respirators; FFP2), 103.8 million surgical masks, 33.6 million
pairs of nitrile gloves, 12.8 million face shields, and 3.3
million protective gowns to provinces and territories, and
more is expected to arrive and be distributed in the coming
days.
 Additionally, the Public Health Agency of Canada has also
distributed to provinces and territories donations of over
590 thousand N95 and equivalent respirators, 700 thousand
surgical masks, 420 thousand pairs of gloves, 60 thousand
protective gowns, and 60 thousand face shields.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ENSURING THE QUALITY OF
PPE SUPPLIES
 Due to intense global competition for PPE and other medical
supplies, countries have needed to engage with a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers.
 As a result, PPE and medical supplies received by the Public
Health Agency of Canada, whether procured internationally
or domestically, are verified to meet the technical
specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 prior to
distribution to provinces and territories. The process is the
same for donations.
 For example, a KN95 respirator undergoes visual inspection
to verify for defects in design and construction, and is tested
to confirm performance expectations. Surgical masks
undergo a fluid resistance test.
 Supplies that do not meet specifications are subsequently
assessed for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
 To date, a large majority of the products received by the
Government of Canada have met the technical specifications
for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response; however, as
a result the Public Health Agency of Canada’s stringent
review process, approximately 10 million KN95 respirators
were assessed as not meeting the technical specifications.
IF PRESSED ON ACCEPTING AND DISTRIBUTING PPE LABELLED FOR NON-
MEDICAL USE
 The Government of China has implemented a number of
export controls aimed at addressing quality control of
exported products.
 All PPE supplies that are distributed by Public Health
Agency of Canada to provinces and territories are confirmed
to meet the Government of Canada’s technical specifications
for healthcare settings and are labelled as such.
BACKGROUND
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care
response to COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach
of interdepartmental coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), Health Canada, National Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the
Department of National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC),
and Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED).
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Bulk Procurement
ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian industries to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce equipment and supplies
including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role,
conducting technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of
Canada technical specifications for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell
website.
Urgent need is further facilitated by Health Canada, expediting regulatory approvals of
product reviews and licenses through the Interim Order for Medical Devices signed by
the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. As the regulatory authority, Health Canada
also continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all medical devices for use
in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as
provinces and territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada.
Manufacturers and importers are also now required to notify the Minister of Health of
medical device shortages of devices considered critical. Health Canada is closely
monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-19 and working with
companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before
distribution to provinces and territories (P/Ts). This process is supported by testing
capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with
suppliers to address issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers
in the future once issues are identified.
Government of China Export Controls
In response to international criticism concerning the quality of PPE, the Government of
China has imposed more stringent certification and export controls for masks and other
personal protective equipment (PPE). As a result, the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), as an importer, is now required to sign a joint declaration with the exporter
attesting that the products meet the standards and certification requirements of the
destination country.
For products that are not certified as medical devices in China, the joint declaration will
also stipulate that the item is “not for medical use” even if it meets Canada’s technical
specifications for healthcare settings. These products are subsequently labelled in
Simplified Chinese as “not for medical use” both on the outer shipping boxes and inside
each of the individual product package.
As noted above, all supplies procured internationally continue to undergo quality
verification by PHAC prior to distribution to P/Ts. To maintain the integrity of the PPE
packaging, PHAC will be labelling the outer shipping boxes, confirming quality and
stating that it is suitable for use in healthcare settings. PHAC will not be removing labels
inserted inside each of the individual product boxes, as the process of removing these
inserts in Simplified Chinese would cause significant delays in the distribution.
KN95 Respirators
On May 8, CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators received
by the Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out of China,
8 million did not meet the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for
healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1 million met specifications, and 1.6 million
were pending testing results. The number not meeting specifications has since
increased to approximately 10 million. PSPC has suspended shipments from this
supplier and is pursuing the appropriate recourse on behalf of the Public Health Agency
of Canada.
Reuse and decontamination
Due to increased demand of N95 respirators, PHAC has also been working closely with
Health Canada, the NRC, and ISED on identifying companies with experience
manufacturing the equipment used in reprocessing in order to authorize these
technologies to safely and effectively reprocess N95 respirators.
Health Canada issued its first authorization under the Interim Order for Medical Devices
to Stryker for its Sterizone VP4 on April 5, 2020, and has since authorized additional
devices including Sterrad and Steris sterilizers that are widely available and distributed
across Canadian hospitals.
F/P/T Allocation and Distribution
As agreed to by F/P/T Ministers of Health, PHAC is allocating procured PPE using an
80/20 formula: 80% is distributed to P/Ts on a per capita basis and the remaining 20%
replenishes the inventory of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS),
including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada. The purpose of the NESS is
to provide surge capacity to P/Ts when their own resources are not sufficient.
To support distribution, PSPC awarded a contract with Amazon valued at up to $5
million. This contract is primarily for use of the Amazon interface to push out the
allocation of supplies to P/Ts.
On May 4, to facilitate the intake and distribution of large volumes of PPE and medical
supplies, a Letter of Interest (LOI) / Request for Information (RFI) notice was posted on
the PSPC Buy and Sell website to solicit interest from major logistics service providers.
This new expression of interest relates to a multimodal logistics solution in Canada,
going beyond distribution and includes warehousing, customs documentation and
brokerage, and inventory management. The RFP closed on May 7, and the review of
the expressions of interest is now underway.
PROTECTING CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY INSPECTORS FROM
COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 Concern has been raised over Canadian Food Inspection Agency inspectors
becoming infected with COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency doing to protect inspectors in
meat processing plants, as well as the Canadian food safety system?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is committed to
protecting the health and safety of its employees while
maintaining critical inspection services.
 Masks and face shields are made available to all Canadian
Food Inspection Agency meat inspectors who cannot
practice physical distancing.
 When cases of COVID-19 occur in a food processing or
meat slaughter establishment, the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency (CFIA) works with local public health to help
determine the level of risk of exposure for CFIA employees,
and their need for self-isolation and/or referral to health
services for testing.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has been
made aware of 38 CFIA employees having tested positive
for COVID-19 between March 23 and June 22.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has taken a
number of measures to protect the food supply without
putting undue pressure on its existing workforce, which
include bringing back former CFIA employees, leveraging
provincial and territorial inspectors, as well as hiring new
inspectors.
IF PRESSED…
 The Canadian food safety system is strong and the
Government of Canada is working to ensure that Canadians
have continued access to safe, high-quality foods.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency continues to
maintain an appropriate number of inspectors in meat
establishments.
BACKGROUND
In any establishment where there is a COVID-positive case, Canadian Food Inspection
Agency (CFIA) employees are asked to immediately 1) notify their manager, 2) prepare
to leave the workplace, and 3) self-isolate and self-monitor for symptoms while they wait
on the provincial/local public health authorities to assess the situation and provide
additional instructions.
Only in cases where a CFIA employee’s risk of exposure is determined to have been
low by provincial/local public health authorities (example: CFIA employees were not
present in the part of the plant where the COVID-positive employees were working) will
they be permitted to safely return to work at the establishment.
CFIA looks to provincial/local public health authorities to perform a contact investigation
and provide a risk assessment of any employees that should move to (continue to) self-
isolate.
CFIA has issued guidance and instructions to its employees relating to prevention and
wellness. Employees have been instructed to self-assess their own condition on a daily
basis before reporting to work and to be diligent in monitoring their own personal
condition in order to minimize any risks to their health and that of others in the
establishments they report to.
CFIA employees (including inspectors) who are exhibiting any signs or symptoms of
illness have been advised to contact their managers and stay home.
To further protect the health and safety of its employees, CFIA has also provided
specific written guidance and instructions (posted online) to meat slaughter and
processing establishments across the country on prevention measures and response
protocols when there are suspected and confirmed cases of the virus amongst plant
employees.
CFIA has asked all establishments to be prepared to share their response plans in the
case of confirmed or suspected positive cases of COVID-19 in an effort to trace back
exposure risks and determine needed next steps.
CFIA expects that each third party establishment operator is complying with the advice
and guidance provided by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), as well as that
from local public health authorities in addressing the COVID-19 outbreak.
The decision to suspend operations is the result of an establishment’s cooperation with
directions or recommendations from local and provincial health authorities, and CFIA
does not have jurisdiction in that area. This includes the assessment of mitigation and
control measures the determination on workplace conditions (presenting a high risk for
infection) or the assessment.
RACE OR ETHNICITY BASED DATA COLLECTION
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on COVID-19 cases, including
deaths, through agreements with the provinces and territories, and is working to collect
additional data, including on race or ethnicity, to improve our understanding of the
overall impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Does the federal government collect race or ethnicity based data?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health consequences of the pandemic are likely to differ
across sub-populations. Those Canadians who before the
pandemic were at greater risk of poor health are likely to be
at greater risk of suffering its direct and indirect
consequences.
 Given this, the Public Health Agency of Canada and partners
are undertaking a number of activities to improve Canada’s
knowledge of the impact of COVID-19 on racialized
communities.
 This includes working with provincial and territorial partners to
explore adding race/ethnicity as a key variable within the
national data set for COVID-19, as well as undertaking
specialized surveys and enhanced surveillance activities
among key populations of interest.
 It is critical that this work be done in a way that respects
privacy laws and ensures individual autonomy in choosing
whether or not to provide this information to the health care
system.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCIAL/TERRITORIAL DATA:
 The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on
COVID-19 cases, including deaths, through agreements with
the provinces and territories.
 Federal/Provincial/Territorial data sharing is cooperative, and
the Government of Canada as well as the provinces and
territories are sharing available data relevant to the COVID-
19 response.
IF PRESSED ON NEED FOR GREATER DEPTH OF INFORMATION:
 As the epidemic has unfolded across the country, it has
become clear that we need more information on certain
groups at higher risk for exposure to, or severe outcomes of,
COVID-19.
 The current National COVID-19 Case Report Form,
completed by PTs and submitted to PHAC, does not include
any questions on race or ethnicity – but it does include a
section for identifying and classifying cases as Indigenous
(First Nations, Metis, Inuit).
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work with
partners, including provincial and territorial counterparts and
Indigenous organizations, to look at ways to improve the
collection of data on race and ethnicity, Indigenous identity,
occupation, and socio-economic factors.
BACKGROUND
The health consequences of the pandemic are likely to differ across sub-populations.
Those Canadians who before the pandemic were at greater risk of poor health are likely
to be at greater risk of suffering its direct and indirect (or secondary) consequences.
Given this, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and partners are undertaking a
number of activities to improve Canada’s knowledge of the impact of COVID-19 on
racialized communities.
First, PHAC has completed a review of published literature on race and COVID-19.
While there is limited evidence available overall and in Canada, studies to date do show
that people reporting Black, Asian or Hispanic race appear to have a higher chance of
COVID-19 infection than those who are White. Data is conflicting regarding the role
race/ethnicity may play in severity of infection (i.e., hospitalization, ICU admission and
death).
In addition, through the Special Advisory Committee (SAC) on COVID-19 governance,
federal/provincial/territorial (FPT) governments are exploring the inclusion of
race/ethnicity as a key variable within the national data set for COVID-19. This means
that race/ethnicity would be expected to be collected and reported to PHAC for COVID-
19 cases. Due to the sensitive nature of race and ethnicity, this work must be done in a
way that respect privacy laws, ensures individual autonomy (in choosing whether or not
to provide this information to the health care system), and a process that includes
consultation with implicated communities to ensure that it does not further stigmatize
people.
PHAC is also working with provinces and territories (PTs) and other national partners to
determine the feasibility of collecting and sharing an expanded list of information
including risk factors and other socio-economic factors. These indicators will help to
further PHAC’s understanding of COVID-19 among specific, including disadvantaged
communities, and to monitor trends going forward.
Further, PHAC is engaging with various partners to undertake specialized surveys and
enhanced surveillance activities among key populations of interest. Studies to explore
COVID-19 impact and unintended consequences of COVID-19 related public health
measures on racialized communities are a key component of this work. In addition,
PHAC and CIHR will coordinate efforts to facilitate research activities related to burden
and impact of COVID-19 among racialized and marginalized communities, to further
enhance and expand the knowledge base.
Finally, PHAC is working with other partners to expand the knowledge base on
racialized communities and COVID-19. Statistics Canada for example plans to release
new ethno-cultural data from new data collection initiatives, with new data points
expected starting in summer of 2020.
Data Collection from Provinces and Territories
Provinces and territories share data on new COVID-19 cases with the Agency every
day.
As of June 16, PHAC had received detailed information for nearly 100% of the COVID-
19 cases in Canada. The completeness rate for the demographic information received
at PHAC from PTs was as follows:
 Case classification (confirmed or probable cases): 100%
 Age (or age group): 99% (range 90% - 100% by PT)
 Sex/gender (male, female or others): 100%
 Date reported (onset date, specimen collection date or reported date): 100%
 Exposure category (travel-related or domestic case): 89% (range 37% - 100% by
PT)
 Hospitalization status and deaths: 77% (range 67% - 100% by PT)
PTs share a cumulative list of confirmed and probable case data to PHAC, which
includes newly identified cases, on a daily or weekly basis; the timing of these transfers
vary depending on the jurisdiction. Currently, provinces and territories share their data
in an electronic format, through the Secure File Exchange, which are then uploaded into
the national COVID-19 surveillance database. Updates on previously reported cases
(i.e., whether a case has recovered or died) are also sent to PHAC and changes are
captured in the database.
These data provide PHAC with an ability to asses the overall impact and burden on
Canadians and the health system, as data include severity of illness, including
hospitalizations, admissions to intensive care units (ICU), the number of cases that
have required mechanical ventilation and death outcomes.
Other demographic information may be collected by the PTs, but are not reported to
PHAC at this time.
The limitations of case report forms as a data source include data completeness and
the lack of race-based and socio-economic data
Some PTs are moving forward on efforts to collect race-based data:
 Ontario proposed a regulatory change on June 15 to mandate the reporting of
data on race, income, language and household size for individuals who have
tested positive for COVID-19. The province has already granted some health
units permission to begin collecting race-based data voluntarily, including
Ottawa, Toronto, Middlesex-London and Sudbury.
 As of May 1, Manitoba has been tracking the ethnicity of COVID-19 patients to
determine whether the virus was having a disproportionate impact on specific
communities.
 Though Quebec’s Public Health Director said in early May the government would
begin collecting race-based data for COVID-19, the Health Ministry
acknowledged there are no immediate plans to do so.
Routine case data are inherently limited in how much information they can provide.
PHAC is therefore working with various partners and stakeholders to leverage other
information sources in order to better understand the impact of COVID-19 on different
populations.
COVID-19 TESTING REAGENT PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 23, 2020, 2,444,118 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average more than 38,000 people were tested a day in Canada. Global
shortages of testing reagents have resulted in the Government of Canada implementing
an aggressive procurement strategy to supply reagent to meet current and future
demand.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Has the Government of Canada procured a sufficient supply of reagents to meet
current and future demand for COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action on all fronts to
mitigate the impact of the global shortage of testing reagent
on Canada’s testing capacity.
 We are procuring testing supplies both domestically and
abroad. We are investing to build sustainable capacity in
Canada.
 Public-private collaborations are helping us meet reagent
needs. For example, a testing reagent developed by the
National Microbiology Laboratory is being produced by
LuminUltra, a New Brunswick-based company that will
supply extraction reagent for 500,000 tests a week for the
next year.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
laboratory testing they need in response to the serious
health threat posed by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON CAPACITY TO TEST MORE CANADIANS
 Canada has and will continue to test symptomatic
individuals, as part of our evidence-based approach, while
considering the evolving science on other testing scenarios.
As the science evolves, our approach will keep pace, and
policies and protocols will be updated accordingly.
 As new products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire new products and platforms to augment existing
testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT OTHER STEPS CANADA HAS TAKEN TO ENSURE THERE
IS SUFFICENT REAGENTS FOR TESTING
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has also worked
closely with provincial public health laboratories to provide
access to different test platforms. This enables provincial
public health laboratories to leverage other platforms to
mitigate reagent shortages.
 The Government of Canada is investigating other in-Canada
options for the production of reagents for testing purposes.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) National Microbiology Laboratory (NML)
is working in close collaboration with provincial and territorial public health laboratories
to perform diagnostic testing for the virus that causes COVID-19.
As of June 23, 2020, 2,444,118 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Testing
in Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak of COVID-19 spreads.
PHAC works with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing strategy that will
help us maximize the impact of our testing resources and delay the spread of COVID-19
in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Reagents are chemicals that are used to extract, amplify, and/or detect the virus.
Internationally, there has been a shortage of reagents to support laboratory testing.
RE-OPENING OF ECONOMY DURING COVID-19 OUTBREAK
SYNOPSIS
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to protect the health and safety of Canadians as
the economy re-opens?
KEY MESSAGES
 Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is our top
priority.
 Restarting the economy must happen through a gradual
approach that protects the health of Canadians, while at the
same time continuing to support a range of economic
sectors and Canadian workers.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
provinces, territories, and key stakeholders to ensure
appropriate guidance, monitoring and information sharing is
undertaken to support the safe re-opening of our economy,
while mitigating the risk of importation and spread of COVID-
19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED…
 The Federal/Provincial/Territorial Special Advisory
Committee on COVID-19 has developed comprehensive
guidance on gradual re-opening for use by provinces and
territories.
 This guidance balances the risks associated with spread of
COVID-19 with the importance of supporting a broad range
of economic sectors.
BACKGROUND
Following a period where many businesses and services across the country have been
closed to help minimize the spread of COVID-19, provinces and territories are beginning
to lift restrictions allowing the economy to re-open. This may increase the risk of
transmission of the virus.
In general, the following criteria should be met before beginning to loosen public health
measures:
1. Transmission of COVID-19 is controlled
2. Sufficient public health and health systems capacity has been achieved
3. Outbreak risks in vulnerable settings are minimal
4. Preventive measures are in place in workplaces
5. The risk of importing cases from other countries has been managed
6. Canadians are aware of and engaged with public health information
As jurisdictions in Canada are at different points in the COVID-19 epidemic, these
criteria will likely be met at different times, therefore the timing for loosening or
tightening public health measures may also differ.
The provinces and territories have legislative authority to implement and execute the
pandemic response actions that are appropriate for their jurisdiction, including
implementing and easing public health restrictions.
On April 28, 2020, a First Ministers’ statement on shared public health approach to
support restarting the economy was released. On April 30, the F/P/T Special Advisory
Committee (SAC) on COVID-19, which provides advice to support a pan-Canadian
coordinated approach to support governments’ decisions in transition to living with
COVID-19 in Canada, published recommendations for the lifting of restrictive public
health measures. The SAC recommendations include a set of 7 criteria and 14
indicators that provinces and territories can use to assess their readiness for gradually
lifting restrictive public health measures in their jurisdiction. These criteria and indicators
provide a data- and evidence-driven basis for decisions to lift or adjust restrictive public
health measures, and will also be used to assess the need to re-introduce specific
measures, if required.
PHAC has also collaborated with provinces, territories and stakeholders to develop
guidance on public health measures and has supported the work of the Canadian
Centre for Occupational Health as it generates more detailed guidance for workplaces.
With no targeted treatments or vaccine available at this time, core personal public
health measures will need to become the “new normal” in order to maximize our ability
as a society to control the spread of the virus over the long term. The Government has a
number of recommendations for Canadians to keep in mind to help protect their health
while the economy reopens. These recommendations include continuing to practice
good hygiene, maintaining physical distancing when outside the home, wearing non-
medical masks or cloth face coverings when physical distancing may be a challenge,
staying home if they feel ill, and continuing to stay informed as public health advice
continues to evolve.
Prolonged close contact is thought to be the source of most COVID-19 infections,
suggesting that in the community setting, physical distancing combined with an
emphasis on personal practices (hand hygiene, avoid touching face, respiratory
etiquette, disinfect frequently touched surfaces) will be the most effective mitigation
approaches.
As jurisdictions begin to lift restrictive public health measures, vulnerable populations,
such as older adults and people with compromised immune systems and/or underlying
medical conditions, should stay at home unless they need urgent medical services.
Remote, isolated and Indigenous communities are often considered to be vulnerable
because of circumstances such as geographic location, limited access to health care
resources, demographics, living conditions or prevalence of underlying medical
conditions. Lifting restrictive public health measures within these communities will be
undertaken in consultation and collaboration with the communities and adapted to their
specific situations.
Restrictions on domestic travel have been put in place by some provincial and territorial
governments, and at the community level. These restrictions will be lifted based on each
jurisdiction’s individual risk assessment. Non-essential international travel is currently
prohibited and Canada’s borders remain closed to foreign nationals. Any changes to
international travel restrictions and advice would be based on national and international
evidence-based risk assessments.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic continues to draw public, political and media
attention with a growing focus on Government of Canada funded COVID-19
research, notably investments made through CIHR’s Rapid Research
Response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is CIHR doing to support research on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 Research is a critical component of both domestic and
international efforts to address COVID-19 and the Canadian
research community has risen to the challenge.
 CIHR and partners moved quickly in March to invest more
than $54 million in 100 research projects focused on
medical, social and policy countermeasures to COVID-19.
 On April 23, the Prime Minister announced an additional
close to $115 million in funding for CIHR as part of Canada’s
national medical research strategy on COVID-19.
 With this new funding, CIHR was able to build off its initial
investments by launching another COVID-19 research
competition to support 139 additional promising research
projects.
 This research will increase our understanding of the efficacy
and effectiveness of vaccines, therapeutics, clinical and
public health management approaches to COVID-19.
 CIHR is also providing funding for 45 projects aimed at
addressing the evidence gaps and building the evidence
base needed as part of the mental health and substance use
response to COVID-19.
 I have confidence that the research funded through CIHR’s
Rapid Research Response to COVID-19 will greatly
contribute to helping Canada address this public health
crisis.
IF PRESSED…
 To further support our research community, CIHR is working
with other Granting Agencies to disseminate the recently
announced $292 million to extend expiring federal graduate
research scholarships and post-doctoral fellowships and
supplement existing federal research grants.
 As well, we worked closely with Minister Bains and his
portfolio to provide funding to help Canada’s academic
research community impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
 This $450 million in funding will provide wage support to
universities and health research institutes to prevent
imminent layoffs of thousands of research personnel whose
research programs have been impacted by COVID-19. In
doing so, this will enable universities and health research
institutions to maintain essential research-related activities
during the crisis, and then ramp back up to full research
operations once physical distancing measures are relaxed
and ultimately lifted.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response
to COVID-19 and is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research
funding agency, has moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research
community and deliver programs while maintaining rigour in funding the most
outstanding research.
Canadians will benefit from this research through enhanced prevention, detection, and
treatment options for COVID-19 as well as an evidence base on which to inform
effective social and public health policy responses.
To mobilize Canada’s research community, CIHR and its federal and provincial partners
accelerated their timelines to launch the initial two COVID-19 Rapid Research
Response competitions in March 2020, totaling $54.3M that translated into 100
research grants.
The medical countermeasures funding accounts for 53 of the 100 projects in Phase 1
and 90 of the 139 projects in Phase 2, including research into vaccines, diagnostics,
transmission dynamics, therapeutics and clinical management. The social and policy
countermeasures funding accounts for 47 of the 100 projects in Phase 1 and 49 of the
139 projects in Phase 2, including research into coordination, governance, and logistics;
public health response and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and,
transmission dynamics.
 CIHR used the priorities identified by the WHO and GloPID-R to inform this
initiative.
 Hundreds of researchers volunteered their expertise to peer review the
applications received so that the funding competition could be completed in
record time.
 Grants funded for two-year terms and with an agreement that data and findings
would be openly shared.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR was approved for an additional $114.9M in funding through the
Prime Minister’s announcement of new support for countermeasures against COVID-19.
Building on the initial investment of $54.3M to support 100 research projects on COVID-
19, the majority of the new investment of will enable researchers to accelerate the
development, testing and implementation of medical and social countermeasures to
mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
 Approximately $100M of this $114.9 million investment was allocated to the
COVID-19 Rapid Research Funding Opportunity launched April 23. Through this
funding opportunity, CIHR and its federal and provincial partners, are enabling
rapid and timely research responsive to the current phase of COVID-19
pandemic in Canada and around the globe, which is focused on slowing and
stopping the spread of SARS-CoV-2. The results of this competition are expected
to be released to the applicants no later than June 12, 2020. To note, CIHR and
the recently established COVID-19 Immunity Task Force have agreed to
collaborate in supporting a subset of grants in the current CIHR competition.
 Approximately $10 million of the $114.9 million investment was allocated to
CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative. CIHR, in partnership with the
Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada, has established an Expert
Advisory Panel on Mental Health and Substance Use to support research to
facilitate the rapid synthesis and translation of evidence on effective virtual
service delivery models for the benefit of Canadians. This included the launch of
a first funding opportunity on April 29, Knowledge Synthesis: COVID-19 in Mental
Health and Substance Use, focused on enabling the development of rapid and
timely knowledge syntheses and related knowledge mobilization plans to address
evidence gaps and build the evidence base as part of the mental health and
substance use response to COVID-19. The results of this competition were
publicly posted on June 4 and in total 45 applications were funded with a focus
on a number of priority populations, including: healthcare and public safety
personnel, older adults and residents of long-term care homes, people who use
drugs, women and indigenous populations. The second funding opportunity
under CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative was launched on June 4
and the results are anticipated for late August.
 This investment has also helped to secure Canadian researchers’ participation in
domestic and international clinical trials responsive to WHO priorities that will
increase the understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines,
therapeutics, mental health supports and clinical management approaches to
COVID-19. For instance, through this new investment, CIHR provided an
additional $3.5 million to Dr. Srinivas Murthy and team from the University of
British Columbia in support of the Canadian Treatments for COVID-19 Trial
(CATCO)-the Canadian arm of the WHO SOLIDARITY trial. This will enable Dr.
Murthy and team to expand the trial to include additional hospital sites and more
study participants across Canada to study the effectiveness of different drug
treatments for COVID-19.
 A portion of the investment will also be dedicated to funding grants that support
research on research ethics and consent issues in the context of COVID-19.
CIHR is already in consultation and working closely with Health Canada and a
number of experts from the research community through CIHR Institutes to refine
the scope of this initiative. We expect grants to still be issued by September
2020, as planned.
 Further, these funds will also allow the Government of Canada, under the
leadership of CIHR, to set up a Centre for Pandemic Preparedness and Health
Emergencies Research that will lay the groundwork towards more nimble
domestic and global pandemic research coordination.
Other notable COVID-19 research investments include the additional $1 million CIHR is
providing through a direct grant to the existing Canadian Immunization Research
Network to gather data related to COVID-19 symptoms, as well as possible treatments
and risk factors, which will inform Canada’s public health response to COVID-19.
Further, CIHR is providing an additional $1 million through a direct grant to the
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) to rapidly develop a series
of six national guidance documents to address urgent needs of people who use
substances, service providers, and decision makers in relation to the COVID‑19
pandemic. The first three guidance documents are now available: Supporting people
who use substances in shelter settings; Telemedicine support for addiction services;
Supporting people who use substances in acute care settings during the COVID-19
pandemic.
Finally, CIHR is providing direct grants of $0.3 million for 6 months to the Canadian
Critical Care Trials Group (CCCTG) and Canadian Venous Thromboembolism
Research Network (CanVECTOR) to undertake urgent activities related to the national
COVID-19 clinical trials and clinical trial support.
RECALL OF RESPIRATORS
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada issued a public advisory on April 14 to warn the public about potential
counterfeit respirators (https://healthycanadians.gc.ca/recall-alert-rappel-avis/hc-
sc/2020/72707a-eng.php)
On May 7, 2020, the US FDA issued revised guidance, indicating that certain filtering
facepiece respirators may not provide adequate respiratory protection based on testing
conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) -
National Personal Protective Technology Laboratory (NPPTL) of the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). The FDA indicated that these products were no
longer authorized to be marketed or distributed in the United States as respirators but
that they could be re-labelled as face masks if certain criteria were met.
Health Canada cancelled the authorization for Senke Pharmaceutical (Chengdu) Co.
Ltd. on May 8 after it was determined that the company was the manufacturer of
respirators identified by the US FDA. On May 10, Health Canada sent regulatory letters
to all companies that were identified to have potentially imported and distributed the
impacted respirators to direct that they stop sale and re-label them as face masks for
use in settings where 95% filtration is not required. In Canada, the re-labelling of a
medical device is considered to be a recall. On May 11, Health Canada issued a public
communication to inform Canadians about the issue.
Health Canada continues to actively monitor the NIOSH website and the results of
testing by other laboratories, and takes action when products are identified to have
failed filtration testing. These actions include sending regulatory letters, verifying that
products are recalled/re-labelled as needed, and communicating safety information to
the public, including most recently on June 9th when an additional 16 manufacturers
were added to the list of products that must be recalled/re-labelled as face masks
before they can be distributed in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure the quality of respirators used by
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 The quality, effectiveness and safety of health products is a
top priority for the Government.
 The Government of Canada understands that health care
professionals rely on personal protective equipment,
including respirator masks, to keep them safe.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada verifies the
effectiveness of all respirators procured by the Government
to confirm that they meet performance standards before they
are distributed to the provinces and territories for frontline
healthcare workers.
 Health Canada continues to assess all sources of
information related to respirators that may not meet safety
and effectiveness standards, and is taking action to ensure
that companies re-label these products as face masks for
use in settings where 95% filtration is not required.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PROTECT CANADIANS…
 Health Canada assesses all sources of information related to
respirators that may not meet safety and effectiveness
standards, including testing conducted by the National
Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) and
other laboratories.
 Health Canada also conducts inspections and assessments
of shipments at the border to identify suspected fraudulent
products, including respirators.
 The Department contacts all companies who may have
imported or distributed impacted products to direct that they
stop sale and re-label any impacted products as face masks
for use in settings where 95% filtration is not required.
 Health Canada continues to advise all Medical Device
Establishment Licence (MDEL) holders that they are not
permitted to import or distribute respirators that do not meet
performance standards unless they are re-labelled as face
masks.
IF PRESSED ON RECALLS…
 As of June 12, 17 companies have been asked to relabel
respirators as face masks as a result of failed NIOSH test
results.
 Health Canada maintains a list of manufacturers and
respirators that are subject to recall/re-labelling on its
website and will continue to update it as required.
IF PRESSED ON WHY PRODUCTS AREN’T BEING REMOVED FROM THE
MARKET…
 While some respirators do not meet the standard required
for use by frontline health care workers, they may still be
used as face masks in settings where 95% filtration
standards are not needed. This is why the impacted
respirators may be re-labelled as masks.
IF PRESSED ON RESPIRATORS PURCHASED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF
CANADA
 PPE and medical supplies received by the Government of
Canada, whether donated or procured internationally or
domestically, are verified by the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) to ensure they meet Government of
Canada technical specifications for healthcare settings for
COVID-19 response.
 If PHAC cannot account for the quality of devices, they will
not be allocated to the provinces and territories for frontline
healthcare response.
 Provincial and territorial health authorities and health care
institutions have been advised to review their inventories of
respirators to confirm that they meet the Government of
Canada technical specifications for healthcare settings for
COVID-19 response on a regular basis.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
Regulation of Medical Devices in Canada
All medical device products, including N95 and KN95 respirators and other Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE), are subject to the safety and effectiveness requirements of
the Medical Devices Regulations. Manufacturers of medical devices are responsible for
ensuring that they are safe and effective.
Most PPE (e.g., respirators, gowns, masks) are classified as Class I devices in Canada.
Class I devices are considered the lowest risk Class of devices and do not require pre-
market authorization by Health Canada, which means they are not assessed by the
Department for safety and efficacy prior to import or sale in Canada.
A Medical Device Establishment Licence (MDEL) is required to import and distribute
Class I devices. MDELs are issued based on an attestation to requirements related to
documented procedures for complaint handling, distribution records, recalls and
problem reporting.
Improving Access to Medical Devices During COVID-19
Health Canada has implemented three different measures to expedite the availability of
medical devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts:
1. Interim Order Respecting the Importation and Sale of Medical Devices for Use
in Relation to COVID-19 - provides an expedited authorization pathway for medical
devices for sale in Canada. Health Canada reviews the scientific evidence provided by
the manufacturers through this pathway to support the safety and effectiveness of
devices before issuing authorizations for these devices.
2. Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special
Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 - builds on an existing practice to facilitate
access to alternative supplies of health products to help prevent and alleviate shortages
resulting directly or indirectly from COVID-19. Under this Interim Order, companies must
report shortages of medical devices related to COVID-19 to Health Canada. Public
reporting of shortages helps the health care system adapt to and prepare for supply
disruptions.
3. Expedited review and approval of MDEL applications for companies applying to
supply medical devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts.
MDEL Submission Numbers
The Department implemented a temporary measure between April 22 and May 25 to
facilitate expedited access to PPE and avoid delays at the border, without
compromising health and safety. This was necessary in light of the unprecedented
demand for PPE to help combat COVID-19 and the overwhelming number of
companies that came forward to supply these products in Canada. Through this
temporary measure, MDEL applicants are assigned a Submission Number while
the MDEL applications continued to be processed. Submission number holders are
required to comply with all of the same safety requirements as MDEL holders.
Virtual Inspections
In order to verify that new COVID-19 related MDEL holders are conducting activities in
accordance with regulatory requirements, Health Canada is conducting virtual
inspections to assess compliance with the regulatory requirements related to
documented procedures and record keeping, to verify product quality, and to detect
suspected counterfeit product.
Recalls
Health Canada is assessing all available information on a daily basis and is directing
any company importing or selling respirators that do no meet labelled claims for 95%
filtration to re-label the products as face masks for use in settings where 95% filtration is
not required. These products do not need to be removed from the market. In Canada,
re-labelling of a medical device that fails to conform to claims relating to its
effectiveness is considered a recall, in accordance with the Regulations.
This action does not implicate KN95 respirators purchased by the Government of
Canada and tested by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). Before allocating
any personal protective equipment to the provinces or territories for frontline healthcare
workers, PHAC conducts a quality verification. For KN95 respirators, this includes a
visual inspection to check for defects in design and construction, and testing to confirm
that they meet filtering specifications.
Health Canada will continue to take action to ensure that products that do not meet the
applicable standards are re-labelled as face masks for use in settings where 95%
filtration is not required. Health Canada will also continue to update the online list of
devices that must be re-labeled as face masks in order to be distributed in Canada.
SPARTAN BIOSCIENCES
SYNOPSIS
Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan Biosciences,
Health Canada authorized the sale of the Spartan diagnostic test device on April 11,
2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders from Spartan
Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92 million tests in order to
ensure access to point of care testing in regions where it is needed to support rapid
turn-around of test results. Before distributing testing devices for clinical use, the
National Microbiology Laboratory conducts clinical validation to ensure satisfactory test
performance in the real-world clinical setting. On May 1, the National Microbiology
Laboratory shared the findings of their clinical validation of the Spartan device with
Health Canada. In light of the poor results of clinical performance of the device, Health
Canada is amending the Interim Order authorization of this device to “for research use
only”. On May 5, 2020, Spartan Bioscience issued a recall on the Spartan Cube,
Spartan Test Kits, and Spartan Swabs.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by the results of the Spartan test
kit?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking all action necessary to
protect the health and safety of Canadians during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response.
 The Government of Canada is working in collaboration with
provinces and territories to procure and deploy approved
rapid test devices and test kits to support testing in rural and
northern communities.
 The Spartan test is a point of care test that offers rapid test
results and is expected to be particularly useful in northern
and remote communities.
 As soon as problems were identified with the performance of
the Spartan test, Health Canada amended its authorization
to limit use of the test to research purposes only. All testing
devices that had been sold to date were for research use.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory worked with other
public health laboratories to validate the Spartan test and
has provided data to Spartan to assist the company with test
improvements.
 Canada is implementing an aggressive procurement strategy
to meet both current and future demand as testing continues
to ramp up across the country.
BACKGROUND
Spartan Biosciences, an Ottawa-based company, created a made-in-Canada rapid
COVID-19 analyzer, the Spartan Cube, and test reagents. Spartan’s research is
supported by the National Research Council of Canada’s Industrial Research
Assistance Program. The company was awarded a Government of Canada contract to
accelerate the development of the rapid COVID-19 diagnostic test.
Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan Biosciences,
Health Canada completed a scientific review of the Spartan diagnostic test device on
April 11, 2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders from Spartan
Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92 million tests in order to
ensure access to point of care testing is in regions where it is needed to support rapid
turn-around of test results.
INTERSECTION OF COVID-19 AND SUBTANCES
SYNOPSIS
 Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating long-standing challenges
regarding substance use and the overdose crisis, with some communities now
reporting record high numbers of overdose deaths, hospitalizations, and
emergency medical service calls. In addition to the dangers of COVID-19, people
who use drugs are also facing additional barriers and risks related to the
increased toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to health and
social services, including life-saving harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to support people who use drugs
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES:
 In parallel with the COVID-19 pandemic, many communities continue to
struggle with the devastating impacts of substance use and the
overdose crisis. Tragically, data from jurisdictions across the country
including British Columbia, Ontario, and Alberta, are reporting significant
increases, to record-breaking levels in some cases, in overdose deaths,
hospitalizations, and EMS calls.
 The Government is very concerned about the potentially deadly risks
facing people who use drugs as a result of the dual crises of COVID-19
and substance use . People who use drugs may be at increased risk of
COVID-19 itself due to challenges with physical distancing or underlying
health conditions. While necessary, public health measures to reduce
the spread of COVID-19 may, sadly, also have had unintended
consequences, including increased toxicity of the illegal drug supply and
a reduction in the availability of life saving services.
 At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government began taking
action to enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use.
 To date, we have made it easier for people with substance use disorder
to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for
overdose prevention sites to be established rapidly in temporary
community shelters and other locations.
 Building on these early efforts, the Government is also supporting
community-based projects funded under the Substance Use and
Addictions Program that address the dual crises of COVID-19 and
substance use, including those that provide safer, pharmaceutical grade
alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply, and is working with the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Canadian Research
Initiative in Substance Misuse to develop guidance documents that
address the needs of people who use drugs, services providers, and
decision makers in relation to COVID-19.
 Given the deeply worrying data about the surge in overdose deaths and
growing concerns about the impact of a second wave of the pandemic,
the Government is working to identify additional areas where federal
actions, including exemptions, guidelines or funding opportunities, could
help mitigate and reverse the current trend, including ways to address
urgent needs and strengthen the continuum of care.
 By providing for these new measures, vulnerable people will be better
able to get the supports they need, while respecting public health
directives for physical distancing and self-isolation. We remain
committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and
municipal partners, along with other key stakeholders, to advance
innovative solutions to address this devastating dual crisis.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON OVERDOSE DEATHS
 The Government of Canada remains deeply concerned about the
devastating impact that the opioid overdose crisis continues to have on
people, families and communities across the country. There is further
concern that the response to the COVID-19 pandemic may have
unintended negative consequences, including as it relates to opioid-
related overdose deaths and problematic substance use in Canada
more broadly.
 The British Columbia Coroners Service recently reported alarming data
showing that, in May 2020, the province recorded 170 suspected illicit
drug deaths, which is the highest number ever recorded in a single
month in B.C. history.
 Tragically, other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar
trends, with, for example, Ontario reporting a 25% increase in fatal drug
overdoses from March to May 2020 compared to the same period in
2019, and Alberta Health Services reporting that emergency medical
service responses to incidents involving opioids have increased 74%
since January and February.
 The Government of Canada remains committed to addressing the crisis
of opioid-related overdoses and continues to work to identify ways to
maintain lifesaving supports, including treatment and harm reduction
services for people who use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH FUNDING
 On April 23, our Government announced new funding for COVID-19
research, including $10 million for the COVID-19 and Mental Health
Initiative, led by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).
Under this research initiative, CIHR is supporting rapid research on
mental health and substance use to ensure that COVID-19 responses
are based on the latest evidence. Last month, CIHR granted funding to
45 research teams across the country to conduct rapid knowledge
synthesis of current evidence on mental health and substance use, with
a focus on priority and vulnerable populations. Results from this
research will provide timely, high quality, and relevant evidence to
decision makers at municipal, provincial, territorial, and federal levels.
 Under the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative, CIHR also launched –
in partnership with four provincial research agencies – a funding
opportunity to better understand mental health and/or substance use
needs of individuals and communities due to the pandemic, and support
the development of innovative adaptations of mental health and
substance use services.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-
19 IN COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE IS CHRONIC OVERCROWDING,
INCLUDING A SHORTAGE OF HOUSING
 We understand the unique challenges associated with containing the
spread and protecting homeless Canadians from COVID-19.
 On April 6, 2020, we proactively took steps to make it easier for
overdose prevention sites to be rapidly established in temporary
community shelters for vulnerable individuals (e.g., homeless/housing
unstable) exposed to COVID-19, and to allow existing supervised
consumption site operators to adjust their services to support physical
distancing and respect public health directives.
 We have also developed a set of resources to help frontline service
providers understand and comply with existing regulations associated
with medications for substance use disorder or as a safer,
pharmaceutical grade alternative to the street supply.
 These measures will not only make it easier for people who are staying
at shelters to respect public health directives to distance and isolate,
they will also protect them from the risks and harms of overdose.
 These efforts will help ensure vulnerable Canadians have access to the
health services they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL INVESTMENT TO ADDRESS ISSUES AT
INTERSECTION OF SUBSTANCE USE AND COVID-19
 Budget 2019 committed to address persistent gaps in harm reduction
and support communities in their response to problematic substance
use.
 Recent investments made through Health Canada’s Substance Use and
Addictions Program (SUAP) are helping to relieve some of the
extraordinary stresses placed on people, communities and health
organizations struggling to deal with the dual demands of overdose
crisis harm reduction and pandemic response.
 In February of this year, our Government announced funding of over $32
million over five years to support 26 projects across the country that will
address a range of harm reduction and treatment needs, including:
o $10 million to support 13 projects relating to Harm Reduction,
Community-led and Front Line Initiatives;
o $16 million in support of 5 projects aimed at Increasing Access to
Pharmaceutical-Grade Medications (also referred to as “safe
supply”); and,
o $6 million to support 8 projects aimed at finding Approaches to
Problematic Methamphetamine Use.
 Furthermore, we are supporting community-based projects funded under
SUAP by allowing funds to be re-directed to support immediate COVID-
19 related needs, and have committed to providing short term funding to
additional projects that will provide access to safer, pharmaceutical
grade medications as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply for
people with severe opioid use disorders.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY
 We know that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and
dangerous illegal drug supply, even while services to people who use
drugs are being limited, and we have seen the tragic increases in
overdose deaths in British Columbia and elsewhere.
 The Government of Canada has taken actions to reduce barriers to
providing people who use drugs with a safer, pharmaceutical-grade
alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
 For example, we have issued class exemptions to pharmacists, and
eased restrictions on the transportation of controlled substances, to
make it easier for people to access the medications they need during
the pandemic while following public health advice, such as physical
distancing.
 We were funding five safer supply pilot projects through Health
Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program, and have now
committed to providing short-term funding to an additional seven (7)
sites to address immediate needs.
 These innovative projects will be independently evaluated and this
assessment will contribute to building the evidence base to support
the scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED ON THE OPEN LETTER CALLING FOR THE
DECRIMINALIZATION OF THE PERSONAL POSSESSION OF DRUGS
 The Government of Canada is committed to a compassionate and
evidence-based approach to addressing problematic substance use.
 We understand that stigma comes with criminalizing drug use, and our
government is fully committed to addressing problematic substance use
as a public health issue.
 The Government of Canada is not considering the decriminalization or
legalization of illegal drugs at this time. We will continue to work with civil
society organizations to assess options that could better support the
needs of people who use drugs, during this difficult time.
 We know that in places that have decriminalized drug use, concurrent
investments in robust treatment options and other social services have
been shown to be instrumental in helping address substance use issues.
 This is why our government’s response has included significant actions
to improve access to treatment, harm reduction and social services such
as:
o Investing $150 million in the Emergency Treatment Fund, through
Budget 2018, for provinces and territories to improve access to
evidence-based treatment services; and
o Making legislative changes to streamline the application process
for supervised consumption sites, and reducing regulatory barriers
for accessing a safe supply of pharmaceutical-grade medications
to improve treatment.
 We know that more needs to be done, and we are committed to
increasing access to quality resources and services to address this
public health issue.
BACKGROUND
In June, 2020, jointly with the provinces and territories, the Government of Canada released
updated data indicating that 15,393 Canadians lost their lives between January 2016 and
December 2019 to apparent opioid-related overdoses. This most recent national data indicated
that, from January to December 2019, 77% of accidental apparent opioid-related deaths
involved fentanyl or fentanyl analogues, compared to 54% in 2016. The presence of fentanyl
and its analogues in the illegal drug supply is therefore the main driver of recent overdose
deaths.
In many regions of the country, the COVID – 19 pandemic is compounding ongoing public
health crisis related to high rates of opioid overdose and deaths as well as acute substance use
harms. In British Columbia in May 2020, there were 170 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths.
This represents a 93% increase over the number of deaths seen in May 2019 (88) and a 44%
increase over the number of deaths in April 2020 (118). The May 2020 total represents the
highest number of illicit drug toxicity deaths ever recorded in a month in B.C. Postmortem
toxicology results suggest that there has been a greater number of cases with extreme fentanyl
concentrations in May, compared with previous months. From April-May 2020, approximately
19% of cases had extreme fentanyl concentrations as compared to 9% from Jan 2019 to March
2020. Ontario and Alberta are also reporting increases in overdose deaths and/or emergency
medical service calls.
These crises are exacerbated in communities where there is chronic overcrowding, including a
shortage of housing or other shelters. At the intersection of these public health crises, people
who use drugs (PWUD) are experiencing a number of increased risks:
• Mortality due to COVID-19 given higher prevalence of underlying health conditions
(respiratory illnesses, immune comprised, etc)
• Spread of COVID-19 due to multiple close contacts, including in the community to
support drug-seeking behaviours and/or within primary care system for harm
reduction/treatment
• Other severe health risks such as drug withdrawal for those who must self-isolate or
quarantine
• Overdose and other harms related to an increasingly toxic illicit supply
Substance use, mental health, and pain and are inter-connected and it is often challenging to
manage one without attending to the others. Many people who live with pain are coping with
underlying health conditions or receiving pain treatments (ongoing use of opioids and other
medications, steroid injections used in pain interventions), which are immune suppressing,
placing people living with pain at higher risk of contracting and experiencing severe illness due
to COVID-19. Public health measures required to respond to the pandemic have also increased
the risk of social isolation, mental illness, and suicidality, which are already prevalent among
people with chronic pain. Health and social services that help maintain function and keep
disability at bay, such as psychological supports, physical therapies, and self-management
options are more difficult to access. Canadians living with pain are therefore reporting
decreased functional capacity and quality of life, fear and anxiety, cancellations of needed in-
person care, surgeries and diagnostics, and drug shortages of certain pain medications (i.e.,
opioids).
On May 13, 2020, the Ministers of Health, Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, and
Justice, received an open letter from Richard Elliott, Executive Director of the Canadian
HIV/AIDS Legal Network, on behalf of more than 50 civil society organizations from across
Canada. The letter highlights a series of factors that increase people’s vulnerabilities during the
pandemic and calls on the Government to decriminalize personal use drug possession as a
public health measure to mitigate harms from the parallel public health emergencies caused by
COVID-19 and the ongoing crisis of opioid overdose and deaths.
Federal actions to date on this issues have been:
Increasing the reach of health system, including enabling Opioid Agonist Treatment (OAT)
Issued on March 19, 2020 exemptions that, if permitted within the applicable provincial/territorial
scopes of practice: permit pharmacists to extend and/or transfer prescriptions; permit
prescribers to issue verbal orders to extend or refill a prescription; and permit pharmacy
employees to deliver prescriptions of controlled substances to patient’s location. These
measures facilitate self-isolation or quarantine to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
 Fully implemented in BC, AB, SK, ON, QC, NB, NS; Partially implemented (no verbal
prescriptions) in PEI, NL; Being considered in MB, YU, NU; No information NWT
Flexible access to harm reduction services
Issued on April 6, 2020 class exemptions for all provinces and territories, for a duration of 6
months, allowing them to modify the operations of existing supervised consumption sites and
establish new temporary spaces for the safe consumption of drugs, without having to apply to
Health Canada. This saves valuable time for local officials who want to establish temporary
overdose prevention services within shelters or other temporary sites to house homeless or
housing unstable people.
 Health Canada has received formal notice from British Columbia that it has
adopted the class exemption and Saskatchewan has indicated its intention to do
so. No other formal notices of implementation by provinces or territories have
been received to date, however Health Canada has requested to be informed if
there is a decision to implement.
Disseminating information and guidance
Developed and disseminated new “tool kit”, on May 5, 2020, to support service provides and
PWUD to socially distance and self-isolate, and web link available as of June 11, 2020:
 Providing an easy-to-understand summary of the various exemptions now in place for health
care practitioners (HCP) and allied HCP which facilitate flexible models of care during the
pandemic;
 Consolidating prescribing and practice guidelines for HCP to foster an increase in
prescribing of medications to address symptoms of withdrawal experienced by PWUD,
including Suboxone, methadone and medications considered “safer supply” (hydrophone,
prescription grade heroin); and
 Assisting PWUD, harm reduction advocacy groups and families who support PWUD to
understand how to effectively navigate the changing healthcare environment to secure
medications and treatment supports as well as educate on harm reduction measures.
Increasing access to mental health supports, including those for problematic substance use,
and provide advice for overall well-being during the pandemic to reduce risk of overdose death
and prevent spread of COVID-19
Leveraging the existing mental health as well as crisis lines and services, including the Federal
COVID-19 – Mental Health and Substance Use Portal, to provide support for substance use and
people experiencing chronic pain, including referrals to community services.
Since April, CIHR has launched three funding opportunities under the for the COVID-19 and
Mental Health Initiative to support rapid research on mental health and substance use in the
COVID-19 context:
 CRISM Operating grant: CIHR is currently providing support to CRISM to undertake
urgent activities related to challenges faced by people who use drugs (PWUD), service
providers and decision makers in relation to COVID-19. This includes the development
of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of the issues PWUD are
experiencing during the COVID-19 crisis, and the health service interventions to support
them. Three of the CRISM six national guidance documents are now available
(telemedicine for addiction services; supervised consumption and safer supply in
emergency shelters; acute care services for PWUD). The other three will be available
late -June (harm-reduction worker safety; supporting recovery services; supporting
patients to self-isolate).
 Knowledge synthesis grants: CIHR is supporting 45 research projects to support rapid
knowledge synthesis and mobilization of current evidence on mental health and
substance use services, delivery, and related guidelines, in the COVID-19 context.
These include projects with a focus on priority populations, including people who use
drugs. Preliminary results from the knowledge syntheses will be available by late
June/early July 2020.
 Operating grants: On June 4, 2020, CIHR launched a new funding opportunity to support
implementation science and population-level intervention research to address the
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and its containment measures on mental health and
substance use. Four provincial health research funding agencies are partnering with
CIHR on this funding opportunity: the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research
(BC), the New Brunswick Health Research Foundation, the Ontario Ministry of Health
and Long Term Care, and the Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation.
TEMPORARY FOREIGN WORKERS
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 outbreaks have occurred among temporary foreign workers who are
working on Canadian farms.
KEY MESSAGES
 Protecting the health of the temporary foreign workers who
are essential to Canada’s food supply is a priority for the
federal government, as it is for all Canadians.
 The Government of Canada is working with employers,
workers, and stakeholders to ensure they are aware of their
obligations to comply with public health requirements in the
context of COVID-19, and to promote practices that can help
to prevent and reduce spread.
 Temporary foreign workers are screened under the
Quarantine Act upon arrival in Canada, and are required to
have a quarantine plan in place for 14 days.
 Employers have access to funding to support mandatory
quarantine, and guidance on public health requirements.
Employers who do not comply with requirements are subject
to penalties under the Immigration and Refugee Protection
Regulations.
 However, we are seeing outbreaks on farms and agricultural
work sites after the 14-day isolation period. Outbreaks of
COVID-19 are proving difficult to control in these settings.
 Consistent implementation of infection prevention and
control measures is essential for these settings, including at
the worksite, in accommodations, and during travel.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with
Economic and Social Development Canada, and Agriculture
and Agrifood Canada, and with provinces and territories to
strengthen COVID-19 prevention and control measures on
agriculture sites.
BACKGROUND
Foreign workers make an essential contribution to the Canadian economy and sectors
like the agricultural industry - we are balancing this important aspect of our food supply
chain while proactively protecting the health and safety of both the workers and the
communities where they will live and work.
In recent weeks, COVID-19 outbreaks on farms have been reported in several parts of
Canada.
Temporary Foreign Worker Program
Canada’s Temporary Foreign Worker (TFW) Program aims to assist employers with
filling their temporary skills and labour requirements when qualified Canadians and
permanent residents are not available. The TFW Program is jointly administered by
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) and Immigration, Refugees and
Citizenship Canada (IRCC).
In 2018, TFWs accounted for about 19% of the primary agriculture workforce and 1% of
the food and beverage manufacturing sector. TFWs are common in horticulture and
meat and seafood processing in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick. Most
TFWs in the sector are hired in low-skilled/low-wage occupations such as general farm
workers, industrial butchers and fish plant workers.
Travel Ban Exemption
On March 20, 2020, the Government of Canada announced exemptions to the air travel
restrictions which were announced on March 18, 2020, including:
 seasonal agricultural workers, fish/seafood workers, caregivers and all other
TFWs
 international students who held a valid study permit, or had been approved for
a study permit, when the travel restrictions took effect on March 18, 2020
 permanent resident applicants who had been approved for permanent
residence before the travel restrictions were announced on March 18, 2020,
but who had not yet travelled to Canada
Allowing foreign workers to enter Canada recognizes their vital importance to the
Canadian economy, including food security for Canadians and the success of Canadian
food producers. The arrival of farm workers and fish/seafood workers is essential to
ensure that planting and harvesting activities can take place.
Temporary Foreign Worker Quarantine Requirements and Employer Compliance
Most TFWs entering Canada are subject to an Emergency Order under the Quarantine
Act, which requires a 14-day mandatory quarantine upon arrival. Penalties of up to
$750,000 can be levied for violation of this Order. A person who causes a risk of
imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person while willfully or recklessly
contravening the Quarantine Act or associated regulations could be liable for a fine of
up to $1,000,000 or to imprisonment of up to three years, or to both. Under the
Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations, workers who are found to have failed
to adhere to an isolation order could be found inadmissible, issued a removal order and
barred from coming back to Canada for one year.
Amendments to the Immigration and Refugee Protection Regulations came into force
April 20, 2020 and compel employers of TFWs to meet additional requirements,
including:
 Paying workers for the initial quarantine/isolation period upon entry into
Canada
 Not preventing a worker from meeting their requirements under orders
made under the Quarantine Act and/or the Emergencies Act, as well as
provincial/territorial public health laws related to COVID-19, and
 Additional requirements for employers who provide accommodations to
workers.
Employers are subject to inspection and those who do not comply with the requirements
could be subject to penalties of up to $1 million and a ban from hiring TFWs, depending
on the seriousness of the situation and number of workers affected.
$50 Million Mandatory Isolation Support for Temporary Foreign Workers Program
On April 13, 2020, the Government of Canada announced $50 million to help farmers,
fish harvesters, and all food production and processing employers, put in place the
measures necessary to follow the mandatory 14-day isolation period required of all
workers arriving from abroad.
Employers are responsible for paying workers for the two weeks during which time they
cannot work, and many employers are also responsible for providing workers with
transportation and accommodations, as well as access to food and basic supplies
needed to meet all of the conditions imposed by public health authorities.
Recognizing the importance of this responsibility, the federal government is providing
support of $1,500 for each TFW, to employers or those working with them to ensure
requirements are fully met. The funding is conditional on employers not being found in
violation of the mandatory 14-day isolation quarantine requirements are met.
As of May 7, 2020, employers were able to apply for funding under the Mandatory
Isolation Support for Temporary Foreign Workers Program. This federal investment will
be available until fully depleted and, as long as the order under the Quarantine Act is in
force and the isolation protocol has to be followed.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
 On March 18, 2020, the Minister of Health approved an Interim Order (IO) to
expedite the review of medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the testing
devices needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Early diagnosis is critical to slowing and reducing the spread
of COVID-19 in Canada.
 The Government of Canada is ensuring quicker and more
flexible approval to import and sell medical devices that are
necessary for Canada’s response to COVID-19. This
includes test kits.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada reviewers to ensure that it is
supported by evidence showing it meets standards for safety
and effectiveness.
 Health Canada has authorized 26 test kits through an
expedited regulatory review process under the Interim Order
for medical devices issued on March 18, 2020.
 Only tests authorized by Health Canada can be imported or
sold in Canada. Unauthorized tests may not produce
accurate results, leading to potential misdiagnosis.
IF PRESSED… on authorization for serological tests:
 Health Canada has authorized 21 nucleic acid-based tests
and five serological tests as of June 22.
 Nucleic acid based testing diagnoses COVID-19 infection
and detects the virus itself. Public health laboratories across
Canada and worldwide use it to detect active infections of
COVID-19.
 Following scientific review, Health Canada has now
authorized the sale of five four serological tests - the
DiaSorin LIAISON® test (May 12), the Abbott ARCHITECT
SARS-CoV-2 IgG Assay (May 14), the Roche Elecsys Anti-
Sars-Cov-2 (June 5), the Ortho Clinical Diagnostics VITROS
Immunodiagnostic Products Anti-SARS-CoV-2 Total
Reagent Pack (June 8) and the Abbott Laboratories
Diagnostics Division Sars-Cov-2 Igg (June 11).
 Serologic tests are not used to diagnose COVID-19. They
detect antibodies developed against the virus and could be
useful in assessing the extent of COVID-19 spread in the
population.
 The US FDA has faced criticism on allowing the marketing of
ineffective serological tests. They announced on April 30th a
new "umbrella" pathway for serology tests under which these
tests can be submitted for validation by an interagency
testing group.
 My department is working with leading regulators and world-
renowned national laboratories to identify serological tests
that will produce accurate and reliable results.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of serological tests
 Following priority scientific review, Health Canada has now
authorized the sale of five serological tests.
 These tests are authorized to detect antibodies specific to
the virus. Serological tests provide evidence of a previous
exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19 by testing for
the presence of antibodies.
 A condition is applied to the authorization issued to serology-
based tests to monitor the ability of the test to perform as
intended once in use by the Canadian health care system.
 Serology-based tests will play a key role in determining the
degree/extent of exposure to the virus though sero-
surveillance studies.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of the test kits:
 Health Canada has maintained a science-informed approach
to managing the pandemic.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada to ensure that it is supported
by evidence showing it meets standards for safety and
effectiveness.
 As with all medical devices, Health Canada will assess and
monitor the safety and effectiveness of the tests once they
are on the market.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of Spartan test kits:
 Health Canada completed its scientific review to ensure that
the device was supported by evidence that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness. The scientific
review relied on analytical data from laboratory studies
provided by the company, and took into consideration that
further clinical validation would be carried out by public
health laboratories in order to determine performance in
clinical settings.
 Clinical trials are key in identifying any performance issues
that could not have been identified in a laboratory setting.
The report identified that while the device performed in a
laboratory setting, as per manufacturer specifications, there
were performance issues identified in the clinical trial.
 It’s important to note that the company informed the
Department that none of the tests were used for diagnosis
purposes.
IF PRESSED… on fraudulent test kits:
 Health Canada has identified companies engaging in non-
compliant advertising activities associated with COVID-19
and unauthorized products including test kits.
 In these cases, Health Canada works to verify compliance
and will take action should any non-compliance be identified.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on home testing for COVID-19:
 To date, Health Canada has authorized the sale and
importation of COVID-19 tests only for use by health care
professionals or trained operators.
 Health Canada does not support home testing for COVID-19
because of the many challenges associated with home
testing.
 These include making the test results available to public
health agencies so that appropriate public health decisions
can be made.
 Health Canada considers that the risks of using home test
(self-testing) kits outweigh the benefits at this time.
 Health Canada does not currently support home testing for
COVID-19 because the tests may not be used properly, and
test results may be misinterpreted.
 Home tests also would not allow for public health care
agencies to collect timely and accurate data on the spread of
infection, which is key for managing a pandemic.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing
the spread of the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for
clinical care and public health management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the
safety, effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an
application through the IO pathway are waived.
The majority of submissions received by Health Canada are for two types of testing
devices:
1. nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the virus)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based
testing to reliably diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. The review
of diagnostic tests using nucleic acid technology has been prioritized to increase the
number of tests available in Canada to detect active infections of COVID-19.
2. serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not
aware of a serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are
not appropriate for early diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection
to develop antibodies.
On May 12, Health Canada issued the first authorization for the sale of a serological test
in Canada under the Interim Order process. On May 14, an additional serological test
was authorized for sale in Canada under the Interim Order process. The DiaSorin
LIAISON® test, the Abbott ARCHITECT SARS-CoV-2 IgG Assay, the Roche Elecsys
Anti-Sars-Cov-2, Ortho Clinical Diagnostics’ VITROS Immunodiagnostic Products Anti-
SARS-CoV-2 Total Reagent Packet and the Abbott Laboratories Diagnostics Division
Sars-Cov-2 Igg are authorized to detect antibodies specific to the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
They are not authorized for diagnosis but rather they provides evidence of a previous
exposure to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Health Canada's position regarding serological
assays is in line with the World Health Organization's (WHO) view that serological
assays will play an important role in research and surveillance but are not currently
recommended for case detection. Serological tests will play an important role in an
overall testing strategy for Canada as they will provide evidence in assessing the true
extent of COVID-19 in the general population.
Health Canada collaborates with the National Microbiology Laboratory and provincial
public health laboratory partners and will leverage the studies of immune responses and
serological technologies underway in Canada and internationally. The uses for which
serological technologies are authorized will depend on the type of evidence that Health
Canada receives from the manufacturer and from these studies.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 23, 2020, 2,444,118 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average more than 38,000 people were tested a day in Canada. Shortages of
testing supplies will present a barrier to the significant ramp up of testing anticipated in
provinces and territories as we enter the recovery phase of the epidemic and begin to
open up the economy.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by a lack of testing capacity
in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response. We are supporting provinces and territories as
they deploy testing to detect and control the spread of
COVID-19.
 Canada is implementing an aggressive procurement strategy
to meet both current and future demand as testing continues
to ramp up across the country.
 On March 18, 2020, the Government of Canada approved
an interim order to expedite the review of medical devices,
including test kits. An interim order is one of the fastest
mechanisms available to address large-scale public health
emergencies.
 We are working with industry to put in place made-in-
Canada solutions to testing supply and support increased
testing capacity.
 We continue to work towards accessing testing reagents and
supplies, evaluating rapid point-of-care tests, and accessing
authorized test kits to help ensure that provinces and
territories are equipped to ramp up testing, according to their
requirements.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
 My health portfolio continues to work with colleagues in
Public Services Procurement Canada and Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada to identify new
products and platforms.
 As new test products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
testing they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON SEROLOGY TESTING
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working on
developing a number of in-house serological tests in addition
to evaluating a variety of commercial tests for COVID-19.
 Developing and applying a serological test for COVID-19
poses challenges as this is an emerging virus and the
performance of new tests require additional time and
research.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory, working with Health
Canada and other partners, is currently assessing a number
of serological tests to evaluate and identify serological tests
that will produce accurate and reliable results.
IF PRESSED ON FALSE NEGATIVES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is aware of the Annals
of Internal Medicine study findings. A 20% false negative
rate is in line with our expected performance of COVID-19
tests.
 Several factors can result in a false negative test result. That
is why health care providers always assess risk and
symptoms when diagnosing infectious diseases and do not
rely only on laboratory tests.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 23, 2020, 2,444,118 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average more than 38,000 people were tested a day in Canada.
Testing in Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with
COVID-19. Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak spreads.
PHAC continues to work with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing
strategy that will help maximize the impact of testing resources and delay the spread of
COVID-19 in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for
commercial diagnostic devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic
capacity.
TRIKAFTA
SYNOPSIS
In October 2019, the US Food and Drug Administration approved Trikafta, the first triple
combination therapy available to treat patients with the most common cystic fibrosis
mutation. The annual cost of treatment with Trikafta is over $300,000 USD. Although
Health Canada has not received a new drug submission for Trikafta, as of May 6, 2020,
there have been 95 Special Access Program (SAP) requests for this drug for 98
patients. Media interest is high around the funding and availability of the drug,
particularly because of its use in the pediatric population. The Department has also
received many letters from patients and their supporters expressing their desire to have
this drug available in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to make Trikafta available to Canadians with cystic
fibrosis?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of Canadians is our top priority.
 Health Canada recognizes the importance of patient access
to new therapies for serious or life-threatening conditions. To
date, the manufacturer of Trikafta has not submitted an
application to market this product in Canada.
 While Health Canada encourages manufacturers to submit
an application for authorization of this drug for sale in
Canada, it is the manufacturer’s decision whether or not to
apply to market their product in Canada.
 For serious or life-threatening conditions, such as cystic
fibrosis, physicians may request access to the drug through
Health Canada’s Special Access Programme (SAP). As of
May 6, 2020, there have been 95 SAP requests for Trikafta
for 98 patients.
 To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments,
we are working with provinces, territories and other partners
to develop a national strategy for high cost drugs for rare
diseases. This is an important step in working with provinces
and territories on national pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON THE DRUG APPROVAL
 Health Canada carefully reviews new drugs to determine
that they are safe, effective and of good quality. This
decision is distinct from price-setting and reimbursement
decisions, which are managed by agencies separate from
Health Canada.
 One of the first steps in a new drug approval process is to
conduct clinical trials which can also be a potential way to
access unauthorized drugs. Although there are currently no
clinical trials for Trikafta open in Canada, Health Canada is
available to provide guidance to a sponsor wishing to
conduct a clinical trial.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF THE MODERNIZING THE PMPRB
 Our Government is committed to improving Canadians’
access to, and the affordability of, necessary prescription
medicines.
 Canada will continue to be an important market for new
medicines. In fact, many countries with much lower medicine
prices gain access to new medicines in the same time frame,
or even faster than Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
BACKGROUND
Trikafta, by the drug manufacturer Vertex Pharma, is the first triple combination therapy
available to treat patients with the most common cystic fibrosis mutation. It is reported to
increase lung function by an average of 14%, which is a significant improvement for
many patients struggling with the effects of cystic fibrosis.
Under the Food and Drug Act and Regulations, all products sold or marketed in Canada
and making a therapeutic claim need to be approved by Health Canada. The drug
authorization process is initiated when a manufacturer submits an application to Health
Canada for review. Every submission is then reviewed by scientists to assess the
product’s safety, efficacy and quality. At this time, Health Canada has not received a
new drug submission for Trikafta although Health Canada and Vertex Pharma have
been in contact in regards to this product. While Health Canada encourages
manufacturers to submit an application for authorization of this drug for sale in Canada,
it is the company’s decision whether or not to submit a new drug application.
Products containing compounds found in Trikafta are approved by Health Canada for
use in treating Cystic Fibrosis. The products are:
 KALYDECO (Ivacaftor)
 SYMDECO (Ivacaftor and Tezacaftor)
 ORKAMBI (Ivacaftor and Lumacaftor)
All drug products approved for sale in Canada are listed on the Drug Product Database,
available at: https://health-products.canada.ca/dpd-bdpp/index-eng.jsp.
The Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests from practitioners treating
patients with serious or life-threatening conditions for drugs that are unavailable for sale
in Canada when conventional treatments have failed, or are deemed unsuitable for the
patient. Decisions by SAP are taken on a case-by-case basis. They are based on the
clinical details of the patient’s unique situation as well as the clinical reasons why other
marketed therapies may not be suited for a patient. As of May 6, 2020, SAP has
received 95 requests for access to Trikafta for 98 patients.
SAP does not provide drug funding to Canadians for access to medication and does not
have a role in the drug reimbursement process. Decisions on insurance coverage or
funding are under the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories.
The Government of Canada is committed to improving the affordability and accessibility
of prescription drugs for all Canadians. That is why we are working with provinces and
territories as an active member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to
combine the governments’ collective buying power to negotiate lower prices on brand
name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
Additionally, in August 2019, the Government announced final amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations. These amendments will give the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board (PMPRB) the tools it needs to protect Canadians from excessive
prices and make patented medicines more affordable for all payers - public and private
drug plans, as well as Canadians who pay out of pocket for their prescription drugs,
including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
VACCINE RESEARCH AND TIMELINES
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the timely development of a
COVID-19 vaccine. On April 23, 2020, the Prime Minister announced more than $1
billion in support of a national medical research strategy to fight COVID-19 that includes
vaccine development, the production of treatments, and tracking of the virus.
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to protecting the
health and safety of Canadians and has invested more than
$1 billion in support of a national medical research strategy
to fight COVID-19.
 Through this investment, the Government of Canada is
supporting multiple organizations who are working at
unprecedented speed to develop candidate vaccines.
 In Canada, there are currently at least 30 candidate vaccines
in early development and it is anticipated that several of
these will advance to human clinical trials in the coming
months.
 On May 15, 2020, Health Canada authorized CanSino
Biologics Inc, a Chinese company with a growing Canadian
presence, to conduct a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in healthy
adults in Canada. The trial will be conducted in collaboration
with the Canadian Immunization Research Network at the
Canadian Center for Vaccinology at Dalhousie University.
IF PRESSED…
 New funding announced on April 23 builds on the previous
Government of Canada investment of $275 million to support
COVID-19 vaccine and therapeutics research and
development.
 For example, vaccine development investments to date have
been announced for Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac.
 We are working closely with academia and the private sector
to advance research and development of candidate vaccines
by partnering on pre-clinical research, bio-manufacturing
requirements to support large-scale production, enhancing
capacity and access for clinical trials, and seeking solutions
for domestic capacity.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine development is a highly complex and long process that typically takes over 10
years due to the extensive research required to ensure a safe and effective product for
human use. Global efforts are underway to develop a COVID-19 vaccine and work is
progressing at an unprecedented pace. At present, there are over 100 COVID-19
candidate vaccines at different stages of development by academia and industry. As of
June 18, 2020, ten of these candidate vaccines have demonstrated promise and have
advanced to Phase 1 clinical trials in China, the U.S., Europe, and Australia, with early
results expected as early as July 2020. Additionally, two of these candidate vaccines
have also entered Phase 2 clinical trials in China and USA, respectively, and another
candidate has recently received approval to launch a Phase 2/3 trial in the UK later this
spring.
Government of Canada investments
On March 11, 2020, the Government of Canada announced a $1 billion package to help
Canadians cope with the COVID-19 outbreak, which included $275 million for
coronavirus research and medical countermeasures. Major investments to date include
supporting vaccine development efforts by Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac. On April 23, 2020, the Prime Minister announced
more than $1 billion in support of a national medical research strategy to fight COVID-
19 that includes vaccine development, the production of treatments, and tracking of the
virus. Investments were announced for the National Research Council of Canada to
enhance its bio-manufacturing capacity to prepare for production of a COVID-19
vaccine, while investments through the Strategic Innovation Fund continue to support
COVID-19 vaccine and therapy research and development led by the private sector.
Funding will also support academia and research networks to conduct vaccine-related
research and clinical trials, and to enhance Canada’s capacity to monitor vaccine safety
and effectiveness. These investments contribute to Canada’s commitment to the
Coronavirus Global Response, an online global pledging event that aims to raise more
than $8 billion (USD) to help researchers and innovators develop solutions to test, treat,
and protect people, and to prevent the further spread of COVID-19.
Vaccine research and development in Canada
As of June 18, 2020, of the 100+ global candidates noted above, at least 30
organizations in Canada are developing vaccines (some are developing multiple
vaccine strategies) using 7 novel and existing vaccine platforms. It is expected that
several will advance to Phase 1 clinical trials in the coming months.
To facilitate impactful clinical trial research in Canada, government and experts are
convening a series of COVID-19 Vaccine Clinical Trials Discussion Forums. Further, a
COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force, to be formally announced shortly, will provide advice to
the Government of Canada on investments in vaccine development and bio-
manufacturing for COVID-19. It includes expert members from academia and industry
and ex-officio members from Innovation, Science and Economic Development, Health
Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Chief Science Advisor.
On May 15, 2020, Health Canada authorized CanSino Biologics Inc. (CanSinoBio)
vaccine candidate for a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in healthy adults Canada. Referred to as
Ad5-nCoV, the vaccine candidate received Chinese regulatory approval earlier this
year, allowing CanSinoBio to move ahead with human clinical trials in China. It was the
first candidate vaccine to enter Phase II human clinical trials.
On May 12, 2020, the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) announced the
collaboration with CanSinoBIO to advance bioprocessing and clinical development in
Canada of a candidate vaccine against COVID-19. CanSinoBio and the NRC are aiming
to pave the way for future clinical trials in Canada, in collaboration with the Canadian
Immunization Research Network at the Canadian Center for Vaccinology in Halifax,
Nova Scotia. The Government of Canada has already announced $44 million in funding
to support upgrades to the NRC’s facilities in Montreal to enable compliance with Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards, to ensure readiness for Canadian
bioprocessing of potential vaccine candidates as they become available.
While every effort in Canada is being made to expedite vaccine development - safety,
efficacy and quality must not be compromised. However, the Government of Canada is
reviewing its regulatory pathways to help expedite access to safe and effective vaccine
for Canadians.
We are also working with international regulators and partners to help fast-track clinical
trials and applications for vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tests and share
information on any signals of global supply disruptions.
Preparing provinces and territories for COVID-19 vaccine deployment
Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine
public health requirements in their jurisdictions, while considering national vaccine
expert advice. Early planning is underway with Canada’s National Advisory Committee
on Immunization (NACI) to prepare for vaccine availability and administration through
public immunization programs.
In addition, we are working with provinces and territories to ensure that the health care
system is prepared to roll out a national vaccination program when a COVID vaccine
becomes available, including ensuring that we have sufficient supplies such as needles
and syringes, for vaccination clinics.
