Created: 2021-03-15T18:01:47.693958
Name: Standing_Committee_on_Justice_and_Human_Rights_Briefing_Binder_for_the_Minister_of_Health_Study_of_Bill_C-7,_An_Act_to_amend_the_Criminal_Code_(medical_assistance_in_dying)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/434954d4-2d97-43ae-9d20-6c66e329071d/resource/1ba83bde-786e-4892-9aae-9f7836631f67/download/standing-committee-on-justice-and-human-rights-study-of-bill-c-7_en.pdf
Package ID: 434954d4-2d97-43ae-9d20-6c66e329071d
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'Legislation', 'Medical Assistance in Dying']
Notes: Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights
Briefing Binder for the Minister of Health
Study of Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying)
November 3, 2020

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Standing Committee on Justice and Human Rights
Briefing Binder for the Minister of Health
Study of Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical
assistance in dying)
Table of Contents
Tab 1 – Opening Remarks - Minister of Health
Tab 2 - Overview of Changes to Bill C-14
Tab 3 – Health Canada Policy Questions and Answers for Committee Review
Tab 4 – Justice Policy Questions and Answers
Tab 5 - Overview of Second Reading Debate
Tab 6 – Second Reading Transcripts
 October 9, 2020
 October 19, 2020
 October 21, 2020
 October 27, 2020
 October 28, 2020
Tab 7 - Technical Briefing Deck: Bill C-7
Tab 8 - Bill C-7
Tab 9 - Bill C-14
Tab 10 - Integrated Version of Bills C-14 and C-7
Tab 11 - Legislative Background: Bill C-7
Tab 12 - Charter Statement: Bill C-7
Appendices
Tab 13 - First Annual Report on MAID, 2019
Tab 14 - Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID
Tab 15 - Summary of CCA Independent Review Findings
Tab 16 - What We Heard Report (Consultations Jan/Feb 2020)
Tab 17 - News Release: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
Tab 18 - Media Lines: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
Tab 19 – Questions and Answers: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
Tab 1 – Opening Remarks - Minister of Health Canada
Opening Remarks for The Honourable Patty Hajdu, P.C., M.P. Minister of Health Standing Committee on
Justice and Human Rights Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (Medical Assistance in Dying)
November 2, 2020 Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 4 minutes (maximum)
Speech length: 4 minutes (420 words)
Check against delivery
Madam Chair, I’m pleased to join you today to speak about the proposed amendments in Bill C-7.I
believe the proposed changes to Bill C-7 will expand freedom of choice for people who are suffering
intolerably, strengthen safeguards to protect vulnerable individuals and respect individual autonomy.
With this Bill, we are addressing critical issues identified by families and health care professionals who
have been involved with MAID over the past four years.
The decision of a person nearing death to pursue MAID is a carefully considered one.A 10-day reflection
period prolongs suffering, so we removed this requirement for people whose natural death is
reasonably foreseeable.
We also heard that the requirement for two witnesses creates a barrier to access. After careful
consideration, we reduced this requirement to one witness and are confident this change doesn’t pose
any risk.
In terms of advance requests, there is a strong public desire for consideration of this option. This is a
complex issue, and can be pursued in the context of the Parliamentary Review.
But we feel strongly that we should address now those situations where an individual nearing the end of
life has requested and been declared eligible for MAID, but finds themselves agonizing about the timing
of their MAID procedure.
This could be because they are worried about losing capacity before the scheduled procedure if they
choose a date that would maximize their life. The majority of practitioners consulted on this issue are in
favour of permitting a “waiver of final consent” in these limited situations.
I know there is concern that these changes go beyond what is required to respond to the Truchon
decision.
But let us remember that Truchon, in effect, created the need for a two stream system of access to
MAID: one, for individuals who are suffering grievously but whose death is not imminent; and, the other
for those whose death is reasonably foreseeable and have been eligible since
2016.
It makes sense to set a high bar in terms of safeguards for the first group, while providing some modest
relief from impediments to access for the second. And that is what we are doing in Bill C-7.
Madam Chair, the proposed amendments in Bill C-7 are informed by our health care system experience
in delivering MAID and reflect the opinions and perspectives shared by Canadians and a wide range of
stakeholders.
They represent a balanced and compassionate approach and respect for personal autonomy while
ensuring adequate safeguards are in place to protect vulnerable individuals.
Thank you.
Tab 2 - Overview of Changes to Bill C-14
Overview of Changes to Bill C-14
Response to International
Truchon/ Public and regimes
Experience roundtable
Unchanged Charter with C-14 consultations
Eligibility Criteria
18+ years of age 
Request must be voluntary
Informed consent to receive MAID after patient informed 
of means available to relieve suffering
Decision making capacity required
Eligible for publicly funded health care services 
Person has grievous and irremediable medical
condition:
‒ Serious and incurable illness, disease or 
disability
‒ In an advanced state of irreversible decline in
capability
‒ Has enduring physical or psychological 
suffering that is intolerable to them and that
cannot be relieved under conditions that they
consider acceptable
‒ Natural death is reasonably foreseeable (no 
longer used as eligibility criteria, retained as a
basis for determining which set of safeguards
to follow) (new)
Exclusion of Mental illness1 (new) 
Safeguards for Persons whose Death IS Reasonably Foreseeable
Removal of 2 witness requirement (only 1 witness now  
required) (eased)
A paid personal or health care worker can be an  
independent witness (eased)
Two independent practitioners must confirm all eligibility 
criteria
Person must be informed that they can withdraw request 
at any time, by any means
Removal of 10-day reflection period (new)  
Advance consent permitted (new)  
Safeguards for Persons whose Death is NOT Reasonably Foreseeable
Removal of 2 witness requirement (only 1 witness now  
required) (eased)
A paid personal or health care worker can be an  
independent witness (eased)
Two independent practitioners must confirm all eligibility 
criteria
Person must be informed that they can withdraw request 
at any time, by any means
Minimum 90 day assessment period2 (new) 
Person must be informed of counselling, mental health
supports, disability supports, community services and
palliative care services (new)
Reasonable means of alleviating suffering have been 
appropriately considered (new)3
Immediately before MAID is provided, person must 
confirm consent to receive MAID
Other
Expansion of monitoring system to include all eligibility 
assessments undertaken (new)
1 The independent review on mental disorders undertaken by the Council of
Canadian Academies highlighted the complexities associated with extending
MAID to persons living with mental illness. The working group could not achieve
consensus what, if any, circumstances MAID should be permitted for this
population, suggesting further study is needed.
2This safeguard is informed by the Belgian regime where persons whose death is
not imminent are required to wait for 30 days between the initial request and the
provision of euthanasia.
3This safeguard is informed by legislation in the Netherlands that states that the
patient’s request must be well considered, meaning that the patient has given the
matter careful consideration on the basis of adequate information and a clear
understanding of their illness.
Tab 3 – Health Canada Policy Questions and Answers for Committee Review
Table of Contents
1 LEGISLATION
1.1 Approach and Objectives
1.2 Key Elements
1.3 Legal Considerations
2 ELIGIBILITY
2.1 Reasonably Foreseeable Natural Death
2.2 Mental Illness
3 SAFEGUARDS
3.1 Two-track System
3.2 Use of RFND to distinguish tracks
3.3 Easing of Witness Safeguard
3.4 Removal of 10-day Reflection Period
3.5 90-Day Assessment Period
3.6 One assessor must have expertise in the condition causing the suffering
3.7 Safeguard requiring bolstered informed consent (mental health, counselling,
etc.).
4 WAIVER OF FINAL CONSENT/ADVANCE REQUEST
4.1 Waiver of Final Consent
4.2 Advance requests
5 FEDERAL MONITORING REGIME
5.1 Purpose
5.2 Data Collection
6 NON-LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
6.1 Palliative Care Supports
6.2 Mental Health and Suicide Supports
6.3 Disability Support Services
7 PROVINCES/TERRITORIES
7.1 Quebec
7.2 Other Provinces/Territories
8 PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW
8.1 Timing
8.2 Anticipated Topics, Process and Potential Next Steps
9 MAID DATA
9.1 Profile of Recipients and Increases since 2016
9.2 Data confidence
10 FEDERAL CONSULTATIONS IN JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2020
10.1 Incorporation of Consultation Results in Current Bill
10.2 Where to Find Results
11 STAKEHOLDERS
11.1 Supporting Practitioners and Conscience Rights
11.2 Vulnerable Persons
11.3 Indigenous Persons
12 INDEPENDENT REVIEWS
12.1 Topics Covered
12.2 Findings
13 MAID DELIVERY DURING COVID-19
13.1 Challenges
13.2 Policy Response
14 OTHER
14.1 Institutions Not Permitting MAID Onsite
14.2 Report by the Parliamentary Budget Officer on Cost Estimate for MAID
14.3 Office of the Correctional Investigator recommendation on MAID in prisons
14.4 Raising the option of MAID by health care professionals
1 LEGISLATION
1.1 Approach and Objectives
1.1.1 Why has the government introduced amendments to legislation on medical
assistance in dying?
• On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of
two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal
Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s natural death be reasonably
foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to be at
the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did not appeal the
decision.
• Bill C-7 is the federal government’s response to the Truchon ruling. The
proposed legislation also provides an opportunity to address concerns and issues
arising from nearly four years of experience with medical assistance in dying in
Canada.
• The proposed legislative changes will allow more autonomy to persons who
wish to relieve intolerable suffering by receiving medical assistance in dying, while
protecting those who may be vulnerable.
1.1.2 Are the proposed changes in Bill C-7 different than those introduced with
former Bill C-7?
• The proposed amendments in Bill C-7 are the same as those proposed in
February 2020.
1.1.3 Who was consulted in the development of this Bill?
• The federal government held consultations in January and February 2020,
which were an important step in responding to Quebec’s court ruling, and are
part of the Government’s approach to ensuring that the federal framework on
MAID is informed by the evolving views and needs of Canadians.
• During these consultations, over 300,000 Canadians completed an online
questionnaire. The high level of engagement demonstrates the importance given
to this issue by Canadians.
• Ministers Lametti, Hajdu and Qualtrough, as well as Parliamentary
Secretaries Virani and Fisher, held 10 expert roundtables in eight cities across the
country (Halifax, Montreal, Toronto, Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg, Ottawa and
Québec City) to discuss Canada’s medical assistance in dying framework.
• A What We Heard report on the results of the consultations is now
available online on the Department of Justice Canada’s website.
• The federal government continues to engage with the provinces and
territories, both through federal, provincial, and territorial ministers, and through
an officials’ level intergovernmental working group on medical assistance in dying.
1.2 Key Elements
1.2.1 What amendments are being introduced through Bill C-7?
There are five main components to the Bill:
1. removing the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” (RFND) criterion
from the list of eligibility criteria in the federal legislation, in response to the
Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon ruling
2. creating a two-track approach to safeguards based on whether or not a
person’s death is reasonably foreseeable
o creating a new set of safeguards for people whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable following their request for MAID
o maintaining and easing some of the pre-existing set of safeguards for
people whose death is reasonably foreseeable
3. expressly excluding eligibility for MAID for persons suffering solely from
mental illness
4. allowing a waiver of final consent, so that persons who are assessed and
approved, whose natural deaths are reasonably foreseeable, and who risk losing
decision-making capacity to make arrangements with their practitioner to receive
MAID on a chosen date even if they lose decision-making capacity before that
date
o rendering this waiver of final consent invalid if the person, after
having lost decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or resistance to
receiving MAID
5. expanding data collected through the federal monitoring regime to provide
a more complete picture of MAID in Canada
1.3 Legal Considerations
1.3.1 When would the legislative amendments become law and when would they
come into force7
• The proposed amendments to the federal law would become law once it
has gone through the legislative process in Parliament and received Royal Assent.
1.3.2 What is the significance of the December 18, 2020 deadline?
• On June 29, 2020, the Superior Court of Québec granted the request of the
Attorney General of Canada for a second extension of the effective date of the
Truchon decision, until December 18, 2020, of the Truchon decision rendered in
September 2019. This extension was necessary as the COVID-19 pandemic
disruptions to the parliamentary process rendered it impossible to meet the
previous deadline of July 11, 2020.
• The Court recognized the Government’s diligence with regards to
introducing a Bill that would modify the medical assistance in dying regime.
• The Court allowed the possibility for individuals whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable and who wish to access medical assistance in dying during
the period of suspension, to apply to the Quebec Superior Court for an “individual
exemption.”
• This option is available only in the province of Quebec.
1.3.3 How many individual exemption requests have been made to date? How
many have been granted by the Court? What was the Attorney General of
Canada’s position?
• As of late- October 2020, there have been 11 individual exemption requests
for MAID and 10 have been granted under this ruling by the Superior Court of
Québec. Although the Attorney General of Canada (AGC) could participate, to this
point the AGC has not appeared or taken a position in any of these cases.
• The outstanding request is awaiting a decision. The Attorney General of
Canada will consider its position on future requests on a case-by-case basis.
1.3.4 Will Parliament will be able to pass the proposed changes by December 18,
2020? Will the federal government request a third extension of the Truchon
deadline?
• The Government of Canada remains committed to implementing changes
to Canada’s MAID legislation before the court deadline of December 18, 2020.
• The Government will support Parliament in its review of this legislation as
much as possible in order to help meet the deadline.
1.3.5 What will happen if the ruling comes into effect on December 18, 2020,
before Parliament can change the law?
• Should the Superior Court of Québec’s ruling come into effect before a
revised legislation is enacted, the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death”
criterion in the federal law will no longer be applicable in the province of Quebec.
It would however, remain in effect in other provinces and territories.
• This means, in effect, that federal MAID law would be different in Quebec
then the rest of Canada, as Quebec residents would no longer be required to
meet the RFND criterion.
1.3.6 Would Canadian residents outside of Quebec who are eligible for MAID
except for the RFND criterion, be able to access MAID in Quebec after December
18, 2020?
• Persons seeking MAID in Quebec would still be required to meet all other
eligibility criteria under the Quebec law, including meeting the residency
requirements for Quebec’s provincial health coverage which is three months.
2 ELIGIBILITY
2.1 Reasonably Foreseeable Natural Death
2.1.1 What is the definition of RFND?
• RFND requires a temporal, but flexible, connection between the person’s
overall medical circumstances and their anticipated death. Individuals may
decline toward death along trajectories of greater or lesser predictability and
duration.
• As such, RFND is not defined by a specific prognosis, but it does require a
temporal link to death in the sense that the person is approaching the end of their
life in the near term.
• As was the case when the first MAID law was enacted in 2016, RFND would
be assessed on a case-by-case basis, in relation to the specific person who is
seeking MAID, and must consider each individual’s unique medical circumstances.
2.1.2 What is the typical prognosis for a person receiving MAID?
• Available evidence suggests that, while there is some variation, most
patients receiving MAID have a prognosis of approximately 6 months to 1 year of
life.
2.1.3 Is it challenging for practitioners to determine if a person’s death is
reasonably foreseeable?
• Practitioners consulted during the federal roundtables earlier in 2020
indicated that while there were some challenges in interpreting reasonable
foreseeability at first, over the past 4 years, providers have become much more
comfortable with the concept and how to apply it.
2.2 Mental Illness
2.2.1 What is the definition of a mental illness?
• There is no single definition of mental illness, however in the context of
Canadian discussions on MAID, the term “mental illness” has come to be
understood as generally referring to those conditions that are primarily treated by
psychiatrists and psychologists
• Mental illnesses raise specific concerns when it comes to MAID eligibility,
such as determining irremediability (meaning whether the symptoms can be
changed for the better), challenges in assessing capacity, and disentangling a
desire to die as a symptom or manifestation of a mental illness from a bona fide
MAID request.
2.2.2 By excluding mental illness, is the Government suggesting that mental
illness is not as serious as a physical illness?
• The Government of Canada recognizes that mental illnesses are serious
conditions that can cause suffering that is on par with that of physical illnesses.
• The Council of Canadian Academies report and the roundtable
consultations held earlier this year revealed the complexities associated with
allowing MAID for individuals suffering solely from mental illness, such as whether
the condition can be considered “incurable” or “irremediable,” challenges in
assessing capacity, and disentangling the common symptom of a desire to die
from a genuine MAID request.
• For these reasons, many roundtable participants expressed strong
reservations around expanding eligibility for MAID to this population.
• This issue will benefit from a more comprehensive examination as part of
the broader parliamentary review of MAID legislation, which is a statutory
requirement.
2.2.3 Is dementia excluded as well since it is listed as a mental disorder under the
DSM?
• Someone with dementia could receive MAID provided they meet all the
required eligibility criteria.
• In the context of the federal MAID legislation, the term “mental illness”
would not include neurocognitive or neurodevelopmental disorders, or other
conditions that may affect cognitive abilities that might otherwise be categorized
as “mental disorders”, such as dementias, autism spectrum disorders or
intellectual disabilities.
• Mental illness has come to be understood as generally referring to those
conditions that are primarily treated by psychiatrists and psychologists
• Dementia and other neuro-cognitive disorders may be treated by
specialties other than psychiatry (such as neurology for neurodegenerative or
neurodevelopmental conditions) or specialties outside of medicine (such as
education specialists for intellectual disabilities).
3 SAFEGUARDS
3.1 Two-track System
3.1.1 What is the rationale for creating two sets of safeguards?
• When a person’s natural death is not reasonably foreseeable, the
assessment of eligibility can be more challenging. New and modified safeguards
for this population reflects the more serious consequences of error in these
circumstances, and aims to address the diverse sources of suffering and
vulnerability that could lead a person to ask for MAID.
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to support best practices and information sharing on clinical
guidance and other aspects of implementing MAID to help ensure consistency in
application of these new provisions.
3.2 Use of RFND to distinguish tracks
3.2.1 How will RFND be used to determine which set of safeguards will be used?
• The RFND criterion would no long apply as an eligibility criterion that could
exclude persons from receiving MAID. However, it would be used to determine
which set of safeguards apply to a particular MAID request.
• Participants at the roundtable meetings, including healthcare practitioners,
expressed comfort with the concept of reasonably foreseeable natural death,
having used it in the context of determining eligibility.
• Using this concept ensures that the appropriate set of safeguards are
applied to an individual’s circumstances. Individuals who are near the end of life
have the same or eased safeguards to avoid prolonged suffering, and individuals
who are not near the end of life, where assessments can be more complex, have
new and stronger set of safeguards.
3.3 Easing of Witness Safeguard
3.3.1 What is the role of the witness?
• The only role of a witness is to attest that the individual signing and dating
the request for MAID is, in fact, that person.
3.3.2 Are we not placing people at risk by easing this safeguard?
• Reducing the required number of witnesses to one and allowing personal
support or health care workers to take on this role will not weaken this safeguard.
• The only role of a witness is to attest to the signing and dating of the
request by the person requesting MAID. A witness does not play a role with
respect to assessing the eligibility of a person or the voluntariness of their
request.
• Full application of the other safeguards is the responsibility of MAID
assessors and providers.
3.3.3 How can a personal support or health care worker, who takes care of a
patient, qualify as an independent witness?
• Paid professionals who provide personal care or health care are likely to be
among the limited number of personal contacts an individual living in a care
institution may have.
• Under the proposed changes, these individuals would still be excluded from
acting as a witness if they know or believe they are a beneficiary of the person’s
will or if they would receive a material benefit from the person’s death.
• A medical or nurse practitioner who is involved in assessing the person for
MAID eligibility or in providing MAID to the person would be excluded from being
able to act as an independent witness.
3.4 Removal of 10-day Reflection Period
3.4.1 What is a reflection period?
• Under the current legislation, the reflection period specifies the minimum
amount of time that must pass between the approval of a request and the
provision of MAID. The objective has been to give the person some time to reflect
on their decision before pursuing a medically-assisted death.
3.4.2 Are we placing people at risk by removing the 10-day reflection period
safeguard?
• Removing the 10-day reflection period is based on feedback from health
care practitioners who participated in the federal roundtable discussions held in
early 2020. They noted that, in practice, the 10-day reflection period was not
fulfilling the original intent of protecting the vulnerable. Instead, the waiting
period was only prolonging an individual’s suffering.
• Health care practitioners noted that the majority of patients seeking MAID
have already taken a significant amount of time to reflect on their decision to
have an assisted death before formally requesting it. This reflection usually
included discussions with families and their health care team.
3.4.3 With the removal of the 10-day reflection period safeguard, could people
request and receive MAID on the same day?
• In order for an individual to receive MAID, two independent health care
practitioners must provide a written opinion confirming that the person meets all
of the eligibility criteria. All the preparations for the procedure must then be
arranged. This entire process takes time and is unlikely to occur on the same day.
3.5 90-Day Assessment Period
3.5.1 What is the difference between a “reflection period” and an “assessment
period”?
• The proposed revisions remove the reflection period and apply a 90-day
assessment period to individuals whose natural death is not reasonably
foreseeable.
• The 90-day assessment period sets a minimum amount of time that must
pass between the day of the individual’s first assessment and the day MAID is
provided.
• The reflection period is the minimum time between the day on which the
request was signed and the day of MAID provision.
• The objective of this “assessment period” is to give the practitioner
adequate time to review a patient’s MAID request and assess whether all
eligibility criteria have been met.
3.5.2 What is the basis for choosing a 90-day assessment period?
• For persons whose natural death is not reasonably foreseeable, the
assessment of MAID requests can be more challenging.
• The proposed mandatory 90-day assessment period for persons whose
natural death is not reasonably foreseeable will ensure that enough time is
devoted to exploring relevant aspects of the person’s situation and to discussing
possible options to alleviate their suffering, such as palliative care and other
support services.
• Exploring possible options to alleviate an individual’s suffering could involve
arranging consultations with other health care professionals or services, which
require time to schedule. Ninety days provides a reasonable timeframe to make
these arrangements, without unnecessarily prolonging suffering.
• The assessment period could be shortened if both practitioners agree that
loss of capacity is imminent and they are able to complete their assessments in a
shorter period of time.
3.5.3 Will this requirement prolong unnecessary suffering for those who are not
RFND?
• The 90-day assessment period applies only to persons whose natural death
is not reasonably foreseeable. These types of cases can be more complex and
require in-depth consultation and assessment.
• The 90 days provides a reasonable balance between the time required to
complete a comprehensive assessment process, while minimizing the wait for an
individual who is eligible for MAID.
3.6 One assessor must have expertise in the condition causing the suffering
3.6.1 Why does this requirement only apply to persons whose natural death is
not reasonably foreseeable?
• Health care providers have been exercising a great deal of professional
judgement in delivering MAID. In cases where they do not have the necessary
expertise in the patient’s condition to do a comprehensive assessment, providers
are already consulting experts as part of good medical practice.
• For patients whose natural death is not reasonably foreseeable, this
additional level of assessment is necessary because their circumstances are
usually more complex and challenging. Involving a practitioner with expertise or
experience in the condition that is causing the person’s suffering would help to
ensure that all treatment options have been identified and explored.
• Making it mandatory in every request for MAID is likely to place undue
strain on healthcare resources.
3.6.2 What does it mean for a practitioner to have “expertise” in an individual’s
condition?
• The safeguard only requires that the practitioner have expertise in the
person’s medical condition causing the suffering. The practitioner does not need
to be certified as an “expert” or as a “specialist” by a specific board.
• A practitioner could have expertise in a condition through a number of
ways, such as special training or previous experience with a patient with a similar
condition.
3.6.3 Will this safeguard create a barrier to access for individuals in rural and/or
remote communities?
• This safeguard only applies to persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable, in recognition of the fact that these types of cases are
often more complex and require in-depth consultation and assessment.
• Most provinces and territories have implemented care coordination
systems to help patients receive timely assessments and assist health care
professionals with complex MAID assessments.
• Practitioners in rural and remote areas frequently have established
networks of other practitioners that they call upon for advice when assessing
complex health care conditions.
• For more remote communities where travel is an impediment, telehealth
options may be available to support consultations. The availability and use of
technology to facilitate virtual consults has steadily grown, especially as a
consequence of the COVID-19 pandemic.
3.7 Safeguard requiring bolstered informed consent (mental health,
counselling, etc.).
3.7.1 Why is this safeguard required?
• The bill proposes a requirement that the person requesting MAID has been
informed of available counselling services, mental health and disability support
services, community services and palliative care, as appropriate to the individual’s
situation, and be offered consultation with relevant professionals.
• This safeguard only applies to persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable, in recognition of the fact that these types of cases are
often more complex and require in-depth consultation and assessment.
• Ensuring that a person has seriously considered all options is essential to
their informed consent to MAID. It means they are not consenting to MAID as a
result of misinformation or lack of awareness about other options and their
likelihood of success.
• Ensuring that patients are aware of all the supports and options available to
them is part of good medical practice followed by practitioners. Including this
type of provision in the bill underscores the importance of this practice and
requires it to be done in all cases.
3.7.2 Why must practitioners agree that reasonable treatments were
“considered” rather than “tried”?
• This safeguard only applies to persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable.
• As part of good medical practice, practitioners have conversations with
their patients to make them aware of the services available to relieve their
suffering and work with them to explore all reasonable treatments.
• However, individuals cannot be required to undertake treatments that may
be unacceptable to them, for any reason.
• This strengthened safeguard is specifically designed to support fully
informed decision-making, while also respecting individual autonomy.
4 WAIVER OF FINAL CONSENT/ADVANCE REQUEST
4.1 Waiver of Final Consent
4.1.1 What is a waiver of final consent?
• A waiver of final consent is only available to individuals whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable.
• A waiver of final consent would allow a person, who has been assessed and
approved for MAID, to give their consent to receive MAID on a specified day, even
if they subsequently lose the capacity to affirm their consent before that day
arrives.
• The provision allowing a waiver of final consent will address situations such
as that of Audrey Parker, who chose to have MAID earlier than she wanted, for
fear of losing capacity and her ability to receive MAID.
• It will also prevent suffering by individuals who might refuse pain
medications in order to maintain the capacity required to provide final consent
prior to MAID provision.
• This arrangement would need to be specified in writing, and would be
considered invalid if the individual demonstrates resistance or refusal at the time
of administration.
• Practitioners may elect to meet with the patient often to confirm their
wishes and assess the risk of loss of capacity.
4.1.2 Is it possible that the waiver of final consent, as proposed in Bill C-7, could
be used by someone who is eligible for MAID, but whose natural death is quite
some time off, to make, in effect, an advance request for MAID?
• The provision for the waiver of final consent requires a person to specify a
date for MAID provision and have been informed by the practitioner that they risk
losing capacity prior to that date. In most cases, a practitioner would not be able
to state with conviction that there is a risk of losing capacity when a person’s
naturally occurring death is a considerable time away.
• We heard from practitioners that they are concerned about the
complexities associated with advance requests and the need for further
examination. They would likely be reticent to push the boundaries of the waiver
of final consent provision.
• The government will work with the provinces and territories to support the
development and sharing of clinical guidance and best practices related to
waivers of final consent.
4.1.3 What happens if the person retains capacity on the chosen date?
• If the person retains capacity on the chosen date, the provider would
confirm the patient’s wishes before proceeding – that is, they would give the
patient the opportunity to withdraw consent and have them expressly confirm
their consent immediately before proceeding.
4.1.4 Is the practitioner still required to inform the person of what they are doing
even though they have lost decisional capacity?
• As part of good medical practice, practitioners should always inform the
person of what they are doing.
• Provinces and regulators may develop guidance materials to support
clinicians in administering MAID in the context of a waiver of advance consent.
• The government will work with provinces and territories to support the
development and sharing of clinical guidance and best practices.
4.1.5 What if the practitioner is not available on the chosen date?
• This is something that could potentially be addressed in the written
arrangement between the clinician and the patient.
• Provinces and regulators may develop guidance materials to support
clinicians in addressing these types of scenarios.
4.1.6 What happens if the person demonstrates resistance during the day of the
MAID procedure?
• The Bill specifies that once a person demonstrates by words, sounds or
gestures, refusal or resistance to having the substance administered, MAID can no
longer be provided on the basis of the written arrangement for the waiver of final
consent.
• The Bill clarifies that reflexes or involuntary responses such as flinching
when being touched or during insertion of a needle, would not be considered an
indication of refusal or resistance.
• Clinicians will need to apply their judgement and act accordingly if they
have concerns.
• Provinces and regulators may develop guidance materials to support
clinicians.
• The government will work with provinces and territories to support the
development and sharing of clinical guidance and best practices.
4.2 Advance requests
4.2.1 What is an advance request?
• Advance requests are not permitted under MAID legislation.
• Advance requests refer to a situation where a person with decision-making
capacity writes a document setting out that they would want to receive MAID in
the future, if they lose decision-making capacity and if specific circumstances arise
that they expect would cause them unbearable suffering. This request is made
“in advance” of when they want to receive MAID and when they would be
deemed eligible for MAID.
• For example, after receiving a diagnosis for a capacity-limiting medical
condition like Alzheimer’s disease, a person might want to prepare an advance
request in anticipation of future suffering.
4.2.2 Why are advance requests not permitted given the strong public desire for
this option?
• As noted in the Council of Canadian Academies expert panel report,
allowing advance requests is very complex and requires careful consideration and
consultation before it could be codified in law and implemented.
• The overwhelming majority of experts, practitioners and stakeholders
consulted on this specific issue earlier this year recommended that this type of
broad advance requests be considered during the parliamentary review of MAID
legislation, as required by the original legislation.
4.2.3 Could patients with an Alzheimer’s diagnosis create an agreement to waive
final consent given the lack of clear timelines in place with RFND?
• There is agreement among experts that allowing advance requests for
people with illnesses like Alzheimer’s disease is very complex and would require
careful consideration and consultation before it could be implemented.
• Broader advance requests may be considered during the parliamentary
review of MAID legislation, as required by the original legislation.
4.2.4 What is the difference between an advance directive, an advance request
and a waiver of final consent?
• An “advance directive” is a term often used in end-of-life care planning and
refers to a situation when an individual designates someone to make health care
decisions on their behalf, and/or specifies types of treatment that would be
accepted or declined, should the need arise. Advance directives for MAID are not
permitted.
• An “advance request”, in the context of MAID, would be a request, created
in advance of a loss of decision-making capacity and in advance of being eligible
for MAID, intended to be acted upon under circumstances outlined in the request
after the person has lost decision-making capacity. Advance requests for MAID
are not permitted.
• A “waiver of final consent” would allow an individual who is assessed and
approved, whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who risks losing
decision-making capacity, to enter into a written arrangement with their
practitioner to receive MAID on a chosen date even if they lose decision-making
capacity before that date. Bill C-7 proposes to permit a waiver of consent.
4.2.5 Why is the Bill proposing to allow advance consent to MAID administration
by a practitioner in cases of failed self-administration?
• During self-administration, in the unlikely event that the drugs fail to work
properly and the patient does not die but is unconscious, a practitioner cannot
obtain final consent to complete the process.
• This situation could result in a prolonged death for the patient or criminal
liability for the practitioner. The Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and
Providers (CAMAP) flagged the need for clarification of this issue.
• The patient and the practitioner must agree in advance that the
practitioner will be present at the time of self-administration, and will complete
the process if the person experiences complications.
• In these particular cases, there can be a very high degree of confidence that
the patient was clear in their intent to cause their own death. Completing the
process of the administration of MAID is a compassionate action that can be
taken to respect the patient’s choice, as to ease any additional distress of those
who may be present with the patient.
5 FEDERAL MONITORING REGIME
5.1 Purpose
5.1.1 What is the difference between monitoring and oversight?
• Both activities require detailed information about individual cases, but
serve different purposes.
• Monitoring is the collection and analysis of data to provide insight into
MAID implementation and delivery. It is a federal responsibility where the federal
government uses aggregated data to tell the story of how MAID is working in this
country.
• Oversight refers to compliance, and it involves the review of individual
cases to determine whether there has been compliance with the law, with a view
to enforcement when there has been non-compliance. It is a provincial/territorial
responsibility.
• Both monitoring and oversight may yield insights that will be helpful to
persons considering MAID, and to providers and policy-makers.
5.2 Data Collection
5.2.1 What authority does the federal government have to collect information on
MAID? Isn’t the collection of information on health care delivery usually a
provincial/territorial responsibility?
• The MAID legislation of 2016 authorizes the federal Minister of Health to
make regulations that he/she considers necessary for the collection of
information and the reporting on MAID.
• On November 1, 2018, federal regulations on the provision and collection
of information for the purpose of monitoring the implementation of MAID, came
into force to support public accountability and transparency of this practice.
• The regulations set out the framework for mandatory reporting for all
physicians and nurse practitioners who receive written requests for, and
participate in, MAID, as well as pharmacists who dispense drugs for the purposes
of providing MAID.
• This Bill proposes to strengthen reporting to cover all requests for MAID
and to align the reporting requirements with the new provisions in this Bill – the
changes in eligibility for MAID, and the new safeguards in particular.
• Most provinces and territories collect MAID data on MAID assessments and
provision in addition to the information required under the federal regulations.
5.2.2 What type of information is the monitoring system collecting on MAID?
• The system currently collects data such as:
o the number of written requests received;
o how many resulted in the provision of MAID;
o a general profile of those receiving MAID (age, gender, underlying
condition, nature of suffering);
o their access to and use of palliative care and disability support
services;
o the setting of provision; and
o the number and type of practitioners providing MAID.
• Information is also collected on the number of written requests not
resulting in MAID and why (e.g., found ineligible, withdrew request, died of a
cause other than MAID).
• The sole source of information for the federal monitoring system is the
physician or nurse practitioner who assesses and/or provides MAID and is
obligated to report under the Criminal Code.
• This reporting obligation underpins the provision of consistent information
to Health Canada and is the basis upon which the federal government can report
out to Canadians on how the MAID legislation is working.
5.2.3 Why do we need to make changes to the reporting regime?
• Since the implementation of the monitoring regime, it has become clear
that capturing information based solely on the written requests received by
physicians and nurse practitioners has resulted in an incomplete picture of who is
requesting MAID across the country.
• The proposed provisions would allow for the collection of data on all
assessments following an individual’s request for MAID. This would include any
requests that have not been put in writing or any preliminary assessments that
may be undertaken by other health professionals—such as other types of
nurses—in the care team or through a care coordination service. This would help
provide a clearer understanding of who is requesting MAID.
• Consultations will take place with key stakeholders implicated in MAID
reporting, on how the changes to the reporting regime can best be reflected in
the MAID monitoring regulations.
• The collection of a robust and nationally comparable data set will
contribute to an evidence base that will inform ongoing discussions about the
delivery of MAID in Canada.
5.2.4 Will the changes create additional burden on practitioners?
• Health Canada has worked closely with provinces and territories, as well as
physicians, nurse practitioners and pharmacists to support consistent reporting
through the federal monitoring system for MAID.
• Health Canada recognizes the need to minimize reporting burden on
practitioners, including working with the provinces and territories to avoid
duplicate reporting.
• Health Canada will consult with key stakeholders implicated in MAID
reporting on how the changes to the reporting regime can best be reflected to
balance reporting burden with the need for information.
• Under the current regulations, practitioners report either to a provincial or
territorial authority (who in turn reports on all cases in their jurisdiction to the
federal government), or to the federal government directly, but not both. This
approach is efficient and has been working well.
5.2.5 Will the proposed expansion of the monitoring system address all known
gaps in data collection on MAID?
• The amendments to the monitoring system proposed in Bill C-7 will
broaden data collection and provide a clearer understanding of who is requesting
MAID and why some requests may go unfulfilled.
• When determining what to collect through federal regulations, the
government must balance the need for information while respecting the privacy
of patients and providers and minimizing reporting burden. Questions must also
be limited to information that practitioners would be reasonably expected to
know, since failing to report can be penalized as an offence under the Criminal
Code.
• Given the complexity of the issues, and the need to consider a wide range
of views, the federal government will consult closely with key stakeholders such
as PT governments, health care regulators and professional organizations and the
public.
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to explore additional information sources to complement existing
data collection and information sharing on MAID.
6 NON-LEGISLATIVE MEASURES
6.1 Palliative Care Supports
6.1.1 Are Canadians choosing MAID due to the lack of palliative care resources?
• The available evidence does not point to this.
• The First Annual Report on MAID indicates that, in 2019, the overwhelming
majority of persons receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported to have been offered
and to have received palliative care services. Additionally, of those MAID
recipients who did not access palliative care services prior to receiving MAID, the
majority (89.6%) would have had access to these services.
• These findings are consistent with those reported by Quebec’s Commission
on End-of-Life Care, as well as those of a recent Ontario-based study, both of
which found that most MAID recipients had received palliative care.
6.1.2 What is the Government doing to ensure that people don’t choose MAID
due to lack of palliative care supports?
• The Government of Canada recognizes that access to palliative and end-of-
life care is an important issue for Canadians. Many people with life-limiting illness
wish to remain independent and receive the care they need at home or in their
community. Improving access to palliative care in a variety of settings is critical to
making this happen.
• Through Budget 2017, the federal government made historic new
investments in health care, committing $6 billion over 10 years for provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care, as well as palliative
care.
• The Government provided an additional $184.6 million over five years to
improve home and palliative care for Indigenous communities.
• In 2018, our department worked closely with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to develop the Framework on Palliative Care in Canada. It provides a
common vision and guiding principles for palliative care in Canada, as well as a
blueprint to help governments, caregivers and communities shape planning,
decision making, and organizational change.
• In August 2019, Health Canada released an Action Plan that defines federal
activities and next steps linked to the Framework on Palliative Care in Canada.
The Action Plan outlines activities that are designed to:
• raise awareness
• increase support for health care providers, families and caregivers
• support data collection and research
• improve access to palliative care for underserved populations
• improve access to culturally safe, distinctions-based palliative care for and
in Indigenous communities
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces,
territories, people living with life-limiting illness, caregivers, stakeholders, and
communities to improve the quality and availability of palliative care for
Canadians.
6.1.3 Why did the federal Palliative Care Action Plan not have funding attached?
• Action Plan activities are being funded from Health Canada’s Health Care
Policy and Strategies Program.
• Health Canada has invested almost $13 million in projects that address
areas in the Action Plan, such as training, advance care planning, and palliative
care delivery in the home.
• Health Canada’s Health Care Policy and Strategies Program will continue to
provide time-limited funding for projects that address the goals and actions
identified in the Action Plan.
6.2 Mental Health and Suicide Supports
6.2.1 What is the Government of Canada doing to improve mental health and
suicide prevention efforts?
• Addressing mental health is an important priority for the Government of
Canada.
• Mental illness affects many Canadian families and individuals, and has an
impact on our economy and society as a whole.
• Through Budget 2017, Canada made historic new investments in health
care, committing $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to mental health and
addiction services, as well as home and community care, including palliative care.
• Budget 2019 also provided $25 million over 5 years to implement and
sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
• Additional efforts and investments aim to:
o strengthen protective factors that lead to positive mental health
o reduce and address the risk factors that can lead to mental illness
and suicide
o provide culturally appropriate interventions, services and support for
Indigenous peoples, in partnership with them
o reduce the stigma and discrimination attached to poor mental
health, mental illness and problematic substance use
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 continues to create
stress and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready
access to their regular support networks. Therefore, in April 2020, the
Government of Canada launched the Wellness Together Canada portal, the first
national program of its kind, providing a 24/7 suite of free evidence-based tools
and services. Through Wellness Together Canada, Canadians across the country
can access supports ranging self-assessment, peer support, to confidential
sessions with social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
• All services are available in both official languages, and phone counselling
sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects.
6.2.2 How do you respond to criticism that Canada’s MAID legislation is going
against suicide prevention efforts?
• Protecting vulnerable persons, including those suffering from mental illness
or in crisis, remains a priority for the Government of Canada. It is important to
note that international evidence does not suggest any relationship between the
availability of MAID and suicide rates.
6.3 Disability Support Services
6.3.1 Are Canadians choosing MAID due to the lack of disability support services?
• The available evidence does not point to this.
• Data on the use and access to disability support services by persons
pursuing MAID is collected through the federal monitoring regime. For the
purposes of MAID reporting, disability support services could include but are not
limited to assistive technologies, adaptive equipment, rehabilitation services,
personal care services and disability-based income supplements.
• The First Annual Report on MAID indicates that, in 2019, slightly under half
(41.2%) of the MAID recipients were reported as requiring disability support
services. The majority (89.8%) of individuals who required such services were
reported as having received them. Only 3.9% of persons who were identified as
needing support services did not receive them.
6.3.2 How do the proposed amendments protect vulnerable persons?
• The Government of Canada remains committed to protecting vulnerable
individuals and the equality rights of all Canadians, while supporting autonomy
for persons who wish to end their intolerable suffering by receiving MAID.
• Under the proposed Bill, eligible persons seeking to receive MAID but
whose death is not reasonably foreseeable will need to be assessed based on a
different and strengthened set of safeguards from those whose death is
reasonably foreseeable.
• These proposed amendments would allow practitioners to better assess
the different types of MAID requests, and ensure that appropriate time, expertise
and consideration are devoted to requests where the person’s natural death is
not reasonably foreseeable.
7 PROVINCES/TERRITORIES
7.1 Quebec
7.1.1 Are the proposed amendments in line with Quebec’s response to the
Truchon decision?
• The Government of Quebec announced on January 21, 2020, that it would
not be amending the provincial Act respecting End-of-Life Care in light of the
Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon ruling.
• Quebec has confirmed that they will comply with the Truchon decision and
will not make any legislative changes at this time, leaving the medical colleges to
modify its clinical guidelines to reflect the removal of the “end-of-life” criterion.
• The Quebec government announced it would undertake public
consultations to determine public interest in expanding the MAID regime. The
pandemic was declared soon afterwards and the status of the consultations is
unknown.
7.2 Other Provinces/Territories
7.2.1 Do the provinces and territories support the proposed amendments? What
level of engagement has taken place with the provinces and territories?
• The federal government continues to engage with provincial and territorial
officials through an established Working Group on Medical Assistance in Dying.
• Provinces and territories have not expressed objections to the proposed
federal response to the Truchon decision.
7.2.2 Will the federal government give the provinces and territories more money
to implement the legislative changes within health care delivery in their
jurisdictions?
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to support best practices and information sharing on clinical
guidance and other aspects of implementing MAID.
7.2.3 What is the federal government going to do to support health care
professionals in implementing the revised law?
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to support best practices and information sharing on clinical
guidance and other aspects of implementing MAID.
7.2.4 What type of oversight is happening to ensure practitioners are following
the proper procedures for MAID?
• While the federal government is responsible for the monitoring and
reporting on MAID, the provinces and territories are responsible for the oversight
of MAID.
• Many jurisdictions, such as British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba and Quebec have implemented review committees to ensure MAID is
being provided in accordance with federal and provincial rules.
• For example, in Ontario, all MAID deaths are reported to the Chief
Coroner’s Office who is responsible for oversight.
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to support best practices and information sharing on clinical
guidance and other aspects of implementing MAID.
7.2.5 Will the federal government create a federal oversight body like Quebec’s
Commission or the Netherlands where the deliberations of the MAID review
committee are publicly accessible?
• The Government recognizes that provinces and territories are primarily
responsible for the management and delivery of health care services, including
the oversight of MAID.
• Many provinces have implemented review committees to ensure MAID is
being provided in accordance with federal and provincial rules.
• The Government will work with the provinces and territories and health
system partners to support best practices and information sharing on clinical
guidance and other aspects of implementing MAID.
8 PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW
8.1 Timing
8.1.1 When will the parliamentary review take place?
• The original MAID legislation requires a parliamentary review of the law’s
provisions, as well as the state of palliative care in Canada, by one or more
committees, starting at the beginning of the fifth year after becoming law.
• Although this broader review was expected to start by June 2020,
unprecedented challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic delayed the
parliamentary review process.
• The mandate and timeframes for the review will be determined by
Parliament.
8.1.2 Why did the Government not start the parliamentary review right away and
address all the issues at once?
• The time pressure imposed by the Quebec Superior Court deadline did not
make this approach possible.
• However, discussion and debate on Bill C-7 will allow Parliament to address
some key MAID issues within the deadline determined by the Quebec Superior
Court.
• The MAID discussion can then continue with the Parliamentary Review on
issues not addressed through the Bill C-7.
• Exactly when and how the parliamentary review will take place are
decisions to be taken by Parliamentarians.
8.1.3 Will the Government initiate the parliamentary review now in order to
allow a broader review of all MAID issues?
• The mandate and timeframes for the review are determined by Parliament.
• Over the past several months, we have been hearing that Canadians want
to have legislative amendments passed by the Quebec court’s deadline.
• Focussing discussion on Bill C-7 amendments now will facilitate our goal of
meeting the December 18th deadline, while allowing for a discussion on the
broader and more complex issues during the parliamentary review.
8.2 Anticipated Topics, Process and Potential Next Steps
8.2.1 What is anticipated to be included in the parliamentary review?
• The mandate and timeframes for the review will be determined by
Parliament.
• All aspects of the MAID law and how it is being implemented, and the state
of palliative care in Canada, will be subject to the review as required in the
original MAID legislation.
• Important and complex questions relating to MAID in Canada that were not
included in the current amendment, could also be considered.
• These could include advance requests for persons newly diagnosed with a
condition that could affect their decision-making capacity in the future, eligibility
for persons suffering solely from mental illness, and eligibility for mature minors.
These topics were the subject of the independent reviews conducted by the
Council of Canadian Academies.
8.2.2 Why didn’t the Government limit the legislative amendments to addressing
Truchon, and wait to address all other issues during the parliamentary review?
• The government is responding to the Quebec Court’s decision and other
issues where there is consensus and a clear path forward.
• The proposed changes are informed by four years of experience in MAID
implementation, and the concerns and issues raised by Canadians, experts,
practitioners, stakeholders, provinces and territories during the January and
February 2020 consultations.
8.2.3 Will there be another round of legislative amendments expected as a result
of the parliamentary review?
• The Government of Canada and Parliamentarians will be responsible for
determining next steps after the review is completed.
8.2.4 Will there be an opportunity to hold broader public and expert
consultations during the parliamentary review?
• The mandate and timeframes for the review are determined in Parliament.
• The consultations held in January and February 2020 were an important
step in responding to Quebec’s court ruling, and ensuring that the federal
framework on MAID is informed by the evolving views and needs of Canadians.
During these consultations, over 300,000 Canadians completed the online
questionnaire and over 125 experts were consulted across the country.
• The What We Heard report summarizing the results of the consultations is
available online on the Department of Justice Canada’s website.
9 MAID DATA
9.1 Profile of Recipients and Increases since 2016
9.1.1 What is the current profile of MAID use in Canada?
• Health Canada’s First Annual Report on MAID was released on July 24,
2020. This is the first report using data collected under the federal Regulations
for the Monitoring of MAID which came into force on November 1, 2018.
• When all data sources are considered, the total of number of medically
assisted deaths reported in Canada since the enactment of federal legislation is
13,946.
• In 2019, there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID.
• The average age of MAID recipients is 75.2 years.
• A nearly equal proportion of males (50.9%) and females (49.1%) are
receiving MAID.
• The most common underlying condition is cancer (67.2%), followed by
respiratory (10.8%) and neurological (10.4%) conditions.
9.1.2 Should we be concerned with the steady increase in reported MAID deaths
from year to year?
• In 2019, there were 5,631 MAID deaths reported in Canada, which is an
increase of 26.1% over 2018 numbers, and accounts for 2.0% of all deaths in
Canada.
• The number of MAID deaths in Canada is comparable to that of other
permissive regimes, where assisted deaths account for 0.3% to 4.6% of all deaths.
• The consistent and gradual increase in MAID deaths over the last three
years is expected as people become more aware of assisted dying as a legal
option and it gains greater acceptance by Canadians.
9.2 Data confidence
9.2.1 How confident is the Government in the current information on MAID?
• Health Canada has been working with provinces and territories, as well as
physicians, nurse practitioners and pharmacists to support reporting through the
new monitoring system.
• When the Regulations outlining the reporting requirements were
published, the department engaged with key stakeholders and governments to
provide technical briefing sessions on the Regulations and the reporting
obligations. These well-attended sessions allowed federal officials to provide
clarifications and develop appropriate guidance materials, to support appropriate
reporting.
• The provinces and territories have worked diligently to bring their MAID
policies in alignment with the requirements in the federal Regulations with
respect to reporting.
• Provinces and territories were consulted during the preparation of the First
Annual Report on MAID, in order to validate and update their self-reported data
about the number of cases of MAID from 2016 to 2018, as well as validate the
data provided through the monitoring system for 2019.
10 FEDERAL CONSULTATIONS IN JANUARY/FEBRUARY 2020
10.1 Incorporation of Consultation Results in Current Bill
10.1.1 How can two weeks of consultations adequately represent the voices of
Canadians?
• The two-week public consultation was accompanied by series of roundtable
consultations with experts, practitioners, Indigenous groups, stakeholders and
provinces and territories, held in January and February 2020, which heard a broad
range of views on MAID. The results are set out in a What We Heard report,
which can be found online.
• These consultations were an important step in responding to the Truchon
ruling and are part of the Government’s approach to ensuring that the federal
framework on MAID continues to be informed by the evolving views and needs of
Canadians.
• The federal government will continue to engage with provinces and
territories, both at through federal, provincial and territorial ministers, and
through an officials’ level intergovernmental working group on MAID.
10.1.2 How do the proposed legislative amendments reflect what was heard
during the consultations?
• The proposed legislative amendments respond to the feedback from
practitioners, experts and the Canadian public by:
o Introducing a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on
whether or not a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable.
o Excluding eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental
illness.
o Easing the requirement for two witnesses and allowing health care or
personal support workers to act as a witness.
o Allowing a waiver of final consent for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable and who may lose capacity to consent before
MAID can be provided.
o Allowing those who choose to pursue MAID through self-
administration to make arrangements with their practitioner to waive final
consent, to allow a physician to follow through with providing MAID should self-
administration result in complications and cause the individual to lose decision-
making capacity.
10.2 Where to Find Results
10.2.1 Where can I find the results of the consultations?
• The results of the consultation can be found on in the What We Heard
Report on the federal Department of Justice website.
11 STAKEHOLDERS
11.1 Supporting Practitioners and Conscience Rights
11.1.1 How will the federal government support health practitioners in
implementing the changes?
• The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with provinces
and territories, health system partners and health practice regulatory bodies to
support the implementation of the changes made to the legislation. This includes
the development of monitoring, reporting, best practices and guidance for the
MAID regime.
11.1.2 How are the conscience rights of practitioners being protected?
• Nothing in the existing federal law or Bill C-7 compels a health care provider
to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in dying. This is already
stated expressly under subsection 241.2(9) of the Criminal Code.
• The delivery of health care and the regulation of medical professionals fall
within the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories. No province or territory
currently compels practitioners to provide MAID. However, provinces and
territories could adopt policies requiring “effective referrals,”, as is the case in
Ontario, which in the MAID context means a practitioner who conscientiously
objects to MAID must refer the person, in good faith, to a practitioner who does
not object to MAID.
• Such policies have been challenged under the Charter and have been
upheld as a reasonable limit on religious freedom.
11.1.3 How are practitioners protected from patients who might pressure the
practitioner to classify them as RFND so that they have access to the “waiver of
final consent” option?
• Based on current practice, the typical time-frame applied for RFND is
approximately six months to a year.
• Provinces and regulators may develop guidance materials to support
clinicians in addressing these types of situations.
• The government will work with provinces and territories to support the
development and sharing of clinical guidance and best practices.
11.1.4 How will practitioners be protected in the cases of a “waiver of advance
consent”, when the person has lost decisional capacity and is exhibiting
resistance, but the family is pressuring the practitioner to proceed?
• The Bill specifies that once a person demonstrates by words, sounds or
gestures, refusal or resistance to having the substance administered, MAID can no
longer be provided on the basis of the written arrangement for the waiver of final
consent.
11.1.5 How will expansion of the legislation affect the supply of willing MAID
practitioners?
• During the roundtable consultations earlier this year, practitioners were
largely supportive of the removal of the requirement that an individual’s natural
death be reasonably foreseeable.
• Many of the concerns from practitioners with respect to the removal of this
requirement focused on the potential eligibility of persons whose sole underlying
medical condition is mental illness, given the complexities of assessing eligibility
for these persons. Bill C-7 proposes to exclude eligibility for these populations
based on independent review findings and expert consultations.
• Some provinces and territories have developed care coordination services
and/or teams within their jurisdictions which assist in navigating patient requests
and coordinating MAID assessments and provision.
11.2 Vulnerable Persons
11.2.1 Does the easing or removal of safeguards weaken protections for
vulnerable persons?
Reducing the # of witnesses required and expanding who can be a witness
• Witness only attest to the signing and dating of the request by the person
requesting MAID to prevent another person signing on their behalf.
• They play no role in assessing the eligibility of a person seeking MAID and
are not responsible for establishing whether they have been subject to undue
influence or pressures. Full application of the other safeguards is the
responsibility of MAID assessors and providers.
• During the roundtable consultations, there was overwhelming support for
removing the requirement for two witnesses.
• MAID providers and assessors report that finding two witnesses constitutes
an access barrier for many individuals seeking MAID, especially for individuals
living in nursing homes or other residential settings where family and social
networks may be very limited.
• The amendments propose to expand who can act as a witness to include a
paid personal or health care worker.
• Under the proposed changes, these individuals would still be excluded from
acting as witnesses if they know or believe they are a beneficiary of the person’s
will or if they would receive a material benefit from the person’s death.
Removing the 10-day reflection period
• The decision to remove the 10-day reflection period was based on feedback
from health care practitioners who participated during the roundtable discussions
held in early 2020.
• They noted that, in practice, the 10-day reflection period was not fulfilling
the original intent of protecting the vulnerable. Instead, the waiting period only
served to prolong an individual’s suffering.
• Health care practitioners noted that the majority of patients have already
taken a significant amount of time to reflect on the decision to have an assisted
death before formally requesting it.
11.3 Indigenous Persons
11.3.1 Have you engaged Indigenous peoples in the development of C-7? How will
you ensure that Indigenous people will not be disproportionately negatively
affected by broadening eligibility for MAID?
• The cross-country roundtables that took place at the beginning of the year
included one specific to Indigenous organizations. Several representatives from
Indigenous organizations also participated in the other roundtables.
• While participants had some concerns, they also spoke to the importance
of recognizing the rights of Indigenous peoples to be self-determining in the
context of their healthcare and supporting their access to MAID. Participants
agreed that access to culturally safe healthcare is of utmost importance for
Indigenous communities.
• Our Government will continue to engage Indigenous peoples on these
issues.
12 INDEPENDENT REVIEWS
12.1 Topics Covered
12.1.1 What topics were examined in the independent reviews completed by the
Council of Canadian Academies?
• A key requirement under the original MAID legislation was initiating
independent reviews on three types of MAID requests that were sensitive,
complex and not permitted under the 2016 legislation: requests by mature
minors, advance requests and requests where a mental disorder is the sole
underlying medical condition.
• The Council of Canadian Academies conducted the three reviews and our
Government tabled the results in Parliament on December 12, 2018.
• These expert reports provide a comprehensive summary of the available
evidence, identify gaps in knowledge, and outline the risks and benefits of
allowing MAID in these circumstances. The reports did not include
recommendations, but were intended to inform the ongoing dialogue around the
three issues.
• As they were conducted before the Truchon decision, the reports examined
the topics in the context of existing MAID legislation (i.e., eligibility criteria
included reasonably foreseeable natural death [RFND]) and did not examine the
topics and associated considerations in the absence of RFND.
• These reports will be a useful tool to guide discussions during the
parliamentary review of the MAID legislation.
12.2 Findings
12.2.1 What do the independent reviews conclude for each of the review topics?
Advance Requests
• The report on advance requests found that such arrangements raise
different considerations, issues and vulnerabilities depending on the length of
time between creation of the request and implementation of the request.
• As more time passes between the creation and implementation of an
advance request, it becomes increasingly challenging for healthcare providers, at
the time of MAID provision, to be certain that the request still reflects the wishes
of the individual.
• For example, cases where an individual has already been assessed and
approved for MAID may be relatively straightforward, whereas cases where an
individual has been diagnosed with a disease, but has not yet been assessed and
approved, is much more complex.
• Based on international experience, case-specific safeguards, such as time
limits on the validity of the request, could help address some of these challenges.
Mental Illness as a Sole Underlying Medical Condition
• The report on mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition noted a
number of challenges associated with the delivery of MAID to this population.
• There is a fair amount of disagreement among clinicians on whether or not
they can confidently determine that a mental illness is “irremediable”.
• It is also challenging to disentangle an expressed desire to die (which is a
symptom of several mental illnesses) from a bona fide and reasoned MAID
request. Moreover, mental illnesses can affect cognitive faculties, making it more
difficult for the patient to understand and/or appreciate the nature and
consequences of treatment decisions, or, for that matter, their freely given MAID
request.
• Ultimately, the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) Working Group that
focussed on this issue could not reach consensus on ways to address the
complexities and mitigate the risks associated with mental illness and MAID.
Mature Minors
• The report on mature minors indicated that a key challenge for this
population is the ability of healthcare practitioners to assess decision-making
capacity and the voluntariness of a MAID request.
• Research in neuroscience and psychology does not provide clear direction
on assessing capacity in minors and there is relatively little data available
internationally upon which to draw meaningful conclusions.
13 MAID DELIVERY DURING COVID-19
13.1 Challenges
13.1.1 What challenges have health care professionals encountered with MAID
delivery in the context of COVID-19?
• As with most health care services, the provinces and territories have
experienced some challenges with MAID delivery during the pandemic. These
challenges include:
o Obtaining individuals to act as witnesses to a MAID request and
practitioner access to the individual requesting MAID, either due to institutional
policies limiting visitors or limited supply of personal protective equipment (PPE)
available to facilitate a safe encounter.
o Residents of faith-based institutions with restrictive MAID policies
unable to move to another location to receive MAID due to cancelled or limited
transfers.
o Availability of drug supply used in MAID provision because the same
drugs are also used as sedatives for the ventilation of COVID-19 patients.
13.1.2 How have disruptions to MAID delivery in the context of COVID-19 been
addressed?
• Although challenges exist across the provinces and territories, practitioners
generally continue to do MAID assessments and procedures in the context of the
pandemic by adapting their approaches to respect physical distancing and to
ensure their safety and that of their patients.
• The protocols for health care delivery, including for MAID, are the
responsibility of provinces and territories. Provincial and territorial governments
and regulatory bodies are closely monitoring their jurisdiction’s health care
system capacity and have adapted policies and guidelines to facilitate MAID
delivery, including using virtual means in some instances, such as virtual
witnessing and virtual assessments.
• The federal government continues to monitor the situation and work
closely with provincial and territorial partners to respond to the COVID-19
pandemic.
13.1.3 Has there been an increase in MAID requests since COVID-19? Can COVID-
19 patients receive MAID?
• Some practitioners have reported increased MAID inquiries from
individuals concerned about their options in the context of COVID.
• While a COVID-19 patient could be eligible for MAID if they meet the
necessary criteria, this option is not ideal. The procedural requirements in the
current legislation, such as the 10-day reflection period, and the requirements for
two witnesses and assessors could pose delays to a patient whose death is
imminent.
• In light of these requirements, quality palliative care, accompanied by
palliative sedation, is recommended by providers as the best approach in to
address patient suffering in these circumstances.
• This approach has been recommended by palliative care practitioners in an
April 2020 Canadian Medical Association Journal article. This view has also been
reiterated by Dying With Dignity Canada.
13.1.4 Have there been any shortages of medication/other equipment necessary
in the delivery of MAID in the context of COVID-19?
• There have been reports of increased demand for propofol. This
anaesthetic, which is one of the drugs used in the delivery of MAID, is also used to
sedate COVID-19 patients on ventilators. Health Canada is working with
manufacturers to ensure adequate supply over the longer term.
• Some concerns have been raised early in the pandemic regarding access to
personal protective equipment (PPE) for MAID providers. Since then, several
jurisdictions (e.g., BC, MB and NS) have made explicit efforts to make PPE kits
accessible to MAID providers.
13.2 Policy Response
13.2.1 Does the federal MAID legislation permit the use of electronic tools to
witness or assess a person’s MAID request?
• The federal MAID legislation does not prohibit the use of electronic tools to
facilitate witnessing or assessing of a person’s MAID request.
• Many provincial governments and health professional regulatory bodies
have released pandemic-adapted guidelines/policies which allow for the use of
virtual witnessing and assessments.
13.2.2 Will modifications to provincial/territorial MAID policies in the context of
COVID-19 weaken legislative safeguards?
• Using electronic means to facilitate some aspects of the MAID process
complies with the federal legislation while promoting patient and provider safety
in the context of COVID-19.
• A witness’ sole role is to attest to the signing and dating of the request by
the person requesting MAID; witnesses play no role with respect to assessing the
eligibility of the person or the voluntariness of their request. Permitting virtual
witnessing and witnessing by staff will not weaken this safeguard.
• While some jurisdictions (e.g., Manitoba) were already allowing virtual
assessments prior to the pandemic, some in-person interaction is required during
the assessment and provision of MAID.
14 OTHER
14.1 Institutions Not Permitting MAID Onsite
14.1.1 Why don’t the legislative amendments address barriers to MAID access
created by institutional policies that don’t allow MAID onsite?
• MAID legislation clearly states that no individual can be compelled to
provide MAID, however, it does not have similar provisions for institutions.
• Provinces and territories may establish health-related legislation/policies
on MAID as long as they are consistent with the federal legislation. Some
jurisdictions have enacted legislation that protects the autonomy of institutions
choosing not to provide MAID, while others have required their institutions to
allow assessments and/or administration of MAID.
• The Government believes it is crucial that Canadians who choose MAID and
meet the criteria set out in the legislation have access to this service. However,
provinces and territories decide how best to deliver health care services to meet
the needs of their residents.
• The federal government will continue to work with the provinces and
territories to support MAID access for eligible Canadians.
14.2 Report by the Parliamentary Budget Officer on Cost Estimate for MAID
14.2.1 Does the recent report “Cost Estimate for Bill C-7 (MAID)” by the
Parliamentary Budget Officer accurately reflect the expected increase in cases and
cost savings associated with Bill C-7?
• The cost estimates and increases in the number of cases of MAID with the
passage of Bill C-7 outlined in the Parliamentary Budget Officer report are based
on a number of assumptions, many of which are taken from outside the Canadian
context and should be interpreted with caution.
• For example, the report assumes that patients whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable would make up 18% of the total number of cases of MAID
under Bill C-7. This conclusion is based on Belgian experience with its more
permissive regime than what we are proposing in C-7 (MAID is permitted for
those with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition and mature
minors). In addition, there are significant provincial and territorial variations in
the costs associated with providing end-of-life care, making generalizations across
the country challenging.
• As stated in the report, the numbers should in no way be interpreted as
suggesting assisted dying be used to reduce health-care costs. The sole purpose of
the legislative amendments put forward in Bill C-7 is to alleviate the suffering of
Canadians who are living with a serious medical condition that cannot be relieved
through means that are acceptable to them.
• Costs foregone through MAID deaths represent a tiny portion of health care
spending in Canada. Health care system savings would never be used as the
reason to encourage medical assistance in dying.
14.3 Office of the Correctional Investigator recommendation on MAID in prisons
14.3.1 How will the Government address the recommendation found in a report
released on October 27, 2020, by the Office of the Correctional Investigator (OCI),
that the Government should strike an expert Committee to deliberate on the
ethical and practical matters of providing MAiD in all places of detention, with the
aim of proposing changes to existing policy and legislation?
• The Office of the Correctional Investigator (OCI) is responsible for reviewing
and making recommendations on Correctional Service policies and procedures
associated with areas of individual complaints to ensure that systemic areas of
concern are identified and appropriately addressed.
• The OCI’s 2020 annual report includes a review of three known cases of
MAID in correctional facilities since MAID became legal. Specifically, the report
raises questions regarding the circumstances under which MAID was requested
by inmates.
• The report clearly states that the manner in which MAID was provided, and
how the law itself was applied, were not under scrutiny. Instead, the OCI
expressed strong concerns that, in at least one case, MAID may have been sought
when a request for parole on the grounds of terminal illness was unreasonably
denied.
• The report recommends that a moratorium be placed on the provision of
MAID in correctional settings until a Committee is struck to examine the policies
and procedures for decisions around compassionate parole.
• It is the OCI’s view that a prison is not the appropriate setting for MAID
provision as it can be difficult to clearly determine the intent behind an inmate’s
request for MAID, and that the decision to seek MAID is best made in the
community as a parolee.
• Federal MAID legislation sets out a framework for determining access to
MAID for all competent persons who meet a specific set of eligibility criteria.
Application of the legislation to individuals in correctional facilities clearly
presents unique challenges. Whether and under what circumstances the rights of
prisoners to pursue could be abridged is a matter for Correctional Service Canada
and the Minister of Public Safety to consider.
14.4 Raising the option of MAID by health care professionals
14.4.1 Should practitioners and other health professionals be permitted to raise
MAID if their patient has not first inquired about this care option?
• Under the Criminal Code, counselling someone to commit suicide is a
criminal offence. However, MAID legislation (Bill C-14) includes provisions that
exempt physicians and nurse practitioners from providing MAID, and other
persons in aiding those clinicians to provide MAID.
• The law also clarifies that, “no social worker, psychologist, psychiatrist,
therapist, medical practitioner, nurse practitioner or other health care
professional commits an offence if they provide information to a person on the
lawful provision of medical assistance in dying.”
• Professional medical obligations to ensure decision-making by the patient is
fully informed could be compromised if it is an offence to bring up MAID as a
clinical care option. Fear of criminal prosecution could also deter clinicians from
raising MAID with patients in appropriate circumstances or discourage the
clinician from participating in MAID altogether.
• During our extensive consultations with physicians and other health care
professionals, it was clear that these individuals approach discussions about end
of life care, treatment options and MAID with their patients with the utmost care,
sensitivity and compassion. In addition to their humanity, good judgement and
training, the behaviour and actions of these clinicians is heavily influenced by
their professional ethics and guidance they receive from specialist organizations.
• The Canadian Association for MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) has
played a key role in developing clinical guidance and recommendations on
“Bringing up MAID” that aim to reconcile patient autonomy, informed consent
and professional integrity.
• CAMAP recommends that clinicians should not offer MAID as a treatment
option where a patient would not meet the legal eligibility criteria for MAID.
Where a patient has capacity to make choices about health care, and has a
grievous and irremediable condition, an informed discussion about treatment
options could include MAID.
Tab 4 – Justice Policy Qs and As
Policy Qs & As
Bill C-7, An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying)
Q 1 What does Bill C-7 propose to do?
Eligibility
Q 2 What are the current eligibility criteria for MAID?
Q 3 What type of medical conditions could be found eligible for MAID without the
reasonably foreseeable natural death (RFND) criterion?
Q 4 Why does the Bill propose to exclude persons whose sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness?
Q 5 What is the meaning of “mental illness” for the purposes of eligibility under
Bill C-7?
Safeguards
Q 6 What are the current safeguards in the MAID regime?
Q 7 Bill C-7 proposes to create two sets of safeguards and to keep “reasonably
foreseeable natural death” (RFND) as a condition that determines which set of
safeguards would apply. What would it mean in the context of Bill C-7?
Q 8 Would a person diagnosed with a fatal disease whose death is expected
several or more years in the future meet the requirement that “natural death has
become reasonably foreseeable”?
Q 9 What is the first set of safeguards and who would it apply to?
Q 10 What is the second set of safeguards and who would it apply to?
Q 11 Why does the Bill propose a 90-day assessment period for those whose
death is not reasonably foreseeable?
Q 12 Why does the Bill require that one of the eligibility assessments be
undertaken by a practitioner with expertise in the condition that causes the
person’s suffering?
Q 13 Why does the Bill require that the patient and practitioners agree that
reasonable means to alleviate suffering have been seriously considered?
Q 14 Why does the Bill propose a requirement that the patient be informed of
counselling, mental health, disability and community supports before MAID can
be provided to a person who is not dying?
Advance consent
Q 15 What type of advance consent for MAID does the Bill propose to permit?
Q 16 Why does the Bill require that the person requesting MAID and their
practitioner agree on a date for the provision of MAID?
Q 17 Would a substitute decision-maker be allowed to consent on behalf of the
person requesting MAID?
Q 18 Why does Bill C-7 not propose to allow MAID by “advance requests”
following the diagnosis of a capacity-limiting condition?
Q 19 How do the Criminal Code amendments proposed in this Bill align with the
process on advance requests undertaken by the province of Québec?
Q 20 Why is the Bill proposing to allow advance consent to MAID administration
by a practitioner in cases of failed self-administration?
Monitoring Regime
Q 21 What improvements does Bill C-7 propose to federal data collection on
MAID?
Charter Compliance
Q 22 Does this Bill comply with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms?
Q 23 Could the Bill potentially engage the Charter rights and freedoms of persons
whose only medical condition is a mental illness, given their exclusion from the
MAID regime?
Conscience Rights
Q 24 How does the Bill address conscience rights of health care providers?
Provincial jurisdiction
Q 25 How does the Criminal Code MAID regime interact with provincial legislation
and jurisdiction?
Q 26 Is the pandemic having an impact on the provision of MAID?
International Regimes
Q 27 How would Canada compare to other countries with the MAID regime
proposed in this Bill?
Preamble
Q 28 What is meant by the phrase “human rights-based approach to disability
inclusion” in the preamble?
Q 29 Why does the preamble mention suicide as an important public health issue,
since MAID is different from suicide?
Coming into Force
Q 30 When will the changes proposed in this Bill come into force?
Extension in Truchon
Q 31 What is the significance of the December 18, 2020 deadline?
Q 32 What is the impact of the pandemic on the December 18, 2020 deadline?
Q 33 Will the Attorney General of Canada seek a further extension of the
suspended declaration of invalidity if it appears unlikely that Bill C-7 will receive
Royal Assent before December 18, 2020
Parliamentary Review
Q 34 What will be the focus of the five-year parliamentary review of the MAID
law?
Tab 4 – Justice Policy Qs and As.
Q 1 What does Bill C-7 propose to do?
• Bill C-7 is identical to former Bill C-7. It responds to the September 2019
Superior Court of Québec Truchon ruling, which struck down the eligibility
criterion of “reasonably foreseeable natural death” from the Criminal Code MAID
regime. It proposes to amend the Criminal Code to ensure consistency of the
MAID law across the country, and to adjust the safeguards for a MAID regime that
is no longer limited to end of life circumstances.
• More specifically, Bill C-7 proposes to amend the Criminal Code by:
1) repealing the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” (RFND)
eligibility requirement, and excluding persons whose sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness;
2) creating two sets of safeguards to be followed before MAID is provided,
depending on whether a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable or not;
3) allowing the administration of MAID on the basis of advance consent for
persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable and who have been approved for
MAID, if they lose capacity to consent before their preferred date for MAID and
have a written arrangement with a practitioner.
• Bill C-7 also proposes changes to the federal MAID monitoring regime to
enable collection of information in a broader range of circumstances to obtain a
more complete picture of MAID in Canada.
Eligibility
Q 2 What are the current eligibility criteria for MAID?
• Under the current Criminal Code eligibility criteria, persons who seek to
obtain MAID must satisfy all of the following eligibility criteria (subsections
241.2(1) and (2) of the Criminal Code):
o be 18 years of age or older;
o be capable of making decisions with respect to their health;
o be eligible for government-funded health services;
o make a voluntary request that does not result from external
pressure;
o give informed consent after having been informed of all available
means to relieve their suffering, including palliative care; and,
o have a “grievous and irremediable medical condition”, defined as:
1) having a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability;
2) being in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability;
3) experiencing enduring and intolerable physical or psychological
suffering that cannot be alleviated under conditions that the person considers
acceptable; and,
4) their natural death has become reasonably foreseeable, taking
into account all of their medical circumstances.
Q 3 What type of medical conditions could be found eligible for MAID without the
reasonably foreseeable natural death (RFND) criterion?
• Without the RFND criterion, individuals with a wide range of medical
conditions could be found eligible for MAID under the remaining elements of the
requirement to have a “grievous and irremediable medical condition”:
1) having a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability;
2) being in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and,
3) experiencing enduring and intolerable physical or psychological suffering
that cannot be alleviated under conditions the person considers acceptable.
• However, persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental
illness would not be eligible for MAID (see question 4).
• The broadened MAID eligibility criteria, without RFND, could include
conditions producing chronic pain or other symptoms, degenerative conditions,
static disabilities and intellectual disabilities. Some examples could include spinal
muscular atrophy, spinal cord injuries, and multiple sclerosis, but eligibility would
always depend on the entirety of a person’s medical circumstances, and the
presence of all of the eligibility requirements, including informed consent and
decision-making capacity.
Q 4 Why does the Bill propose to exclude persons whose sole underlying medical
condition is a mental illness?
• Although the removal of RFND would have the effect of rendering some
persons whose sole medical condition is a mental illness eligible for MAID, Bill C-7
proposes to specifically make them ineligible for MAID.
• This exclusion would reflect the increased complexities and risks around
the provision of MAID to persons suffering from a mental illness only, which
include the fact that the trajectory of mental illnesses is generally harder to
predict than those of physical diseases, and that a desire to die is a symptom of
some mental illnesses.
• These challenges were noted by the Council of Canadian Academies, which
produced a report on this issue in 2018, and by the public and stakeholder
consultation on MAID, which took place in early 2020.
• The Government understands that the suffering associated with mental
illness can be just as intolerable as the suffering associated with other types of
medical conditions, but believes that the unique considerations for MAID in this
kind of situation require further discussion and public debate. The parliamentary
review that is required by former Bill C-14 is the appropriate forum for further
deliberation on this issue.
• Persons with both a mental illness and a physical condition would be
eligible for MAID, as long as they meet all the other eligibility criteria, including
having decision-making capacity.
Q 5 What is the meaning of “mental illness” for the purposes of eligibility under
Bill C-7?
• There is no clear definition of mental illness in the medical context.
However, for the purposes of MAID, this term has come to be understood as
generally referring to those conditions which are primarily treated by psychiatrists
or psychologists, and which raise specific types of concerns when it comes to
eligibility for MAID (such as illness trajectories being difficult to predict, and the
wish to die being a symptom of some mental illnesses).
• In the context of the federal MAID legislation, the term “mental illness”
would not include neurocognitive or neurodevelopmental disorders, or other
conditions that may affect cognitive abilities, such as dementias, autism spectrum
disorders or intellectual disabilities, which may be treated by specialties other
than psychiatry (such as neurology for neurodegenerative or neurodevelopmental
conditions) or specialties outside of medicine (such as education specialists for
intellectual disabilities).
Safeguards
Q 6 What are the current safeguards in the MAID regime?
• Under the current Criminal Code provisions, before a physician or nurse
practitioner can provide MAID to a person, the following safeguards must be met
(subsection 241.2(3) of the Criminal Code):
o Witness requirement: After being informed that they have a grievous
and irremediable medical condition, the patient must sign and date a written
request that must also be witnessed and signed by two independent witnesses;
o Two assessments: Two independent medical and/or nurse
practitioners must confirm all eligibility criteria;
o Possibility to withdraw consent: The person must be informed that
they can withdraw their request at any time, by any means;
o Reflection period: A mandatory 10-day reflection period must elapse
between the signature of the request and the provision of MAID, unless death or
loss of capacity is imminent; and,
o Final consent: Immediately before MAID is provided, the person must
be given the opportunity to withdraw their consent, and must confirm consent to
receive MAID.
Q 7 Bill C-7 proposes to create two sets of safeguards and to keep “reasonably
foreseeable natural death” (RFND) as a condition that determines which set of
safeguards would apply. What would it mean in the context of Bill C-7?
• The “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” (RFND) criterion would no
longer apply as an eligibility criterion that could have the effect of excluding
persons from the MAID regime. However, it would be used to determine which
set of safeguards apply to a particular MAID request.
• RFND requires a temporal, but flexible, connection between the person’s
overall medical circumstances and their anticipated death. Individuals may
decline toward death along trajectories of greater or lesser predictability. As such,
RFND is not defined by a specific prognosis, but it does require a temporal link to
death in the sense that the person is approaching the end of their life in the near
term.
• As was the case since MAID was enacted in 2016, RFND would be assessed
on a case-by-case basis, in relation to the specific person who is seeking MAID,
and must consider the whole of their individual and unique medical
circumstances.
Q 8 Would a person diagnosed with a fatal disease whose death is expected
several or more years in the future meet the requirement that “natural death has
become reasonably foreseeable”?
• The reasonable foreseeability of natural death, or “RFND”, criterion was
enacted in 2016 to create an end of life MAID regime. This means that a temporal
connection to death was intended and required, and indeed the Legislative
Background document to former Bill C-14 states that RFND requires a temporal,
but flexible, connection to death. It is quite clear that RFND does not require a
specific prognosis, nor is it only satisfied if death is imminent. A reasonably
foreseeable natural death means that death is not too remote, and can be
anticipated in the near term for that person, in light of the totality of their
individual medical circumstances.
• In 2016, Parliament considered legislating a fixed timeline of six or 12
months, but decided against it to preserve flexibility in the inherently difficult and
imprecise task of establishing a prognosis, and in light of the variations in
trajectories toward death of different types of diseases. Nonetheless, it is quite
clear that a timeline of six to 12 months to anticipated death was understood, and
still is, as meeting the RFND standard. It is also quite likely that the RFND standard
can be met on longer timelines, such as 18 and possibly 24 months, or even
longer in exceptional cases, if a practitioner is comfortable foreseeing that specific
person’s death on such timelines. But beyond these timelines, the death of a
specific individual is likely too remote to be foreseeable.
Q 9 What is the first set of safeguards and who would it apply to?
• The first set of safeguards would continue to be tailored to persons whose
natural death is reasonably foreseeable (RFND), where risks are reduced given the
overall proximity of death and the fact that the suffering is most likely linked to
the dying process itself. It would include all current safeguards (written request,
two eligibility assessments by independent practitioners, etc.), with two
modifications.
• First, the requirement that the signed and dated MAID request be
witnessed by two independent witnesses would be changed so that only one is
needed, and individuals who provide either health or personal care to the person
requesting MAID, and who are paid to provide such care, would be allowed to act
as independent witnesses.
• The second modification would repeal the 10-day mandatory reflection
period.
• The proposed changes aim to respond to concerns raised by health
professionals and other stakeholders to the effect that: finding two independent
witnesses is a challenge for many patients, thus posing an access barrier; and the
10-day reflection period is unnecessary, as persons who request MAID often do so
after careful consideration, and prolongs patient suffering unduly.
Q 10 What is the second set of safeguards and who would it apply to?
• The second set of safeguards would be tailored to persons whose deaths
are not reasonably foreseeable, and would therefore reflect the more serious
consequences of error in these cases and aim to address the diverse sources of
suffering and vulnerability that could potentially lead a person who is not nearing
death to ask for MAID.
• In addition to existing safeguards and the proposed changes to the
independent witness requirement (as for the first set of safeguards), the following
new and clarified safeguards would apply:
1) New: minimum 90-day assessment period, which could be shortened
if both practitioners agree that loss of capacity is imminent and are able to
complete the assessments in a shorter period of time;
2) New: one of the two mandatory eligibility assessments must be
conducted by a practitioner with expertise in the condition that is causing the
person’s suffering;
• Two clarifications of informed consent: (1) the person requesting MAID
must be informed of and offered counselling, mental health supports, disability
supports and palliative care as available and applicable; and (2) the practitioners
must agree that they and the patient have discussed and appropriately
considered reasonable means of alleviating their suffering.
Q 11 Why does the Bill propose a 90-day assessment period for those whose
death is not reasonably foreseeable?
• Assessments of MAID requests by those whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable can be more challenging and raise additional concerns, such as
whether the suffering is caused by factors other than the medical condition and
whether there could be ways of addressing the person’s suffering other than
through MAID.
• An “assessment period” is different than a “reflection period”. A minimum
assessment period dictates how long the practitioners must take to review a
patient’s MAID request and assess whether all eligibility criteria have been met. A
reflection period, on the other hand, specifies a minimum amount of time that
must pass after a request has been approved, before MAID can be provided, and
aims to give the person time to reflect on their decision before they proceed.
• The proposed requirement for a minimum 90-day assessment period would
seek to ensure that enough time and expertise are devoted to exploring all of the
relevant aspects of the person’s situation, including whether there are treatments
or services that could help reduce the person’s suffering. Bill C-7 would not
require persons seeking access to MAID to undertake treatments that would be
unacceptable to them during this assessment period.
Q 12 Why does the Bill require that one of the eligibility assessments be
undertaken by a practitioner with expertise in the condition that causes the
person’s suffering?
• Many experts believe that allowing MAID to be provided to people who are
not approaching death in the near term raises various types of risk, and involves
more serious consequences if errors are made, as compared to people who are
dying.
• The new and clarified safeguards for people whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable are specifically designed to support fully informed decision-making
while respecting individual autonomy.
• Involving a practitioner with expertise in the condition that is causing the
person’s suffering would help to ensure that all treatment options have been
identified and considered, while at the same time avoiding the need for specialist
involvement, which could pose a barrier in remote or rural areas where specialists
may be in short supply.
• The amendments would not require that the practitioner with expertise be
certified as an “expert” or a “specialist” by a specific board; they would only
require them to have experience with the condition, which is expected to
facilitate access from a patient’s perspective.
Q 13 Why does the Bill require that the patient and practitioners agree that
reasonable means to alleviate suffering have been seriously considered?
• This safeguard would require the practitioner to explore reasonable
treatment options and other means of relieving suffering with the patient, and be
satisfied that the patient has fully considered and weighed the risks and benefits
of available treatment options.
• This safeguard would not require that the person undertake treatments
that may be unacceptable to them, for any reason. A person could obtain MAID
after declining to pursue means to relieve their suffering if they have discussed
them with the practitioner and have seriously considered them.
• This proposed safeguard would be different than the requirement in the
Netherlands and Belgium that the patient and practitioner agree that there is “no
hope for improvement” or that the “suffering cannot be alleviated.” Practitioners
in these countries cannot provide MAID if they believe that there are reasonable
means of alleviating suffering that the patient has not tried. These are sometimes
called a “MAID as a last resort” requirement.
Q 14 Why does the Bill propose a requirement that the patient be informed of
counselling, mental health, disability and community supports before MAID can
be provided to a person who is not dying?
• This proposed safeguard would expressly require that the person be
informed of available counselling services, mental health and disability support
services, community services and palliative care, as appropriate to the individual’s
situation, and be offered consultation with relevant professionals.
• We are confident that most practitioners, as part of good medical practice,
fully explore appropriate supports and available treatments in discussions with
their patients.
• This safeguard would reinforce the importance of these discussions and
support the requirement that reasonable means to alleviate suffering have been
seriously considered by ensuring that the person requesting MAID is fully aware
of the options and treatments available to them.
Advance consent
Q 15 What type of advance consent for MAID does the Bill propose to permit?
• The Criminal Code would be amended to permit the provision of MAID
without the requirement of “final consent” (waiver) where:
o A person’s death is reasonably foreseeable;
o They were found eligible for MAID and all safeguards, other than
final consent, were met;
o They were at risk of losing decision-making capacity before their
preferred date to receive MAID; and
o They had a written arrangement with their practitioner in which they
provided their consent in advance, and according to which, the practitioner would
provide MAID on their preferred date (or earlier if the agreement so provided) if
they lost the capacity to provide the final consent.
• However, practitioners would not be allowed to provide MAID in cases
where the person demonstrates, by words, sounds or gestures, refusal or
resistance to the provision of MAID. The Bill specifically provides that reflexes or
involuntary responses, such as flinching when being touched, would not be
considered an indication of refusal or resistance.
Q 16 Why does the Bill require that the person requesting MAID and their
practitioner agree on a date for the provision of MAID?
• The requirement for final (contemporaneous) consent is a very important
safeguard to apply in all cases except where it would not be fair to the patient.
Permitting waiver of final consent aims to address the unfairness that arises
where a person is at risk of losing capacity to consent between the day when they
are approved for MAID and the day when they would like to receive it. It would
protect such a person’s ability to obtain MAID on their preferred date, if they risk
losing capacity earlier.
• Setting a date for the provision of MAID ensures that waiver of the
important safeguard of contemporaneous consent is limited to persons who are
eligible, ready to receive the procedure, but are awaiting their chosen date. It also
ensures that they receive MAID according to their wishes, including as to timing.
Without this requirement, it would fall to other people to determine when and
under what conditions MAID should be provided, which may not be consistent
with the person’s wishes.
• Providing MAID to a person who is not capable of giving consent, or not
capable of withdrawing consent that they previously gave, can create additional
burdens for MAID providers, families and others.
• Persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable and who have been
approved for MAID are unbearably suffering and will therefore have a good sense
of when they want to receive MAID. Knowing the timing would in turn allow the
practitioner to determine whether there is a risk of capacity loss before then and,
therefore, a need for an advance consent arrangement.
Q 17 Would a substitute decision-maker be allowed to consent on behalf of the
person requesting MAID?
• MAID is about respecting individual autonomy. No one can consent to
MAID on behalf of another person (whether consent is given in advance or at the
time of the MAID procedure), only the person seeking access to MAID can
consent it.
• Bill C-7’s requirements for MAID to be provided on the basis of advance
consent are clear: in the written arrangement with the practitioner, the person
who has requested MAID on their own behalf must give consent to receive MAID
on a specific date, after loss of capacity.
• This means that it would continue to be criminally prohibited for a
practitioner to administer MAID to any person on the basis of a consent given by
any other person.
Q 18 Why does Bill C-7 not propose to allow MAID by “advance requests”
following the diagnosis of a capacity-limiting condition?
• “Advance requests” refer to a situation where a person with decision-
making capacity writes a document setting out that they would want to receive
MAID in the future, if they lose decision-making capacity and if specific
circumstances arise that they expect would cause them unbearable suffering. This
is a request made “in advance” of when they want to receive MAID. For example,
after receiving a diagnosis for a capacity-limiting medical condition like
Alzheimer’s disease, a person might want to prepare an advance request in
anticipation of future suffering.
• As noted in the Council of Canadian Academies expert panel report on
advance requests, there are many more complexities with advance requests
created when the person is diagnosed with a serious condition, but has not yet
been found eligible for MAID (i.e., a request prepared long in advance of when
MAID would actually be desired and provided).
• The overwhelming majority of experts, practitioners and stakeholders
consulted on this specific issue earlier this year recommended that this type of
broad advance requests be studied further as part of the scheduled parliamentary
review of the MAID regime.
Q 19 How do the Criminal Code amendments proposed in this Bill align with the
process on advance requests undertaken by the province of Québec?
• Quebec’s Expert Group on Incapacity and Medical Aid in Dying (final report
released in November 2019) recommended permitting MAID on the basis of
consent given in advance when someone is at the end of life, has been approved
for MAID, and loses decision-making capacity before MAID is provided. This is
consistent with the amendments proposed in Bill C-7.
• It also recommended permitting MAID by advance requests, something
that is not included in Bill C-7.
• The Government of Quebec indicated its intention to launch public
consultations in this regard following the release of the Expert Group’s report in
November 2019.
Q 20 Why is the Bill proposing to allow advance consent to MAID administration
by a practitioner in cases of failed self-administration?
• Under the existing legislation, a practitioner must seek the patient’s express
consent immediately prior to administering MAID.
• During self-administration, in the unlikely event that the drugs fail to work
properly and the patient does not die but is unconscious, a practitioner cannot
obtain consent to complete the process. This could result in a prolonged death for
the patient or criminal liability for the practitioner. The Canadian Association of
MAID Assessors and Providers (CAMAP) flagged the need for clarification of this
issue.
• The patient and the practitioner must agree in advance that the
practitioner will be present at the time of self-administration, and will complete
the process if the person experiences complications.
• In these particular cases, there can be a very high degree of confidence that
the patient was clear in their intent to cause their own death. Completing the
process of the administration of MAID is a compassionate action that can be
taken to respect the patient’s choice, as to ease any additional distress of those
who may be present with the patient.
Monitoring Regime
Q 21 What improvements does Bill C-7 propose to federal data collection on
MAID?
• The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID came into force in November
2018, and set out the framework for mandatory reporting by all physicians, nurse
practitioners and pharmacists who participate in MAID. The new federal
monitoring regime provides the only consistent and comparable national data set
on MAID and will serve to demonstrate accountability and transparency around
the law and its implementation in Canada.
• The data collected will provide Canadians with information about who is
requesting MAID, their underlying medical conditions, the availability of palliative
care and disability support services, and the nature of the patient’s suffering. The
first report under the permanent monitoring regime was published by Health
Canada in July 2020.
• Bill C-7 proposes amendments to enable gathering data from medical and
nurse practitioners who assess eligibility before receiving a written request, from
persons who are responsible for preliminary assessments of eligibility, and from
pharmacy technicians who dispense MAID substances to aid medical or nurse
practitioners in the provision of MAID. This information cannot be collected under
the existing law, and would provide a more complete picture of MAID in Canada,
including on reasons why persons are found ineligible.
Charter Compliance
Q 22 Does this Bill comply with the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms?
• The Government is confident that it is consistent with the Charter. The
Department of Justice is also preparing a Charter statement to accompany this
Bill, as is now required by the Department of Justice Act for all Government
legislation. This Charter statement will be tabled shortly, and will outline all
potential impacts of the Bill on Canadians’ Charter rights.
Q 23 Could the Bill potentially engage the Charter rights and freedoms of persons
whose only medical condition is a mental illness, given their exclusion from the
MAID regime?
• Bill C-7 would potentially engage the rights to liberty and security (section
7) and to equality (section 15) of individuals whose only underlying medical
condition is a mental illness. The following considerations support the consistency
of this proposal with the Charter.
• The proposed exclusion is crafted narrowly and would apply only to
conditions that are primarily within the domain of psychiatry. Individuals would
not be excluded from accessing MAID if, in addition to a mental illness, they also
have a physical medical condition that is serious and incurable and they otherwise
meet all eligibility criteria.
• The exclusion is based on the inherent risks and complexity that the
availability of MAID would present for these cases, including evidence suggesting
that the trajectory of a mental illness is generally less predictable than that of a
physical illness, and that screening for decision-making capacity can be
particularly difficult.
• Recent experience in the few countries that permit MAID for people whose
sole medical condition is a mental illness (in Belgium, the Netherlands and
Luxembourg - the “Benelux” countries) has also raised concerns, both in terms of
the increasing numbers of these cases and the wide range of mental illnesses in
respect of which MAID has been provided.
Conscience Rights
Q 24 How does the Bill address conscience rights of health care providers?
• The Government is committed to respecting the personal convictions of
health care providers. Nothing in the existing federal law or Bill C-7 would compel
a health care provider to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in
dying. This is already stated expressly under subsection 241.2(9) of the Criminal
Code.
• The delivery of health care and the regulation of medical professionals fall
within the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories. No province or territory
currently compels practitioners to provide MAID. However, provinces and
territories could adopt policies requiring “effective referrals,” which in the MAID
context means referring the person, in good faith, to a practitioner who does not
object to MAID.
• A provincial or territorial law or regulation that affects the conscience rights
of providers can be challenged under the Charter, as was the effective referral
policy of the College of Physicians and Surgeons of Ontario in 2018-2019, which
applies to MAID. The Ontario Court of Appeal agreed that Ontario’s effective
referral policy infringes on practitioners’ Charter-protected freedom of religion,
but upheld the policy as a reasonable limit of religious freedom.
Provincial jurisdiction
Q 25 How does the Criminal Code MAID regime interact with provincial legislation
and jurisdiction?
• Parliament has exclusive jurisdiction over the criminal law, including
exemptions to criminal offences. As MAID involves actions that are otherwise
criminally prohibited (namely murder and aiding a person to die by suicide), the
federal MAID regime in the Criminal Code sets out who is eligible to receive
medical assistance in dying, and what safeguards must be followed for medical
and nurse practitioners to be exempted from criminal responsibility.
• Provinces and territories have jurisdiction over the delivery of health care
and the regulation of medical professionals. They can legislate with respect to
aspects under their jurisdiction, such as requiring specific forms to be used,
specifying how the cause of death should be recorded, setting up mechanisms to
review cases to ensure all legal rules were followed, and adding safeguards to be
followed. For example, a province could require a psychosocial assessments for
requests by persons whose death is not reasonably foreseeable.
• However, provinces and territories, and the professional regulatory bodies
created by their legislatures, cannot permit what is prohibited under the criminal
law.
• At the moment, only Quebec has comprehensive legislation in place that
addresses how MAID must be provided and that establishes a dedicated oversight
body.
Q 26 Is the pandemic having an impact on the provision of MAID?
• The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in increased pressures and demands
on healthcare systems across Canada. As a result, some health authorities
temporarily suspended MAID programs during the pandemic (e.g., health
networks in Hamilton and Ottawa). Others are encouraging the assessment and
witnessing of MAID requests by virtual means, where appropriate, to comply with
physical distancing requirements (e.g., British Columbia and Nova Scotia).
International Regimes
Q 27 How would Canada compare to other countries with the MAID regime
proposed in this Bill?
• Most jurisdictions that have legislated to permit MAID have adopted end of
life regimes, limiting eligibility to a six- or 12-month prognosis or a terminal
illness. This is the case for all nine US States that have a MAID law, for Colombia,
for New Zealand and the Australian states of Victoria and Western Australia
(which have enacted laws very recently).
• With the removal of the end of life limit, Canada’s MAID regime would
become comparable to that of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg (the
“Benelux” countries), which permit MAID on the basis of suffering that cannot be
relieved, regardless of proximity to death.
• There would also be some differences. The Canadian MAID regime would
be narrower than the Benelux countries by requiring an advanced state of
irreversible decline in capability, which is not required in the Benelux laws. It
would also be broader than the Benelux laws by requiring the person to seriously
consider other means of relieving their suffering; the Benelux countries require
the patient to try reasonable treatment options and to actually be left with no
hope of improvement.
• Bill C-7 would make Canada the fifth country to allow MAID by advance
consent. Belgium and Luxembourg require the person to be irreversibly
unconscious, while the Netherlands requires the person to be conscious.
Colombia allows the terminally ill to receive MAID after loss of capacity, but there
is very little available information on MAID in this country.
Preamble
Q 28 What is meant by the phrase “human rights-based approach to disability
inclusion” in the preamble?
• The preamble’s reference to taking a “human rights-based approach to
disability inclusion” is based on the United Nations Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities and the United Nations Disability Inclusion Strategy. The
human-rights based approach to disability inclusion affirms that persons with
disabilities have the right to participate fully and effectively in decisions that
affect their lives, which is critical to the removal of systemic barriers to their full
inclusion and participation in society.
• Unlike approaches that view disability as a form of individual pathology, a
human rights approach views disability as “normal” variations in the human
condition. On this approach, disabling experiences are the result of social and
environmental conditions that fail to include these inherent variations. A human
rights-based approach insists that people with disabilities, like all others, are
entitled to enjoy all human rights. As a result, governments must take measures
to create inclusive societies in which people with disabilities are welcomed,
accommodated, and enabled to live as full citizens. The Bill’s preamble affirms
that this Government views disability under the lens of the human rights-based
approach. This affirmation is important in the context of legislation that affects
persons living with disabilities.
Q 29 Why does the preamble mention suicide as an important public health issue,
since MAID is different from suicide?
• The word suicide is defined as meaning the act of voluntarily and
intentionally ending one’s own life. Under social, public and mental health
perspectives, there are important differences of opinion about the relationship
between suicide and medical assistance in dying. Some experts are of the view
that suicide and medical assistance in dying can be effectively distinguished:
suicide is seen as exclusively concerned with pathological behaviour caused by
mental illness, while medical assistance in dying is seen as a rational wish to die in
light of the person’s intolerable medical suffering. Other experts believe that
there is no valid way to distinguish between the two, particularly where MAID is
sought to relieve suffering that is not connected to the dying process.
• As a matter of criminal law, medical assistance in dying and suicide are
directly related. The criminal offence of aiding a person to die by suicide (section
241(1)(b)) prohibits one person providing another person with the means to end
their own life. This is what medical and nurse practitioners do when they
prescribe a substance for self-administration. Where a person wants a
practitioner to administer the substance to cause their death, they are voluntarily
asking the practitioner to cause their death. This is also prohibited despite the
person’s request and consent. The federal medical assistance in dying regime
operates by exempting medical and nurse practitioners from criminal liability for
these offences that prevent Canadians in all other circumstances from helping
another person to end their life.
Coming into Force
Q 30 When will the changes proposed in this Bill come into force?
• The changes to the Criminal Code set out in this Bill would come into force
on Royal Assent. People who have signed their written request for MAID when
the new law comes into force can obtain MAID without having to satisfy any
additional safeguards. They will not need to go through the ten-day reflection
period, and they will be able to prepare an advance consent arrangement if they
are at risk of losing their capacity to give consent before their preferred date to
receive MAID.
Extension in Truchon
Q 31 What is the significance of the December 18, 2020 deadline?
• In its Truchon ruling, the Superior Court of Québec suspended the effect of
the declaration of invalidity of the RFND criterion contained in the federal MAID
law until March 11, 2020.
• On March 2, 2020, the Attorney of Canada’s request for a 4-month
extension of the ruling was granted by the same court. This extension was
requested to give Parliament more time to assess and enact
the legislative response to the Truchon ruling at the federal level.
• In light of the disruptions of parliamentary activities due to the COVID-19
pandemic, the Superior Court of Québec granted a further extension, until
December 18, 2020.
• Should Bill C-7 not be enacted by December 18, 2020, the “reasonable
foreseeability of natural death” criterion from the current federal law would no
longer be applicable in the province of Quebec. It would however remain in effect
in other provinces and territories.
• Until Bill C-7 is enacted, as long as the Truchon ruling is suspended, patients
in Québec whose natural deaths are not reasonably foreseeable can apply to the
Superior Court of Québec for an exemption.
Q 32 What is the impact of the pandemic on the December 18, 2020 deadline?
• The ongoing pandemic and related physical distancing requirements have
considerably impacted Parliamentary activities. In response to the pandemic, on
March 13th, the House of Commons adjourned most of its routine proceedings so
that it could focus on the COVID-19 pandemic.
• As a result, bills that were before Parliament during the spring of the
previous parliamentary session, including former Bill C-7, did not advance through
the legislative process.
• On August 18, 2020, Parliament was prorogued, and bills that had not yet
received Royal Assent—including former Bill C-7—expired on the Order Paper. A
new parliamentary session began on September 23, 2020, and Bill C-7, which is
identical to former Bill C-7, was reintroduced in this new parliamentary session.
• In addition to any Bills from the previous session that have been
reintroduced, Parliament will also have to consider important legislative measures
in response to the COVID-19 pandemic. This will likely place additional pressures
on limited parliamentary time. Our Government remains committed to meeting
the December 18, 2020 deadline.
Q 33 Will the Attorney General of Canada seek a further extension of the
suspended declaration of invalidity if it appears unlikely that Bill C-7 will receive
Royal Assent before December 18, 2020?
• Our Government is committed to doing our best to meet the December 18,
2020 deadline. Any decision on whether to seek a further extension from the
Superior Court of Quebec will be made closer to December 18, and be informed
by Bill C-7’s actual progress through Parliament.
Parliamentary Review
Q 34 What will be the focus of the five-year parliamentary review of the MAID
law?
• Section 10 of former Bill C-14, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and to
make related amendments to other Acts (medical assistance in dying), requires
that a parliamentary review of the federal MAID law and the state of palliative
care in Canada be referred to one or more Committees of Parliament at the start
of the 5th year after the law comes into effect. The mandate and timeframes for
the review will be determined in Parliament.
• All aspects of the current MAID law and how it is being implemented, and
the state of palliative care in Canada, will be subject to the review. The following
additional issues will also likely be considered: advance requests for MAID, mental
illness as the sole underlying medical condition and mature minors.
• The parliamentary review was expected to start in June 2020 (as noted in
the Preamble and which was not altered with the re-introduction of the Bill). The
COVID-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented challenges, including the
disruption of the current Parliamentary session. These disruptions have
unfortunately delayed the parliamentary review process.
Tab 5 - Overview of Second Reading Debate
Issue Conservative Party of Canada Bloc Québécois New Democratic Party Liberal Party of
Canada
Support for Bill Does not support the Bill (with Generally supports Bill, Generally supports Bill, Bill responds to
and its scope some exceptions) however wants it however wants it Truchon by removing
expanded to include expanded to include RFND, and addresses
Government should have broader advance broader advance areas where there is
appealed the Truchon decision requests. requests. expert/public support
to allow for sufficient for improvement (e.g.,
discussion; currently being Encourages timely Encourages timely removing/easing some
rushed to meet Quebec court passage of Bill to avoid passage of Bill to avoid safeguards; allowing
deadline. (Cooper, Moore, delays in helping delays in helping waiver of final consent
Findlay, Lewis) Canadians who are Canadians who are for those
suffering intolerably and suffering intolerably and assessed/approved).
Bill goes considerably beyond do not meet the RFND do not meet the RFND
the scope of Truchon by criterion. criterion.
removing/easing certain
safeguards and removing Personal autonomy and Bill C-7 maintains the Bill takes a prudent,
requirement for final consent. dying with dignity very high standards set in the middle of the road
(Cooper, Moore) important. Individuals original legislation; the approach.
should be able to bill would not open the
Supreme Court of Canada provide a free and door for MAID as wide as
opinion should have been informed consent. some have suggested
sought on the expansion of Individual always has (Garrison)
the MAID regime. (Findlay) the right to refuse
treatment, why should it NDP will support the bill
Exceptions be different for and help expedite its
individuals suffering passage in order to bring
MP Liepert, CPC, Alberta intolerably. an end to unnecessary
spoke out with strong support suffering and to meet the
for the Bill, noting strong deadline imposed by the
constituent support in his Quebec court in the
riding. Truchon decision, but
this support is predicated
MP Vecchio indicated she was on going forward with a
“on the fence”; spoke to both larger review without
sides of the issues by relating delay (Garrison)
stories of
organizations/individuals in
her riding; important to find
the right balance through
appropriate safeguards.
Removal of Does not support removal Support RFND removal Support RFND removal Supports removal; did
Reasonably not appeal Truchon
Foreseeable Weakens protection for decision
Natural Death persons with disabilities.
(RFND) as
eligibility
criterion
Parliamentary Bill C-7 pre-empts a legislative Supports parliamentary Unprecedented
Review review that would provide a review in parallel with challenges with the
more thorough examination of the debate on Bill C-7; pandemic caused
all the issues.(Cooper, Moore) MP Garrison placed an delays in the
order on the motion parliamentary review
The government ignored its paper to establish a process.
own timeline for a review of special committee to
the original legislation. undertake a The Government is
comprehensive review of committed to
Government squandered time the MAID legislation. undertaking the
that could have been used for review.
the review by shutting down Requested amendments
Parliament. (Lewis) could include a Focusing our
government discussions on C7 now
commitment to a will help Parliament to
timeline for the meet the December 18
parliamentary review. deadline, while
allowing a discussion
on broader and more
complex issues during
the parliamentary
review, such as
requests by those with
a mental illness,
advance requests,
requests by mature
minors.
The mandate and
timeframes of the
review are determined
by Parliament.
A Liberal MP
mentioned that, as
part of the review, it
would be important to
hear about the
experiences of family
members/friends of
individuals who
received MAID.
Vulnerable Bill negatively impacts persons Concerns about ensuring The Bill achieves a
populations living with disabilities. that people are not balance of protecting
(including Institutionalizes the idea that choosing MAID because vulnerable persons
persons with a disability can justify they feel neglected or in while also supporting
disabilities) terminating a life. (Moore, a substandard seniors individual autonomy
Findlay, Lewis) home. and freedom of choice.
Persons with disabilities may The Bill respects the
feel increased pressure by inherent values of all
society to choose MAID. lives, including those
with disabilities. There
Contravenes the UN are no cases where a
Convention of the Rights of practitioner has been
Persons with Disabilities - charged with
MAID available on the basis of pressuring an
disability violates equality individual to choose
rights (Cooper) MAID.
Exceptions
MP Kelly does not see the Bill
as a threat to disabled
Canadians, or as something
that will be routinely offered
as an alternative to palliative
care
Palliative care, Absence of sufficient palliative Absence of sufficient Require more The available evidence,
mental health care, mental health and palliative care denies investments in disability such as the First
and disability disability support services clear alternatives for support services to Annual Report on
support services denies clear options and individuals; need to address potential MAID, indicates that
alternatives for individuals and ensure there increased pressure on the overwhelming
can influence decision to appropriate palliative vulnerable persons to majority of persons
pursue MAID (Cooper, Findlay) care resources are request MAID when receiving MAID
available. MAID is expanded with (82.1%) in 2019, were
Limited access to support the removal of RFND. reported to have been
services especially critical in View palliative care and offered and to have
rural/remote and Indigenous MAID as part of a received palliative care
communities (Cooper, Findlay) continuum; they are not services.
mutually exclusive;
With enhanced palliative care important for individuals Additionally, of those
services, people would not be to be able to access MAID recipients who
choosing MAID. palliative care, but if did not access
that care cannot palliative care services
Government needs to adequately address their prior to receiving
implement national strategies suffering, they should MAID, the majority
and standards of care for have option for MAID (89.6%) would have
those at the end-of-life, and had access to these
increase funding to the Would like to see services.
provinces/territories to additional $$ invested in
support enhanced services. support services.
In 2017, Government
Need to prioritize palliative MP Theriault committed $6 billion
care over MAID. acknowledged that over 10 years for
sometimes, even the provinces and
Sending a mixed message on best, most carefully territories to improve
suicide prevention by managed palliative care access to home and
condoning/expanding MAID. in the world cannot community care, as
alleviate people's well as palliative care.
Requested amendments could suffering.
include a requirement for a Potential amendments The Government
Government commitment to could include a provided an additional
develop a national strategy for requirement for a $184.6 million over
palliative care. Government five years to improve
commitment to further home and palliative
investments in mental
health, disability care for Indigenous
supports and/or communities.
palliative care.
Excluding mental illness could Agree that we need to Mental illnesses raise
Exclusion of potentially render the Bill proceed with caution specific concerns when
Mental Illness unconstitutional (contravening before including mental it comes to MAID
Section 15 of the Charter) health issues. eligibility, such as
[although they would not determining
support expansion to include Issue needs to undergo irremediability,
mental illness]. further reflection, study challenges in assessing
and consultation. capacity, and
disentangling a desire
to die as a symptom or
manifestation of a
mental illness from a
bona fide MAID
request.
The issue requires
further study. This is
consistent with the
findings of the Council
of Canadian Academies
and feedback through
the consultations.
Exceptions
MP Erskine-Smith
supports expanding
the Bill to allow
eligibility for those
whose sole condition is
a mental illness as long
as they meet all other
criteria, in order to
respect individual
choice; concerned that
excluding mental
illness will render Bill
unconstitutional.
MP Hedy Fry also
supports inclusion of
mental illness if the
person meets all other
eligibility criteria;
concerned that
excluding mental
illness will render Bill
unconstitutional.
Changes to Does not support easing of Supports removal of 10- Supports removal/easing Changes informed by
safeguards safeguards generally as think it day reflection period as of existing safeguards consultations in Jan
weakens the protection of it reduces prolonged (removal of 10-day 2020.
individuals. suffering. reflection period;
reduction in number of Removal/easing of
Removal of safeguards will 90-day assessment required witnesses and safeguards for RFND
result in slippery slope; cites period for non-RFND expansion of criteria for individuals improves
plans in the Netherlands to could be acceptable for who can be a witness) as the process to reduce
offer MAID to children under some, but flexibility is it improves the process unnecessary suffering.
12 (Findlay) needed. to receiving MAID
Addition/enhancement
Goes beyond Truchon Requested amendments Concerned the 90-day of safeguards for non-
decision. (Cooper) could include more assessment period for RFND individuals
flexible conditions for non-dying individuals ensures appropriate
Does not support removal of reducing the assessment could prolong suffering; protections where
10-day reflection period; period. questions the basis for assessments can be
concerned it may allow a 90 days specifically. more complex and
person to request and receive require more time.
MAID on the same day; can Concern that
already be waived in certain requirement for one of In rural/remote areas,
extreme circumstances the practitioners to have access to practitioners
(Cooper, Findlay) expertise in the with expertise in an
condition causing the individual’s suffering
Does not support reduction of suffering will pose a can be facilitated by
required number of witnesses barrier to access for established
or expansion of criteria for those in rural/remote provincial/regional
witnesses; believes two areas with reduced care teams/networks
witnesses is a reasonable access to health care and telehealth.
practice that is required when services generally.
a testator executes a will. Exceptions
(Cooper, Findlay) Requested amendments
could include: 1) MP Erskine-Smith
Requested amendments could reduction of the 90-day supports removing the
include the reinstatement of assessment period (e.g., two-track safeguards
the 10-day reflection period 30 or 45 days); 2) as it may result in
and/or 2 witnesses. including flexibility to the prolonged unbearable
“expertise” requirement suffering (e.g., 90 day
Suggestions to ensure the by allowing one assessor assessment period);
voluntariness of an individuals to consult with another
request, requested practitioner (but non-
amendments could include assessor) with expertise.
the requirement for social
worker involvement in
practitioner assessments and
video-taping of assessments.
Supports the concept of
strengthened safeguards for
all persons [not just for non-
RFND]
Questions basis for 90-day
period of time for assessment
period.
Exceptions
MP Theriault supports the
removal of 10-day reflection
period.
Waiver of final Does not support waiver of Supports the waiver of Supports the waiver of Allowing a waiver of
consent for final consent; final consent for people final consent for people final consent for RFND
individuals who at the end of life (those at the end of life (those persons who have
have a Noted the absence of a time who are RFND) who are RFND) been assessed and
reasonably limit when a person can set a approved, addresses
foreseeable date. situations like Audrey
natural death Parker who chose a
(RFND) Process for creation and date to receive MAID
execution of agreement to earlier than desired,
waive final consent is for fear of losing
ambiguous (Moore); Bill capacity.
doesn’t require practitioner to
consult or inform person prior MP Erskine-Smith
to providing MAID; there suggested that having
should be 2 practitioners to a time limit on validity
determine whether MAID would reduce
should be administrated. uncertainty.
Requested amendments could
include further delineation of
the process for waiving final
consent including: 1) time
limit on validity of waiver; 2)
criteria for who can confirm
date of provision; 3)
requirement that practitioner
must attempt to inform and
obtain patient consent,
regardless of their capacity.
Inconsistent with Carter
decision that there must be
clear consent. (Cooper)
Key issue with Bill is that Key issue with Bill is that Advance requests not
Advance it doesn’t allow advance it doesn’t allow advance included in Bill C7;
requests requests for person’s requests for person’s experts and the CCA
who have been who have been report findings suggest
diagnosed with a diagnosed with a that advance requests
capacity-limiting disease capacity-limiting disease is a much more
and have capacity, but and have capacity, but complex topic and
are not yet eligible for are not yet eligible for requires further
MAID (e.g., Alzheimer's MAID (e.g., Alzheimer's review; suggest a
disease). disease) broader review of the
issue take place
Believes people who Recognizes the complex through the
meet the criteria set out issues with advance parliamentary review.
in the act should be able requests and the need
to give their consent in for further discussion; Exceptions
advance, as is the case supports a broader
with organ donation, in discussion on advance MP Erskine-Smith
the event that they are requests taking place supports advance
diagnosed with a during the parliamentary requests where an
degenerative disease review. individual has been
(Fortin) diagnosed, but is not
yet suffering
Requested amendments Requested amendments intolerably in order to
could include the could include the respect the autonomy
expansion to allow expansion to allow and wishes of people
advance requests. advance requests. with a degenerative
illness.
Conscience Important to respect Carter Protections for health
protections for decision regarding conscience care practitioners and
practitioners and rights. other health care
institutions professionals are
Bill does not adequately entrenched in law:
protect conscience rights.  Preamble in C-14
Believes “effective referral”  In statute (section
policy in Ontario violates the 9, page 18 where it
constitutional rights of states that nothing
practitioners.(Findlay) compels an
individual to
By further expansion, the provide or assist in
government risks reducing the providing MAID
number of medical
professionals willing to take  Carter decision
part in this process. (Moore, (section 132)
Lewis) “…nothing in the
declaration of
Requested amendments could invalidity which we
include protections preventing propose to issue
the intimidation and would compel
employment dismissal of physicians to
health care professionals who provide assistance
object to taking part in MAID in dying.”
(basis of Bill C-418 that didn’t  Section 2 of the
pass). (Moore, Lewis) Charter, which
outlines
Requested amendments could fundamental
include protected rights for freedoms for all,
institutions who chose not to including the
allow MAID; cited the Delta freedom of
Hospice in BC as an example conscience and
where funding is being religion.
withdrawn if the organization
maintains policies that It is crucial that
prevent MAID in its institution. Canadians who choose
MAID and meet the
criteria set out in the
legislation have access
to this service.
However, provinces
and territories decide
how best to deliver
health care services in
order to meet the
needs of their
residents. The
government will
continue to work with
the provinces and
territories to support
MAID access for
eligible Canadians.
Other issues Inappropriate for practitioner
to raise the option of MAID if
not first raised by patient.
Requested amendments could
include limitations on
practitioner raising MAID.
Concerned the consultations
were rushed and the
questions in the online
questionnaire were phrased in
a way to skew the results.
Temptation to save health
care dollars with MAID (Lewis)
Tab 6 – Second Reading Transcripts
 October 9, 2020
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-
2/house/sitting-13/hansard
 October 19, 2020
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-
2/house/sitting-14/hansard
 October 21, 2020
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-
2/house/sitting-16/hansard
 October 27, 2020
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-
2/house/sitting-20/hansard
 October 28, 2020
https://www.ourcommons.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-
2/house/sitting-21/hansard
Tab 7 - Technical Briefing Deck: Bill C-7
An Act to Amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying)
Technical Briefing - October 2020
Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada
Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion
Minister of Health
Overview of main changes to MAID regime
The Bill proposes amendments to the Criminal Code MAID provisions in relation
to the following issues:
Eligibility criteria;
Safeguards;
Waiver of final consent;
Monitoring regime.
Changes to Eligibility Criteria
Current Eligibility Criteria Proposed Eligibility Criteria
18+ years of age, has decision- 18+ years of age, has decision-making capacity and
making capacity and eligible for eligible for publicly funded health care services
publicly funded health care
services
Voluntary request for MAID Voluntary request for MAID
Informed consent to receive Informed consent to receive MAID given after patient
MAID given after patient informed of means available to relieve suffering
informed of means available to
relieve suffering
Person has “grievous and Person has “grievous and irremediable medical
irremediable medical condition”, meaning all of the following criteria:
condition”, meaning all of the
• serious and incurable illness, disease or
following criteria:
disability;
• serious and incurable
• in an advanced state of irreversible decline in
illness, disease or
capability; and
disability;
• has enduring physical or psychological suffering
• in an advanced state of
that is intolerable to them and that cannot be
irreversible decline in
relieved under conditions that they consider
capability;
acceptable.
• has enduring physical or
• (reasonable foreseeability of natural death
psychological suffering
criterion repealed)
that is intolerable to
them and cannot be
For purposes of MAID eligibility, a mental illness is
relieved under
not a “serious and incurable illness, disease or
conditions that they
disability” (new).
consider acceptable;
• their natural death has
become reasonably
foreseeable.
MAID safeguards:
Natural death is reasonably foreseeable
Current safeguards Proposed changes to safeguards
Patient must make a written request Patient must make a written request that must be
that must be witnessed and signed by witnessed and signed by one independent witness
two independent witnesses. (eased safeguard).
A paid personal or health care worker can be an
independent witness (eased safeguard).
Two independent practitioners must Two independent practitioners must confirm all
confirm all eligibility criteria. eligibility criteria.
Person must be informed that they can Person must be informed that they can withdraw
withdraw request at any time, by any request at any time, by any means.
means.
Mandatory 10-day reflection period
after written request is signed, unless (10-day reflection period safeguard removed)
death or loss of capacity imminent.
Immediately before MAID is provided, Immediately before MAID is provided, person must be
person must be given opportunity to given opportunity to withdraw consent, and must
withdraw consent, and must confirm confirm consent to receive MAID, except if waived
consent to receive MAID. (consent is given in advance).
MAID safeguards:
Natural death is not reasonably foreseeable
The Bill proposes a different set of safeguards where natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable:
Patient must make a written request that is witnessed and signed by one
independent witness (eased safeguard);
A paid personal or health care worker can be an independent witness
(eased safeguard);
Two independent practitioners must confirm all eligibility criteria are met;
One of the two practitioners assessing eligibility must have expertise
in the condition that causes the person’s suffering (new safeguard);
Person must be informed that they can withdraw request at any time, by
any means;
Minimum period of 90 days for assessment of request, which can be
shortened if loss of capacity is imminent and assessments are complete
(new safeguard);
Person must be informed of counselling, mental health supports, disability
supports, community services and palliative care, and be offered
consultation with relevant professionals, as available and applicable
(clarification of informed consent);
Practitioners agree with the person that they have discussed and
appropriately considered reasonable means of alleviating their suffering
(clarification of informed consent);
Immediately before MAID is provided, person must be given opportunity to
withdraw consent, and must confirm consent to receive MAID.
Waiver of final consent where natural death is reasonably foreseeable
The Bill would permit the provision of MAID to persons who are no longer able to
consent to it at the time it is to be provided:
Person’s natural death must be reasonably foreseeable;
Person must be assessed as eligible for MAID and MAID procedure must be
scheduled;
Person must be informed that they are at risk of losing decision-making
capacity before the scheduled date;
Practitioner must agree to provide MAID on the scheduled day if patient
has lost capacity (or earlier, after loss of capacity, if agreed);
Person gives consent in writing to receive MAID on the scheduled day if
they are no longer able to consent on that day (this waives the requirement
that consent be expressed immediately before MAID is provided).
If, on the day of MAID procedure, the person has capacity to consent to MAID,
the practitioner must give the person the opportunity to withdraw their request
and ensure that the person gives express consent to receive MAID (existing
safeguard requiring final consent).
If, on the day of MAID procedure, the person has lost capacity to consent to
MAID, the practitioner can provide MAID on the basis of the consent given earlier:
Consent given in advance is invalidated if the person demonstrates, by
words or gestures, refusal or resistance to the administration of MAID at
the time of the procedure.
Changes to the Federal MAID Monitoring Regime
The Bill would also amend the Criminal Code to expand data collection through
the federal monitoring regime.
Currently, only practitioners who receive written requests for MAID and
pharmacists who dispense MAID substances are required to provide the
information prescribed in the Regulations.
Amendments would require all practitioners who assess MAID eligibility (prior to
receiving a written request), and any person who undertakes preliminary
assessments of whether a person meets eligibility criteria, to provide the
information required by the federal Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical
Assistance in Dying.
Amendments would also clarify that pharmacy technicians are required to
provide information if they dispense a substance for MAID.
Non-Legislative Measures
Minister of Health to work with provinces and territories, health system partners
and health practice regulatory bodies to develop, implement, monitor and report
on MAID practice guidelines, training and retrospective review processes and
results.
Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion to work
with provincial and territorial partners to enhance disability supports.
Annex: Profile of MAID in Canada
(First Annual Report on MAID in Canada, 2019)
Since legislation enacted, there have been 13,946 reported MAID deaths.
Average age when receiving MAID is 75.2 years.
Nearly equal proportion of males (50.9%) and females (49.1%) receiving MAID.
Most common underlying medical condition is cancer (67.2%), followed by
respiratory (10.8%) and neurological (10.4%) conditions.
In 2019, there were 5,631 cases of MAID, representing 2% of all deaths in Canada
in that year. In other permissive regimes, assisted deaths account for 0.3% to
4.6% of all deaths.
There has been a consistent and gradual increase in MAID deaths over the last 3
years.
*2016 - Quebec data
begins December 10, 2015.
Rest of Canada begins June
17, 2016.
Tab 8 - Bill C-7
https://parl.ca/DocumentViewer/en/43-2/bill/C-7/first-reading
Tab 9 - Bill C-14
https://parl.ca/DocumentViewer/en/42-1/bill/C-14/royal-assent
Tab 10 - Integrated Version of Bills C-14 and C-7
Merge – Bill C-14 and Bill C-7
An Act to amend the Criminal Code and to make related amendments to other
Acts (medical assistance in dying)
Highlighted text reflects the changes proposed in Bill C-7
Prepared by Health Canada staff for reference purposes only; not an official
document:
Readers should refer to documents on the Department of Justice’s website with
respect to provisions in Bills C-14 and C-7
SUMMARY
This enactment amends the Criminal Code to, among other things,
(a) repeal the provision that requires a person's natural death be reasonably
foreseeable in order for them to be eligible for medical assistance in dying ,
(b) specify that persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental
illness are not eligible for medical assistance in dying;
(c) create two sets of safeguards that must be respected before medical
assistance in dying may be provided, the application of which depends on
whether the person's natural death is reasonably expected to occur within the
next 24months;
(d) permit medical assistance in dying to be provided to a person who has been
found eligible to receive it, whose natural death is reasonably expected to occur
within the next24 months and who has lost the capacity to consent before
medical assistance in dying is provided, on the basis of a prior agreement they
entered into with the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner; and
(e) to permit the provision of medical assistance in dying to a person who has lost
the capacity to consent to it as a result of an attempt to self-administers a
substance that was provided to them under the provisions governing medical
assistance in dying in order to cause their own death.
64-65 ELIZABETH II
CHAPTER 3
An Act to amend the Criminal Code and to make related amendments to other
Acts (medical assistance in dying)
[Assented to 17th June, 2016]
Preamble
Whereas the Government of Canada has committed to responding to the
Superior Court of Quebec decision in Truchon v. Attorney General of Canada;
Whereas Parliament considers that it is appropriate to no longer limit eligibility
for medical assistance in dying to persons whose natural death has become
reasonably foreseeable and to provide additional safeguards for those persons
whose natural death Is not reasonably expected to occur within the next 24
months;
Whereas Parliament recognizes the need to balance several interests and societal
values, including the autonomy of persons Who are eligible to receive medical
assistance in dying, the need to protect vulnerable persons from being induced to
end their lives and the important public health issue that suicide represents;
Whereas under the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms every individual has
the right to life, liberty and security of the person without being deprived of them
except in accordance With the principles of fundamental justice and has the right
to the equal protection and equal benefit of the law without discrimination;
Whereas Canada is a State Party to the United Nations Convention on the Rights
of Persons With Disabilities and recognizes its obligations under it, including the
right to life.
Whereas Parliament affirms the inherent and equal value of every person's life
and the importance of taking a human rights-based approach to disability
inclusion;
Whereas it is desirable to have a consistent approach to medical assistance in
dying across Canada, while recognizing the provinces' jurisdiction over various
matters related to medical assistance in dying including the delivery of health care
services and the regulation of health care professionals, as well as insurance
contracts and coroners and medical examiners;
Whereas, while recognizing the inherent risks and complexity of allowing medical
assistance in dying for persons who are unable to provide consent at the time of
the procedure, Parliament considers it appropriate to allow dying persons who
have been approved for medical assistance in dying and are awaiting the
procedure to obtain it even if they lose the capacity to provide final consent;
Whereas further consultation and deliberation are required to determine
whether it is appropriate and if so, how to provide medical assistance in dying to
persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness in light of the
inherent risks and complexity of the provision of medical assistance in dying in
those circumstances;
And whereas the law provides that a Committee of Parliament will begin a review
of the legislative provisions relating to medical assistance in dying and the state of
palliative care in Canada in June 2020, which review may include issues of
advance requests and requests where mental illness is the sole underlying
medical condition;
Now therefore, Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate
and House of Commons of Canada, enacts as follows:
R.S., c. C-46
Criminal Code
1 Section 14 of the Criminal Code is replaced by the following:
Consent to death
14 No person is entitled to consent to have death inflicted on them, and such
consent does not affect the criminal responsibility of any person who inflicts
death on the person who gave consent.
2 The Act is amended by adding the following after section 226:
Exemption for medical assistance in dying
227 (1) No medical practitioner or nurse practitioner commits culpable homicide
if they provide a person with medical assistance in dying in accordance with
section 241.2.
Exemption for person aiding practitioner
(2) No person is a party to culpable homicide if they do anything for the purpose
of aiding a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner to provide a person with
medical assistance in dying in accordance with section 241.2.
Reasonable but mistaken belief
(3) For greater certainty, the exemption set out in sub-section (1) or (2) applies
even if the person invoking it has a reasonable but mistaken belief about any fact
that is an element of the exemption.
Non-application of section 14
(4) Section 14 does not apply with respect to a person who consents to have
death inflicted on them by means of medical assistance in dying provided in
accordance with section 241.2.
Definitions
(5) In this section, medical assistance in dying, medical practitioner and nurse
practitioner have the same meanings as in section 241.1.
R.S., c. 27 (1st Supp.), s. 7(3)
(3) Section 241 of the Act is replaced by the following:
Counselling or aiding suicide
241 (1) Everyone is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a
term of not more than 14 years who, whether suicide ensues or not,
(a) counsels a person to die by suicide or abets a per-son in dying by
suicide; or
(b) aids a person to die by suicide.
Exemption for medical assistance in dying
(2) No medical practitioner or nurse practitioner commits an offence under
paragraph (1)(b) if they provide a person with medical assistance in dying in
accordance with section 241.2.
Exemption for person aiding practitioner
(3) No person is a party to an offence under paragraph (1)(b) if they do anything
for the purpose of aiding a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner to provide a
person with medical assistance in dying in accordance with section 241.2.
Exemption for pharmacist
(4) No pharmacist who dispenses a substance to a person other than a medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner commits an offence under paragraph (1)(b) if
the pharmacist dispenses the substance further to a prescription that is written by
such a practitioner in providing medical assistance in dying in accordance with
section 241.2.
Exemption for person aiding patient
(5) No person commits an offence under paragraph (1)(b) if they do anything, at
another person’s explicit re-quest, for the purpose of aiding that other person to
self-administer a substance that has been prescribed for that other person as part
of the provision of medical assistance in dying in accordance with section 241.2.
Clarification
(5.1) For greater certainty, no social worker, psychologist, psychiatrist, therapist,
medical practitioner, nurse practitioner or other health care professional commits
an offence if they provide information to a person on the lawful provision of
medical assistance in dying.
Reasonable but mistaken belief
(6) For greater certainty, the exemption set out in any of subsections (2) to (5)
applies even if the person invoking the exemption has a reasonable but mistaken
belief about any fact that is an element of the exemption.
Definitions
(7) In this section, medical assistance in dying, medical practitioner, nurse
practitioner and pharmacist have the same meanings as in section 241.1.
Medical Assistance in Dying
Definitions
241.1 The following definitions apply in this section and in sections 241.2 to
241.4.
medical assistance in dying means
(a) the administering by a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner of a
substance to a person, at their request, that causes their death; or
(b) the prescribing or providing by a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner of a
substance to a person, at their request, so that they may self-administer the
substance and in doing so cause their own death. (aide médicale à mourir)
medical practitioner means a person who is entitled to practise medicine under
the laws of a province. (médecin)
nurse practitioner means a registered nurse who, under the laws of a province, is
entitled to practise as a nurse practitioner — or under an equivalent designation
— and to autonomously make diagnoses, order and interpret diagnostic tests,
prescribe substances and treat patients. (infirmier praticien)
pharmacist means a person who is entitled to practise pharmacy under the laws
of a province. (pharmacien)
Eligibility for medical assistance in dying
241.2(1) A person may receive medical assistance in dying only if they meet all of
the following criteria:
(a) they are eligible — or, but for any applicable mini-mum period of
residence or waiting period, would be eligible — for health services funded by a
government in Canada;
(b) they are at least 18 years of age and capable of making decisions with
respect to their health;
(c) they have a grievous and irremediable medical condition;
(d) they have made a voluntary request for medical assistance in dying that,
in particular, was not made as a result of external pressure; and
(e) they give informed consent to receive medical assistance in dying after
having been informed of the means that are available to relieve their suffering,
including palliative care.
Grievous and irremediable medical condition
(2) A person has a grievous and irremediable medical condition only if they meet
all of the following criteria:
(a) they have a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability;
(b) they are in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and
(c) that illness, disease or disability or that state of decline causes them
enduring physical or psychological suffering that is intolerable to them and that
cannot be relieved under conditions that they consider acceptable.
Exclusion
(2.1) For the purposes of paragraph (2)(a), a mental illness is not considered to be
an illness, disease or disability.
Safeguards
(3) Subject to subsection (3.2), before a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner
provides medical assistance in dying to a person whose natural death is
reasonably foreseeable, taking into account all of their medical circumstances,
without a prognosis necessarily having been made as to the specific length of
time that they have remaining, the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner
must
(a) be of the opinion that the person meets all of the criteria set out in
subsection (1);
(b) ensure that the person’s request for medical assistance in dying was
(i) made in writing and signed and dated by the person or by another
person under subsection (4), and
(ii) signed and dated after the person was informed by a medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner that the person has a grievous and irremediable
medical condition;
(c) be satisfied that the request was signed and dated by the person - or by
another person under subsection (4) - before an independent witness who then
also signed and dated the request;
(d) ensure that the person has been informed that they may, at any time
and in any manner, withdraw their request;
(e) ensure that another medical practitioner or nurse practitioner has
provided a written opinion confirming that the person meets all of the criteria set
out in subsection (1);
(f) be satisfied that they and the other medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner referred to in paragraph (e) are independent;
(g) if the person has difficulty communicating, take all necessary measures
to provide a reliable means by which the person may understand the information
that is provided to them and communicate their decision; and
(h) immediately before providing them medical assistance in dying, give the
person an opportunity to withdraw their request and ensure that the person gives
express consent to receive medical assistance in dying.
Safeguards - death not expected
(3.1) Before a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner provides medical
assistance in dying to a person to whom subsection (3) does not apply, the
medical practitioner or nurse practitioner must
(a) be of the opinion that the person meets all of the criteria set out in
subsection (1);
(b) ensure that the person's request for medical assistance in dying was
(i) made in writing and signed and dated by the person or by another
person under subsection (4), and
(ii) signed and dated after the person was informed by a medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner that the person has a grievous and irremediable
medical condition;
(c) be satisfied that the request was signed and dated by the person - or by
another person under subsection (4) - before an independent witness who then
also signed and dated the request;
(d) ensure that the person has been informed that they may, at any time
and in any manner, withdraw their request;
(e) ensure that a written opinion confirming that the person meets all of
the criteria set out in subsection (1) has been provided by
(i) if they do not have expertise in the condition that is causing the
person's suffering, a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner with that
expertise, or
(ii) if they have that expertise, another medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner;
(f) be satisfied that they and the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner
referred to in paragraph (e) are independent;
(g) ensure that the person has been informed of the means available to
relieve their suffering, including counselling services, mental health and disability
support services, community services and palliative care, and where appropriate,
has been offered consultations with relevant professionals who provide those
services or care;
(h) ensure that both they and the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner
referred to in paragraph (e) have discussed with the person the reasonable and
available means to relieve their suffering and they both agree with the person
that the person has given serious consideration to those means;
(i) ensure that there are at least 90 clear days between the day on which
the first assessment of whether the person meets the criteria set out in
subsection (1) begins and the day on which medical assistance in dying is provided
to them or - if the assessments have been completed and they and the medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner referred to in paragraph (e) are both of the
opinion that the loss of the person's capacity to provide consent to receive
medical assistance in dying is imminent - any shorter period that the first medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner considers appropriate in the circumstances;
(j) if the person has difficulty communicating, take all necessary measures
to provide a reliable means by which the person may understand the information
that is provided to them and communicate their decision; and
(k) immediately, before providing the medical assistance in dying, give the
person an opportunity to withdraw their request and ensure that the person gives
express consent to receive medical assistance in dying.
Final consent – waiver
(3.2) For the purposes of subsection (3), the medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner may administer a substance to cause the death of a person without
meeting the requirement set out in paragraph (3) (h) if
(a) before the person loses capacity to consent to receiving medical
assistance in dying,
(i) they met all of the criteria set out in subsection (1) and all other
safeguards set out in subsection (3) were met,
(ii) they entered into an arrangement in writing with the medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner that the medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner would administer a substance to cause their death on a specified day,
(iii) they were informed of the risk of losing the capacity to consent
to receiving medical assistance in dying prior to the day specified in the
arrangement by the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner, and
(iv) in the written arrangement, they consented to the administration
by the medical practitioners or nurse practitioner of a substance to cause their
death on or before the day specified in the arrangement, if they lost their capacity
to consent to receiving medical assistance in dying prior to that day;
(b) the person has lost the capacity to consent to receiving medical
assistance in dying;
(c) the person does not demonstrate, by words, sounds or gestures, refusal
of or resistance to the administration of the substance; and
(d) the substance is administered to the person in accordance with the
terms of the arrangement.
For greater certainty
(3.3) For greater certainty, involuntary words, sounds or gestures made in
response to touch do not constitute a demonstration of refusal or resistance for
the purposes of paragraph (3.2)(c).
Advance consent invalidated
(3.4) Once a person demonstrates, by words, sounds or gestures, refusal of or
resistance to the administration of a substance that would cause their death in
accordance with subsection (3.2), medical assistance in dying can no longer be
provided to them on the basis of the consent given to them by paragraph
(3.2)(a)(iv).
Advance consent – self-administration
(3.5) In the case of a person who loses the capacity to consent to receiving
medical assistance in dying after self-administering a substance, provided to them
under this section, so as to cause their own death, a medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner may administer a substance to cause the death of that person if
(a) while the person had capacity to consent to receiving medical assistance
in dying, they and the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner entered into an
arrangement in writing providing that the medical practitioner or nurse
practitioner would
(i) be present at the time the person self-administers the first
substance, and
(ii) administer a second substance to cause the person’s death if,
after self-administering the first substance, they lost the capacity to consent to
receiving medical assistance in dying and do not die within a specified period;
(b) the person self-administers the first substance and, after having done
so, does not die within the period specified in the arrangement and loses the
capacity to consent to receiving medical assistance in dying; and
(c) the second substance is administered to the person in accordance with
the terms of the arrangement.
Unable to sign
(4) If the person requesting medical assistance in dying is unable to sign and date
the request, another person — who is at least 18 years of age, who understands
the nature of the request for medical assistance in dying and who does not know
or believe that they are a beneficiary under the will of the person making the
request, or a recipient, in any other way, of a financial or other material benefit
resulting from that person’s death — may do so in the person’s presence, on the
person’s behalf and under the person’s express direction.
Independent witness
(5) Any person who is at least 18 years of age and who understands the nature of
the request for medical assistance in dying may act as an independent witness,
except if they
(a) know or believe that they are a beneficiary under the will of the person
making the request, or a recipient, in any other way, of a financial or other
material benefit resulting from that person’s death;
(b )are an owner or operator of any health care facility at which the person
making the request is being treated or any facility in which that person resides;
(c) are directly involved in providing health care services to the person
making the request; or
(d) directly provide personal care to the person making the request.
Exception
(5.1) Despite paragraphs (5)(c) and (d), a person who provides health care
services or personal care as their primary occupation and who is paid to provide
that care to the person requesting medical assistance in dying is permitted to act
as an independent witness, except for
(a) the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who will provide medical
assistance in dying to the person; or
(b) the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who provided an opinion
under paragraph (3)(e) or (3.1)(e), as the case may be, in respect of that person.
Independence — medical practitioners and nurse practitioners
(6) The medical practitioner or nurse practitioner providing medical assistance in
dying and the medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who provides the opinion
referred to in paragraph (3)(e) or (3.1)(e) are independent if they
(a) are not a mentor to the other practitioner or responsible for supervising
their work;
(b) do not know or believe that they are a beneficiary under the will of the
person making the request, or a recipient, in any other way, of a financial or other
material benefit resulting from that person’s death, other than standard
compensation for their services relating to the request; and
(c) do not know or believe that they are connected to the other practitioner
or to the person making the re-quest in any other way that would affect their
objectivity.
Reasonable knowledge, care and skill
(7) Medical assistance in dying must be provided with reasonable knowledge, care
and skill and in accordance with any applicable provincial laws, rules or standards.
Informing pharmacist
(8) The medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who, in providing medical
assistance in dying, prescribes or obtains a substance for that purpose must,
before any pharmacist dispenses the substance, inform the pharmacist that the
substance is intended for that purpose.
Clarification
(9) For greater certainty, nothing in this section compels an individual to provide
or assist in providing medical assistance in dying.
Failure to comply with safeguards
241.3 A medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who, in providing medical
assistance in dying, knowingly fails to comply subject to subsection 241.2(3.2)
with all of the requirements set out in either in paragraphs 241.2(3)(b) to (h) or
paragraphs 241.2(3.1)(b) to (k), as the case may be, and with subsection 241.2(8)
is guilty of an offence and is guilty of
(a) on conviction on indictment, to a term of imprisonment of not more
than five years; or
(b) on summary conviction, to a term of imprisonment of not more than 18
months.
Forgery
241.4 (1) Everyone commits an offence who commits forgery in relation to a
request for medical assistance in dying.
Destruction of documents
(2) Everyone commits an offence who destroys a document that relates to a
request for medical assistance in dying with intent to interfere with
(a) another person’s access to medical assistance in dying;
(b) the lawful assessment of a request for medical assistance in dying; or
(c) another person invoking an exemption under any of subsections227(1)
or (2),241(2) to (5) or245(2).
Punishment
(3) Everyone who commits an offence under subsection (1) or (2) is liable
(a) on conviction on indictment, to a term of imprisonment of not more
than five years; or
(b) on summary conviction, to a term of imprisonment of not more than 18
months.
Definition of document
(4) In subsection (2), document has the same meaning as in section 321.
4 The Act is amended by adding the following after section 241.3:
Filing information - practitioners
241.31 (1) Unless they are exempted under regulations made under subsection
(3), a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who carries out an assessment of
whether a person meets the criteria set out in subsection 241.2(1) or who
receives a written request for medical assistance in dying must, in accordance
with those regulations, provide the information required by those regulations to
the recipient designated in those regulations.
Filing information – responsible for preliminary assessments
(1.1) Unless they are exempted under regulations made under subsection (3), any
person who has the responsibility to carry out preliminary assessments of
whether a person meets the criteria set out in subsection 241.2(1) must, in
accordance with those regulations, provide the information required by those
regulations to the recipient designated in those regulations.
Filing information — pharmacist and pharmacy technicians
(2) Unless they are exempted under regulations made under subsection (3), a
pharmacist who dispenses a sub-stance in connection with the provision of
medical assistance in dying, or the person permitted to act as a pharmacy
technician under the laws of a province who dispenses a substance to aid a
medical practitioner or nurse practitioner in providing a person with medical
assistance in dying must, in accordance with those regulations, provide the
information required by those regulations to the recipient designated in those
regulations.
Regulations
(3) The Minister of Health must make regulations that he or she considers
necessary
(a) respecting the provision and collection, for the purpose of monitoring
medical assistance in dying, of information relating to requests for, and the
provision of, medical assistance in dying, including
(i) the information to be provided, at various stages, by medical
practitioners, nurse practitioners, persons referred to in subsection (1.1) who
have the responsibility to carry out preliminary assessments, pharmacists and
pharmacy technicians, or by a class of any of them, including the elements
considered in relation to the assessment – preliminary or otherwise – of whether
a person meets the criteria set out in subsection 242.2(1),
(ii) the form, manner and time in which the information must be
provided,
(iii) the designation of a person as the recipient of the information,
and
(iv) the collection of information from coroners and medical
examiners;
(b) respecting the use of that information, including its analysis and
interpretation, its protection and its publication and other disclosure;
(c) respecting the disposal of that information; and
(d) exempting, on any terms that may be specified, a class of persons from
the requirements set out in sub-sections (1) to (2).
Guidelines — information on death certificates
(3.1) The Minister of Health, after consultation with representatives of the
provincial governments responsible for health, must establish guidelines on the
information to be included on death certificates in cases where medical
assistance in dying has been provided, which may include the way in which to
clearly identify medical assistance in dying as the manner of death, as well as the
illness, disease or disability that prompted the request for medical assistance in
dying.
Offence and punishment
(4) A medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who knowingly fails to comply
with subsection (1), person having the responsibility to carry out preliminary
assessments who knowingly fails to comply with subsection (1.1), or a pharmacist
or a pharmacy technician who knowingly fails to comply with subsection (2),
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment of
not more than two years; or
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
Offence and punishment
(5) Everyone who knowingly contravenes the regulations made under subsection
(3)
(a) is guilty of an indictable offence and liable to a term of imprisonment of
not more than two years; or
(b) is guilty of an offence punishable on summary conviction.
5 Subsection 241.4(2) of the Act is amended by striking out “or” at the end of
paragraph (b), by adding “or” at the end of paragraph (c) and by adding the
following after that paragraph:
(d) the provision by a person of information undersection 241.31.
6 Section245 of the Act is renumbered as subsection 245(1) and is amended by
adding the following after that subsection:
Exemption
(2) Subsection (1) does not apply to
(a) a medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who provides medical
assistance in dying in accordance with section 241.2; and
(b) a person who does anything for the purpose of aiding a medical
practitioner or nurse practitioner to pro-vide medical assistance in dying in
accordance with section 241.2.
Definitions
(3) In subsection (2), medical assistance in dying, medical practitioner and nurse
practitioner have the same meanings as in section 241.1.
Transitional Provision
Request made prior to assent
(4) A medical practitioner or nurse practitioner who provides medical assistance
in dying to a person who, before the day on which this Act receives royal assent,
had signed and dated their written request to receive medical assistance in dying
must provide it in accordance with section 241.2 of the Criminal Code as it read
immediately before that day, other than paragraph 241.2(3)(g), and with
subsections 241.2(3.2) to (3.5) of that Act, as enacted by this Act
Related Amendments
R.S., c. P-6
Pension Act
7 (1) The definition improper conduct in subsection 3(1) of the Pension Act is
replaced by the following:
improper conduct includes wilful disobedience of orders, vicious or criminal
conduct and wilful self-inflicted wounding — except if the wound results from the
receipt of medical assistance in dying and the requirement set out in
paragraph241.2(3)(a) of the Criminal Code has been met; (mauvaise conduite)
(2) Subsection 3(1) of the Act is amended by adding the following in alphabetical
order:
medical assistance in dying has the same meaning as in section 241.1of the
Criminal Code; (aide médicale à mourir)
(3) Section 3 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (3):
Deeming — medical assistance in dying
(4) For the purposes of this Act, if a member of the forces receives medical
assistance in dying, that member is deemed to have died as a result of the illness,
disease or disability for which they were determined to be eligible to receive that
assistance, in accordance with paragraph241.2(3)(a) of the Criminal Code.
1992, c. 20
Corrections and Conditional Release Act
8 Section 19 of the Corrections and Conditional Release Act is amended by adding
the following after subsection (1):
Medical assistance in dying
(1.1) Subsection(1) does not apply to a death that results from an inmate
receiving medical assistance in dying, as defined in section 241.1 of the Criminal
Code, in accordance with section 241.2 of that Act.
2005, c. 21
Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-establishment and Compensation Act
9 (1) Subsection 2(1) of the Canadian Forces Members and Veterans Re-
establishment and Compensation Act is amended by adding the following in
alphabetical order:
medical assistance in dying has the same meaning as in section241.1 of the
Criminal Code. (aide médicale à mourir)
(2) Section 2 of the Act is amended by adding the following after subsection (5):
Interpretation — medical assistance in dying
(6) For the purposes of this Act, a member or veteran has neither inflicted wilful
self-injury nor engaged in improper conduct by reason only that they receive
medical assistance in dying, if the requirement set out in paragraph241.2(3)(a) of
the Criminal Code has been met.
Deeming — medical assistance in dying
(7) For the purposes of this Act, if a member or a veteran receives medical
assistance in dying, that member or veteran is deemed to have died as a result of
the illness, dis-ease or disability for which they were determined to be eligible to
receive that assistance, in accordance withparagraph241.2(3)(a) of the Criminal
Code.
Independent Review
Mature minors, advance requests and mental illness
9.1 (1) The Minister of Justice and the Minister of Health must, no later
than180days after the day on which this Act receives royal assent, initiate one or
more independent reviews of issues relating to requests by mature minors for
medical assistance in dying, to advance requests and to requests where mental
illness is the sole underlying medical condition.
(2) The Minister of Justice and the Minister of Health must, no later than two
years after the day on which a review is initiated, cause one or more reports on
the review, including any findings or recommendations resulting from it, to be laid
before each House of Parliament.
Review of the Act
Review by committee
10 (1) At the start of the fifth year after the day on which this Act receives royal
assent, the provisions enacted by this Act are to be referred to the committee of
the Senate, of the House of Commons or of both Houses of Parliament that may
be designated or established for the purpose of reviewing the provisions.
Report
(2)The committee to which the provisions are referred is to review them and the
state of palliative care in Canada and submit a report to the House or Houses of
Parliament of which it is a committee, including a statement setting out any
changes to the provisions that the committee recommends.
Coming into Force
Order in council
11 Sections 4 and 5 come into force 12 months after the day on which this Act
receives royal assent or on any earlier day that may be fixed by order of the
Governor in Council.
Tab 11 - Legislative Background: Bill C-7
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/pl/ad-am/c7/toc-tdm.html
Tab 12 - Charter Statement: Bill C-7
https://www.justice.gc.ca/eng/csj-sjc/pl/charter-charte/c7.html
Tab 13 - First Annual Report on MAID, 2019
https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/medical-assistance-dying-
annual-report-2019.html
Tab 14 - Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID
https://laws-lois.justice.gc.ca/eng/regulations/SOR-2018-166/index.html
Tab 15 - Summary of CCA Independent Review Findings
Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) Requests by Mature Minors
Key Points from the Council of Canadian Academies’ (CCA) Report
Mature Minor Definition:
• “Mature minor” is a legal term that refers to young people below the age of
majority (defined as 18+ in the legislation) who are deemed competent to make
their own medical decisions.
Decision-Making Capacity of Mature Minors:
• A 2009 Supreme Court of Canada decision (A.C. vs Manitoba) set a
precedent that, even if the consequences of refusing a treatment are potentially
life-ending, a minor’s maturity must be taken into account – and if they are
capable of making the decision, they should be given the right to do so.
• Neuroscience and psychology research to date does not provide clear
direction on capacity in minors; chronological age can provide some
generalizations about the development of decision-making skills, but it is not an
accurate predictor of minors’ capacity to provide informed consent for medical
treatments.
• In pediatric settings, the family is central to the patient’s care, making it
challenging to determine the voluntariness of a MAID request where a minor is
dependent upon, and influenced by, their family.
Variation across Canada with respect to healthcare decision-making for mature
minors:
• The rights of mature minors in Canada to make healthcare decisions are
based upon a number of areas of law, including healthcare consent law, common
law, child welfare legislation, criminal law, and constitutional law.
• There is no standard set across provinces and territories. Quebec is the only
province with a legislated age of consent for minors, which is 14 years old.
International Experience:
• Euthanasia for minors is available only in the Netherlands and Belgium,
where the practice is rarely used and remains controversial.
• The Netherlands requires parental consent for patients between 12-16 and
parental consultation for those aged 16-18. Belgium requires patients under the
age of 18 to be terminally ill (which is not required for adults); the case must be
assessed by a psychiatrist and/or psychologist, and final approval must be granted
by the parents.
Additional relevant information:
• There is no evidence that children and adolescents experience physical pain
differently than adults.
• Mature minors are often perceived as vulnerable; laws for minors must find
a balance between keeping them safe from exploitation/harm, while also
respecting their rights by avoiding unfair and unethical restrictions.
• Healthcare practitioners show greater unease about provision of MAID to
minors.
• There is a need for more research on dying pediatric patients and their
families, including the realities of clinical practice and the ways in which critically
ill minors make end-of-life decisions.
• Research suggests the need for more services to support care and symptom
management for children with life-threatening illness, particularly as they near
the end of life.
Advance Requests for Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID)
Key Points from the Council of Canadian Academies’ (CCA) Report
Definition:
• An advance request (AR) is a request for MAID, created in advance of a loss
of decision-making capacity, intended to be acted upon under circumstances
outlined in the request after the person has lost decisional capacity.
The CCA considered three scenarios for ARs (ordered from least to most
complex):
• Individual has requested and has been found eligible for MAID, but is
concerned about losing capacity before the scheduled procedure (e.g., “Audrey
Parker” scenario).
• Individual has received a diagnosis with a medical condition that is likely to
cause loss of capacity (e.g., Alzheimer’s disease), but has not yet been found
eligible for MAID
• Prior to any diagnosis, but individual is concerned about documenting their
preference for MAID in the event of a sudden, irreversible loss of capacity (e.g.,
injury from a motor vehicle accident).
Sources of uncertainty relevant to implementing ARs for MAID:
• The patient’s status and how well their current condition aligns with the
circumstances described in their AR for MAID.
• The clarity in the AR of their communication about the circumstances in
which they would want MAID; and
• The strength of their relationships with trusted loved ones and their
healthcare team prior to capacity loss.
(Uncertainty increases the longer the time between writing the AR and the actual
provision of MAID)
Challenges to Implementing the AR:
• It could be difficult to assess when suffering has become intolerable to a
patient if the patient cannot communicate.
• The type of trajectory towards death of certain diseases or conditions can
be unpredictable and fluctuate between periods of contentment and periods of
obvious suffering (e.g., Alzheimer’s).
• A person who has lost decision-making capability may express physical or
emotional responses contrary to what is written in their AR.
• A substitute decision-maker is ultimately required to choose when to
proceed with MAID provision if the individual no longer has the capacity to
consent.
International Experience:
• Belgium and Luxembourg: ARs can only be followed if the patient is
irreversibly unconscious.
• Netherlands: ARs can only be followed if the patient has some level of
consciousness; physicians are not obliged by law to comply with ARs for
euthanasia.
• Colombia: no requirements of consciousness but death must be imminent.
Additional relevant information:
• ARs for MAID written by a competent person after they requested and
were assessed as eligible for MAID have little uncertainty associated with them.
• ARs for MAID can relieve anxiety and distress, but they raise the possibility
that a person could receive an assisted death against their wishes.
• While many people write advanced euthanasia directives in the
Netherlands, physicians and families rarely decide to provide euthanasia to
conscious, but decisionally incompetent, persons.
Medical Assistance in Dying Requests where Mental Disorder is the Sole
Underlying Medical Condition (MAID MD-SUMC)
Key Points from the Council of Canadian Academies’ (CCA) Report
Mental Disorder definition : The legislation and terms of reference for the reviews
used the term mental illness. The CCA Working Group used the term mental
disorder to be consistent with current clinical and legal practice, including the two
primary classifications of psychiatry. Mental disorders can be defined as health
problems that disturb or impair a person’s thoughts, experiences, emotions,
behaviour and/or ability to relate to others.
Issues and Uncertainties in Applying Legislative Criteria to MAID MD-SUMC:
• Reasonably Foreseeable Natural Death: People that have a mental disorder
only rarely have a foreseeable natural death and so eligibility would largely be
denied on this criterion alone.
• Decision-making capacity: Symptoms of mental disorders can affect
cognitive faculties, which may result in an inability to understand and/or
appreciate the nature and consequences of treatment decisions. The evidence is
unclear as to the reliability of capacity assessments for persons with mental
disorders.
• Grievous and irremediable: There does not seem to be an established
standard for defining the threshold when a typical mental disorder can be
considered irremediable.
• Advanced state of irreversible decline in capability: There is a lack of clarity
as to whether this eligibility criterion can be based solely on mental capability.
Many mental disorders have fluctuating symptoms, making it challenging to
distinguish between an irreversible or temporary decline.
• Intolerable suffering: While mental disorders can cause enduring and
intolerable psychological and physical suffering, they can impair a person’s ability
to reflect on this suffering rationally.
Balancing Vulnerability and Autonomy
• Some people with mental disorders are considered vulnerable, insofar as
having a mental disorder can be associated with socio-economic hardship,
discrimination, and disability resulting in less independence and reduced ability to
defend or promote their own interests.
• Restricting MAID MD-SUMC may simultaneously deny a person’s
autonomy. It also risks denying MAID requests as a result of paternalistic
attitudes about people with mental disorders.
Suicide and MAID MD-SUMC:
• Having a mental disorder is one of the strongest risk factors for suicide.
• Some organizations and experts argue that MAID is incompatible with
suicide prevention efforts; however, there was disagreement among Working
Group members on this point.
• There was also a divergence of opinion regarding the certainty with which a
clinician could distinguish between suicidal people and those desiring MAID MD-
SUMC autonomously.
The mental health professional community:
• A 2017 survey of Canadian psychiatrists found that most (61%) do not
support MAID for mental illness, despite being supportive of MAID in general.
International Experience:
• In the Netherlands and Belgium, psychiatric euthanasia and assisted suicide
(EAS) represents approximately 1-2 % of all EAS cases;
• Most of these jurisdictions have different criteria for assisted death (e.g.,
no need for foreseeable death), and different health and social contexts.
• In some jurisdictions, additional requirements must be met when death is
not foreseeable (e.g., assessment by independent consulting physician;
consultant must be an expert in the disorder or disease causing the suffering;
one-month waiting period between the request and provision)
• The service remains controversial.
Additional relevant information:
• There was more disagreement among members of the MAID MD-SUMC
working group than the other CCA working groups addressing mature minors and
advance requests.
• The MAID MD-SUMC working group was able to agree on the following :
o The lives of those with mental disorders have been valued less than
the lives of those without mental disorders.
o The autonomy of people with mental disorders should be respected.
o People with mental disorders face impediments to accessing
appropriate mental healthcare in Canada.
o Most mental disorders lack the prognostic predictability of the
physical conditions that currently motivate MAID requests in Canada.
o Suicide is a major public health concern.
• The MAID MD-SUMC working group disagreed on the following
fundamental issues:
o Interpretation of the existing evidence (influenced by members’
views on autonomy, discrimination and human rights).
o Weighing the risks of ending a life that might have improved versus
saving an individual from ongoing intolerable suffering.
o Whether it is possible to distinguish between suicide and MAID MD-
SUMC.
o Whether there are differences between making a decision about
MAID vs other highly consequential health care decisions (e.g., refusing life-
sustaining treatment).
Tab 16 - What We Heard Report (Consultations Jan/Feb 2020)
https://open.canada.ca/data/en/dataset/06fd85c0-5842-4453-a97d-
7e4ac3b4ce89
Tab 17 - News Release: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
https://www.canada.ca/en/department-justice/news/2020/10/government-of-
canada-reintroduces-proposed-changes-to-medical-assistance-in-dying-
legislation.html
Tab 18 - Media Lines: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
PROTECTED B
Last updated on October 5, 2020
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING
MEDIA LINES
Table of Contents
INTRODUCTION OF REVISIONS TO MAID LEGISLATION – BILL C-7 (REINTRODUCED
IN OCTOBER 2020)
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS
TRUCHON V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (QC)
FOLEY V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (ON)
KATZENBACK V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (SK)
LAMB AND BCCLA V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (BC)
INTRODUCTION OF REVISIONS TO MAID LEGISLATION – BILL C-7
(REINTRODUCED IN OCTOBER 2020)
BACKGROUND
On February 24, 2020, the Government of Canada introduced amendments to the
Criminal Code’s provisions related to Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) in
response to the Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon decision,
and to address issues on which there is emerging societal consensus.
On June 11, 2020, the AGC filed a motion for extension until December 18, 2020
of the coming into force of the Truchon decision, which was granted by the Court
on June 29, 2020. The court allowed individual exemptions for persons in Quebec
whose death is not reasonably foreseeable, but who would otherwise meet all
other eligibility criteria for MAID, enabling them to apply to the Superior Court of
Québec for leave during the period of suspension. This second extension was
necessary as the COVID-19 pandemic disruptions to the parliamentary process
unfortunately rendered it impossible to meet the previous deadline of July 11,
2020.
Following the prorogation of the 1st session of the 43rd Parliament in August
2020 and the opening of the 2nd session on September 23, 2020, former Bill C-7
was reintroduced as Bill C-7 on October 5, 2020.
The proposed changes include:
• removing the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” (RFND) criterion
from the list of eligibility criteria in the federal legislation, in response to the
Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon ruling;
• creating a two-track approach to safeguards based on whether or not a
person’s death is reasonably foreseeable;
• creating a new set of safeguards for people whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable following their request for MAID;
• maintaining and easing some of the pre-existing set of safeguards for
people whose death is reasonably foreseeable;
• expressly excluding eligibility for MAID for persons suffering solely from
mental illness;
• allowing a waiver of final consent, so that persons who are assessed and
approved, whose natural deaths are reasonably foreseeable, and who risk losing
decision-making capacity to make arrangements with their practitioner to receive
MAID on a chosen date even if they lose decision-making capacity before that
date;
• rendering a waiver of final consent invalid if the person, after having lost
decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or resistance to receiving MAID;
and
• expanding data collected through the federal monitoring regime to provide
a more complete picture of MAID in Canada.
KEY MESSAGES
• Medical assistance in dying is a complex and deeply personal issue.
• On October 5, 2020, the Government of Canada reintroduced proposed
changes to the Criminal Code to respond to the Superior Court of Québec’s
September 2019 Truchon ruling, and to emerging societal consensus on specific
issues relating to MAID.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to the implementation of
these necessary changes and has reintroduced the proposed changes to Canada’s
MAID legislation in the House of Commons. These changes are the same as those
proposed by Bill C-7 in the previous parliamentary session.
• The proposed changes to Canada’s MAID legislation were informed by
concerns and issues raised during the January and February 2020 consultations,
and are the result of careful consideration of the past four years’ of experience
with MAID in Canada.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to protecting vulnerable
individuals and the equality rights of all Canadians, while supporting the
autonomy of eligible persons to seek medical assistance in dying.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with provinces
and territories to support the implementation of the proposed changes to the
legislation once passed in Parliament.
If asked about the reintroduction of the Bill:
• The COVID-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented challenges, including the
disruption of the current Parliamentary session.
• As a result of the prorogation of Parliament in August 2020, the proposed
changes to Canada’s MAID legislation were reintroduced in the House of
Commons on October 5, 2020. These changes are the same as those proposed by
Bill C-7 in the previous parliamentary session.
If asked about the proposed legislative changes in general:
• The proposed legislative changes would provide greater autonomy and
freedom of choice to persons seeking medical assistance in dying to end
intolerable suffering caused by irremediable medical conditions.
• The five main components of the Bill:
1. remove the requirement for a person’s natural death to be
reasonably foreseeable in order to be eligible for MAID;
2. introduce a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on
whether or not a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable;
a) existing safeguards will be maintained and certain ones will be
eased for eligible persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable;
b) new and modified safeguards will be introduced for eligible
persons whose death is not reasonably foreseeable;
3. exclude eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness;
4. allow waiver of final consent for eligible persons whose natural death
is reasonably foreseeable and who may lose capacity to consent before MAID can
be provided; and
5. expand data collection through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete picture of MAID in Canada.
• Other important questions relating to MAID in Canada, such as advance
requests for persons newly diagnosed with a condition that could affect their
decision-making capacity in the future, eligibility for persons suffering solely from
mental illness and eligibility for mature minors, could be considered during a
broader parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
If asked about changes specifically relating to eligibility:
• In response to the Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon
ruling, the Government of Canada proposes to remove the “reasonable
foreseeability of natural death” from the list of eligibility criteria included in
Canada’s MAID law.
• The proposed changes also exclude eligibility for persons who suffer solely
from mental illness.
• Individuals who seek medical assistance in dying would still be required to
satisfy the remaining eligibility criteria.
• The Government of Canada recognizes the complexity and challenges
associated with allowing MAID for persons suffering solely from mental illness.
This issue could be studied as part of the broader parliamentary review of MAID
legislation.
If asked about changes specifically relating to safeguards, including keeping
“reasonable foreseeability of natural death”:
• While “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” is removed as an
eligibility criterion in the proposed legislation, it is kept as a way of deciding which
procedural safeguards will be applied to MAID requests.
• Under the proposed bill, a strengthened set of safeguards would be applied
for MAID requests where a person’s death is not reasonably foreseeable..
• These proposed amendments would require practitioners take additional
steps to ensure that a request by a person whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable is fully informed and considered, and that patients have seriously
considered reasonable and available treatment options.
• When a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable, the existing
safeguards would be maintained and, in some cases, eased. For example, a
person’s request would need to be signed by one independent witness instead of
two, and the 10-day reflection period would be eliminated.
If asked about the inclusion of advance consent, wavering of final consent, or
“Audrey’s Amendment”:
• The proposed amendments would allow waiver of final consent for
persons:
o whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable;
o who have been assessed and approved to receive MAID; and
o who made an arrangement with their practitioner for waiver of final
consent because they were at risk losing decision-making capacity before their
chosen date to receive MAID.
• The Bill would also render this kind of waiver of final consent invalid if the
person, after having lost decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or
resistance to the administration of MAID.
• Eligible persons who choose to pursue MAID through self-administration
would also be allowed to make arrangements with their practitioner to waiver
final consent, to allow for a physician to follow through with providing MAID to
the person should self-administration produce complications and cause the
individual to lose decision-making capacity. This type of waiver of final consent
would be available for all eligible persons, regardless of their prognosis.
• The Government of Canada recognizes the complexity and challenges
associated with allowing advance requests for MAID for persons diagnosed with
illnesses that will affect their decision-making capacity, such as Alzheimer’s or
dementia. This type of advance request could be considered during a broader
parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
If asked about January and February 2020 consultations:
• The consultations held in January and February 2020 were an important
step in responding to Quebec’s court ruling, and are part of the Government’s
progressive approach to ensuring that the federal framework on MAID continues
to be informed by the evolving views and needs of Canadians.
• During these consultations, over 300,000 Canadians completed the online
questionnaire. The high level of engagement demonstrates the importance of this
deeply personal issue for many.
• During the months of January and February 2020, the federal government
also consulted directly with experts, practitioners, Indigenous groups,
stakeholders, and provinces and territories.
• Ministers Lametti, Hajdu and Qualtrough, as well as Parliamentary
Secretaries Virani and Fisher, met with stakeholders in Halifax, Montreal, Toronto,
Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg, Ottawa, and Québec City to discuss Canada’s
medical assistance in dying framework. Attendance at these sessions was by
invitation only.
• A What We Heard report on the results of the consultations is now
available online on the Department of Justice Canada’s website. Accessible
versions of the report are also available online.
• On January 22, 2020, Minister Lametti also met with provincial and
territorial counterparts in Victoria, BC, to discuss the Government’s key priorities,
including medical assistance in dying.
• The federal government continues to engage with the provinces and
territories, both through federal, provincial, and territorial ministers, and through
an officials’ level intergovernmental working group on medical assistance in dying.
If asked about changes to Quebec’s provincial legislation:
• The Government of Quebec announced on January 21, 2020, that it would
not be amending the provincial Act respecting End-of-Life Care in light of the
Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon ruling.
If asked about the Council of Canadian Academies’ reports:
• The Council of Canadian Academies completed three independent reviews
in areas where MAID was not allowed under the 2016 legislation: requests by
mature minors, advance requests, and requests where a mental disorder is the
sole underlying condition.
• These expert reports provide a comprehensive summary of the currently
available evidence, identify gaps in knowledge, and outline the risks and benefits
of allowing MAID in these circumstances.
• These reports will be a useful tool to guide discussions during a broader
parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
Media Enquiries: (613) 957-4207
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada,
media@justice.gc.ca
Prepared by: Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy
Communications (Justice Canada)
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS
BACKGROUND
Former Bill C-14, which created Canada’s current medical assistance in dying
(MAID) law, requires a parliamentary review of the law’s provisions, as well as the
state of palliative care in Canada, by one or more committees, starting at the
beginning of the fifth year after becoming law. According to Canada’s MAID law,
this parliamentary review process was expected to begin in June 2020. That
review was delayed by the COVID-19 pandemic.
In addition, on February 24, 2020, Bill C-7 was introduced to propose changes to
the Criminal Code’s MAID provisions.
The Minister of Justice and Attorney General of Canada, following the
introduction of Bill C-7 in February 2020, indicated that the parliamentary review
would provide an opportunity to discuss other aspects of MAID that have not
been included in Bill C-7, such as MAID for mature minors, for individuals
suffering solely from mental health issues, and through advance requests.
Decisions relating to the parliamentary review ultimately rests with Parliament,
including decisions on timing and focus.
KEY MESSAGES
If asked about the parliamentary review process:
• Former Bill C-14, which created Canada’s current medical assistance in
dying legislation, requires a parliamentary review of the law’s provisions, as well
as the state of palliative care in Canada, by one or more committees, starting at
the beginning of the fifth year after becoming law.
• The parliamentary review would allow for further public and parliamentary
debate on all aspects of medical assistance in dying in Canada, including some
excluded from the proposed legislative changes that were reintroduced in Bill C-7.
• Important questions relating to MAID in Canada—such as advance requests
for persons newly diagnosed with a condition that could affect their decision-
making capacity in the future, eligibility for persons suffering solely from mental
illness and eligibility for mature minors—could be considered during this broader
parliamentary review of Canada’s MAID law.
• This broader review was expected to start by June 2020, after the adoption
of MAID legislation. However, the COVID-19 pandemic has led to unprecedented
challenges, including the disruption of the current parliamentary session.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to supporting this broader
review of Canada’s MAID law and the state of palliative care in Canada.
• Decisions relating to the parliamentary review ultimately rests with
Parliament, including decisions on timing and scope.
If asked about the Council of Canadian Academies’ reports:
• The Council of Canadian Academies completed three independent reviews
in areas where MAID was not allowed under the 2016 legislation: requests by
mature minors, advance requests, and requests where a mental disorder is the
sole underlying condition.
• These expert reports provide a comprehensive summary of the currently
available evidence, identify gaps in knowledge, and outline the risks and benefits
of allowing MAID in these circumstances.
• These reports will be a useful tool to guide discussions during a broader
parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
Media Enquiries: (613) 957-4207
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada,
media@justice.gc.ca
Prepared by: Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy
Communications (Justice Canada)
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
TRUCHON V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (QC)
BACKGROUND
On June 11, 2020, the Attorney General of Canada (AGC) filed a motion
requesting a five-month plus one-week extension of the period of suspension of
the Truchon decision rendered by the Superior Court of Québec in September
2019, which would otherwise come into effect on July 12, 2020. In its decision,
the court struck down the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” criterion
from the eligibility requirements in the federal law, as well as the “end-of-life”
eligibility requirement from Quebec’s provincial law.
The AGC’s motion for extension until December 18, 2020 was granted by the
Court on June 29, 2020.
This is the second extension request made by the AGC in this case. On March 2,
2020, the court granted the AGC’s motion and extended the suspension period
from March 11, 2020 to July 11, 2020. The court allowed individual exemptions
for persons in Quebec whose death is not reasonably foreseeable, but who would
otherwise meet all other eligibility criteria for MAID, enabling them to apply to
the Superior Court of Québec for leave during the period of suspension.
Exemption requests and summary of AGC position
During the period of the suspension of the original judgment, individuals wishing
to seek MAID have been able to apply to the Superior Court of Québec to access
MAID. Applications to date are listed and their resolution, if applicable, is outlined
below:
Mr. Payette
On May 20, 2020, the court granted an application to access MAID by an
individual who suffers from type 2 diabetes and severe neuropathy (Mr. Payette).
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC did not take a position on this application and therefore did not
attend the May 20 virtual hearing.
C.V.
On May 27, 2020, the court granted an application to access MAID by an
individual, authorized to be referred to by his initials C.V., who is 66 years old and
suffers from spastic paraplegia.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC did not take a position on this application and therefore did not
attend the May 26 hearing.
Ms. Trudeau
On June 18, 2020, the court granted an application to access MAID by an
individual (Ms. Trudeau) who suffers degenerative cerebellar ataxia and is in an
advanced state of decline.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC did not take a position on this application and therefore did not
attend the hearing on June 17.
A.A.
On September 10, 2020, the court granted an application to access MAID by an
individual, authorized to be referred to by the initials A.A., who suffers from a
rare, incurable, degenerative disorder called Neuro-Sjogren’s Syndrome that
affects the person’s endocrine and exocrine glands and is associated with central
and peripheral neurological problems.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC did not take a position on this application and therefore did not
attend the September 4 hearing.
Ms. Lacroix
On September 14, 2020, the court granted an application to access MAID by an
individual (Ms. Lacroix) who suffers from a generalized complex pain syndrome
characterized by severe chronic pain throughout her body and from Raynaud’s
syndrome, fibromyalgia, multiple sclerosis and an allergy to morphine.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC did not take a position on this application and therefore did not
attend the September 14 hearing.
Ms. Benoit
On September 22, 2020, the court will hear an application to access MAID by an
individual, (Ms. Benoit) who suffers from Friedreich’s ataxia.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC will not take a position on this application and therefore will not
attend the September 22 hearing.
Ms. Gamache
On September 25, 2020, the court will hear an application to access MAID by an
individual (Ms. Gamache) who suffers from multiple sclerosis.
To align with the AGC’s practice in individual exemption applications following
Carter II, the AGC will not take a position on this application and therefore will not
attend the September 25 hearing.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is proud to have brought forward a bill in
February that proposed changes to the current law, informed by consultations
with Canadians, experts, and the broader legal and health community.
• On June 29, 2020, the Superior Court of Québec granted the request of the
Attorney General of Canada for a second extension of the Truchon decision
rendered in September 2019.
• This extension is necessary as disruptions to the Parliamentary process as a
result of the COVID-19 pandemic have unfortunately rendered it impossible to
meet the previous deadline of July 11, 2020.
• We welcome this decision by the court, which will give Parliament sufficient
time to properly consider and enact this proposed legislation of importance for
many Canadians and families across the country.
• Because of this extension, the Criminal Code’s medical assistance in dying
provisions will remain the same across Canada until December 18, 2020, or until
Parliament enacts a new medical assistance in dying law.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to responding to this
important court ruling as quickly as possible.
If asked about the effects of the prorogation of Parliament on the implementation
of the proposed changes:
• On October 5, 2020, the Government of Canada reintroduced proposed
changes to the Criminal Code to respond to the Superior Court of Québec’s
September 2019 Truchon ruling, and to emerging societal consensus on specific
issues relating to MAID.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to the implementation of
these necessary changes and has reintroduced the proposed changes to Canada’s
MAID legislation in the House of Commons. These changes are the same as those
proposed by Bill C-7 in the previous parliamentary session.
If asked about individual exemptions under the second extension request:
• The Attorney General of Canada takes the position that individuals can
apply for individual exemptions during the extension period.
• Individuals in Quebec who meet all eligibility criteria, except for the
“reasonable foreseeability of natural death” criterion, could still seek the
authorization from the court to access MAID during this period of suspension.
• As of October 1, 2020, 6 individual exemption requests for MAID have been
granted under this ruling by the Superior Court of Québec. The Attorney General
of Canada has not appeared or taken position in any of these cases.
• The Attorney General of Canada will consider its position on such requests
on a case-by-case basis.
If asked about specific individual exemption cases and the AGC’s position:
Scenario 1: If AGC chooses not to take position on an individual exception
application:
• The Attorney General of Canada has reviewed the individual application
and has decided not to appear or to take a position.
• This means that the Attorney General of Canada will not take part in the
proceedings related to this individual exemption application.
Scenario 2: If AGC chooses to appear, but not take position on an individual
request:
• The Attorney General of Canada has reviewed the application and decided
to be present at the hearing in order to provide assistance to the Court, but will
not take a position on the application.
• This means that the Attorney General of Canada will be present at the
hearing to answer questions from the Court, but will not take position on the
merits of the request.
Scenario 3: If the AGC appears and makes a general submission:
• The Attorney General of Canada has reviewed the application and has
decided to be present at the hearing and to make general submissions at the
proceeding for the benefit of the Court.
• This means that the AGC will participate in the proceeding by presenting
general observations on the application, without taking positions on whether it
should be granted or rejected.
Scenario 4: If AGC appears and takes position on an individual request:
Note: A detailed set of media lines will be developed for this scenario if necessary.
• After careful consideration, the Attorney General of Canada has decided to
support or contest the individual exemption application.
• This means that the AGC will participate in the proceedings and will be
making submissions on whether the application should be granted.
Media Enquiries: 613-957-4207, media@justice.gc.ca
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada
Prepared by:
Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy Communications (Justice
Canada)
Lyne Corneau, A/Director of Regional Communications, Quebec Regional Office
(Justice Canada)
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
FOLEY V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (ON)
BACKGROUND
Mr. Foley suffers from numerous medical conditions that have left him physically
disabled and with limited mobility. He has commenced two related actions
against the Attorneys General of Canada and Ontario, provincial health care
providers and a hospital.
Mr. Foley alleges that he received inadequate home care and was unfairly denied
funding for further in-home medical care. He also alleges that the hospital (in
which he is currently a patient) has provided him with insufficient medical care,
and has attempted to force him to choose between an unsafe discharge and
seeking MAID. Mr. Foley further alleges that the MAID provisions of the Criminal
Code violate ss 7, 12 and 15 of the Charter because they do not require that
individuals receive adequate assisted care prior to the provision of MAID.
The Defendants brought motions to strike the Claim in September 2018, but
subsequently agreed to withdraw their motions and suspend the timelines in the
action to allow Mr. Foley to be assessed for in-home care. The parties consented
to an Order dated January 23, 2019 reflecting their agreement.
Mr. Foley was ultimately found to be eligible for in-home care, but has refused to
cooperate with the discharge process. Accordingly, the Defendants (Attorneys
General of Canada and Ontario) brought motions to strike on September 30,
2019. In response, Mr. Foley brought a motion to enforce the consent Order
which, he argues, reflects a settlement preventing the Defendants from “reviving”
their motions to strike. In response, the Defendants argue that the consent Order
does not include any such term (explicit or implied). Correspondence between
counsel confirms that, when the Order was negotiated, the Defendants did not
restrict their rights to bring future motions
Mr. Foley’s motion seeking to enforce the Consent Order was heard March 4,
2020, and dismissed March 16, 2020. Mr. Foley’s lawyer advised that his client
intends to seek leave to appeal. He has served a notice of motion but has
otherwise not taken any steps to move the appeal forward. He has also
mentioned the possibility of having to amend the claim once Bill C-7 is enacted. In
light of these outstanding issues, there has been no movement toward resuming
the motions to strike.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that medical assistance in dying is a
complex and deeply personal issue.
• The focus of this challenge is about the adequacy of long-term medical
care, which is provided by the provincial government.
• We recognize Mr. Foley’s circumstances are distressing and hope he can
find suitable care to help ease his suffering.
• On March 16, 2020, the Ontario Superior Court of Justice dismissed Mr.
Foley’s motion seeking to enforce an agreement he says was made by the parties
where Canada agreed to withdraw and not recommence motions to strike his
statement of claim. No such agreement was in fact made.
Media Enquiries: (613) 957-4207
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada,
media@justice.gc.ca
Prepared by:
Paula Creighan, Director of Communications, Ontario Regional Office
Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy Communications
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
KATZENBACK V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (SK)
BACKGROUND
In this case, the primary plaintiff, Ms. Katzenback, alleges that the Criminal Code’s
medical assistance in dying provisions are unconstitutional and violate the
plaintiff’s section 7, 12, and 15 Charter rights. This case represents the first
Charter challenge in Saskatchewan involving the MAID provisions.
Ms. Katzenback’s claim alleges that she had health issues, which led to her
hospitalization in an emergency department and intensive care unit. The plaintiff
alleges that she was provided with improper health care.
She says that through improper health care, her Charter rights were violated by
“pushing assisted dying through refusal of assistance to maintain life”. She alleges
that the MAID provisions contain a lack of sufficient safeguards for vulnerable
people, particularly those with disabilities because they:
• do not require health professionals to take steps to relieve intolerable
suffering, or assist those who do not want a medically assisted death
• do not raise the prospects of other remedies for people with disabilities
• facilitate abuse, humiliation, and degradation and exploit vulnerable people
at their weakest times of desperation
The Attorney General of Canada intends to file a motion to strike the claims
against Canada in their entirety on October 15, 2020.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that medical assistance in dying is a
complex and deeply personal issue.
• The focus of this challenge is about the adequacy of emergency and long-
term medical care, which is provided by the provincial government.
• We recognize Ms. Katzenback’s circumstances are distressing and hope she
can receive suitable care to help ease her suffering.
Media Enquiries: (613) 957-4207
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada,
media@justice.gc.ca
Prepared by:
Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy Communications
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
LAMB AND BCCLA V. ATTORNEY GENERAL OF CANADA (BC)
BACKGROUND
On September 6, 2019, the plaintiffs delivered a letter to the court (see separate
attachment) seeking an order that the trial scheduled to take place from
November 18 to December 20, 2019, be adjourned sine die (with no set date for
resumption). The AGC consented to this request.
On September 10, 2019, the parties appeared before Chief Justice Hinkson, at his
request, to discuss the adjournment request. Counsel for the AGC stated
expressly that consent to the adjournment did not constitute an admission with
respect to Ms. Lamb’s eligibility, nor with respect to the proper interpretation of
“reasonable foreseeability of natural death”. The court granted the adjournment
of the trial sine die.
This litigation involves a constitutional challenge to certain requirements of s.
241.2 of the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying). The Plaintiffs claim that
the definition of “grievous and irremediable medical condition” violates ss. 7 and
15 of the Charter because it requires that the individual’s illness be incurable, that
the individual be in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability, and
that their natural death has become reasonably foreseeable.
KEY MESSAGES
• On September 10, 2019 the BC Supreme Court granted the plaintiff’s
request for adjournment of Lamb and BCCLA v. AGC without any future dates.
Contrary to what has been reported in the media, the adjournment does not
affect the existing law’s requirement that a person’s natural death must be
reasonably foreseeable.
• Canada consented to this adjournment and respects the decision of the
Court. Canada’s consent to the adjournment expressly stated that it did not
constitute an admission with respect to the proper interpretation of “reasonable
foreseeability of natural death”, which would need to be determined by the Court
on a full factual record and arguments.
Media Enquiries: (613) 957-4207
Spokesperson: Media Relations, Department of Justice Canada,
media@justice.gc.ca
Prepared by:
BC regional office, Communications
Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy Communications
Last update: October 5, 2020
Status: Final
Tab 19 – Questions and Answers: Tabling of Bill C-7 on Oct. 5, 2020
PROTECTED B
FINAL
Q&A DOCUMENT
Medical Assistance in Dying – Introduction of revisions to MAID legislation
(Bill C-7 – Reintroduced October 2020)
(For internal use only)
BACKGROUND
On February 24, 2020, the Government of Canada introduced amendments to the
Criminal Code’s provisions related to Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID) in
response to the Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon decision,
and to address issues on which there is emerging societal consensus.
On June 11, 2020, the AGC filed a motion for extension until December 18, 2020
of the coming into force of the Truchon decision, which was granted by the Court
on June 29, 2020. The court allowed individual exemptions for persons in Quebec
whose death is not reasonably foreseeable, but who would otherwise meet all
other eligibility criteria for MAID, enabling them to apply to the Superior Court of
Québec to seek authorization to access MAID during the suspension period. This
second extension was necessary as the COVID-19 pandemic disruptions to the
parliamentary process unfortunately rendered it impossible to meet the previous
deadline of July 11, 2020.
Following the prorogation of the 1st session of the 43rd Parliament in August
2020 and the opening of the 2nd session on September 23, 2020 Bill C-7 was
reintroduced on October 5, 2020.
The proposed changes include:
• removing the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” (RFND) criterion
from the list of eligibility criteria in the federal legislation, in response to the
Superior Court of Québec’s September 2019 Truchon ruling
• creating a two-track approach to safeguards based on whether or not a
person’s death is reasonably foreseeable
o creating a new set of safeguards for people whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable following their request for MAID
o maintaining and easing some of the pre-existing set of safeguards for
people whose death is reasonably foreseeable
• expressly excluding eligibility for MAID for persons suffering solely from
mental illness
• allowing a waiver of final consent, so that persons who are assessed and
approved, whose natural deaths are reasonably foreseeable, and who risk losing
decision-making capacity to make arrangements with their practitioner to receive
MAID on a chosen date even if they lose decision-making capacity before that
date
o rendering a waiver of final consent invalid if the person, after having lost
decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or resistance to receiving MAID
• expanding data collected through the federal monitoring regime to provide
a more complete picture of MAID in Canada
QUESTIONS AND ANSWERS
Proposed amendments to Canada’s Criminal Code provisions on MAID
Q1. Why was this Bill reintroduced?
On October 5, 2020, the Government of Canada reintroduced proposed changes
to the federal MAID legislation to respond to the Superior Court of Québec’s
September 2019 Truchon ruling. In accordance with the Truchon ruling, the
proposed changes will remove the requirement for a person’s natural death to be
reasonably foreseeable to be eligible for MAID.
These changes are the same as those proposed by Bill C-7 in the previous
parliamentary session.
The proposed legislation also provides an opportunity to address concerns and
issues arising from nearly four years of experience and through feedback from
Canadians, experts, practitioners, stakeholders, provinces and territories,
including during the January and February 2020 consultations.
The proposed legislative changes will allow more autonomy to persons who wish
to relieve intolerable suffering by receiving medical assistance in dying.
Q2. Who was consulted in the development of this Bill?
The consultations held in January and February 2020 were an important step in
responding to Quebec’s court ruling, and are part of the Government’s approach
to ensuring that the federal framework on MAID is informed by the evolving
views and needs of Canadians. During these consultations, over 300,000
Canadians completed the online questionnaire. The high level of engagement
demonstrates the importance given to this issue by Canadians.
Ministers Lametti, Hajdu and Qualtrough, as well as Parliamentary Secretaries
Virani and Fisher, met with stakeholders in Halifax, Montreal, Toronto,
Vancouver, Calgary, Winnipeg, Ottawa and Québec City to discuss Canada’s
medical assistance in dying framework.
On January 22, 2020, Minister Lametti also met with provincial and territorial
counterparts in Victoria, BC, to discuss the Government’s key priorities, including
medical assistance in dying.
A What We Heard report on the results of the consultations is now available
online on the Department of Justice Canada’s website. Accessible versions of the
report are also available online.
The federal government continues to engage with the provinces and territories,
both through federal, provincial, and territorial ministers, and through an officials’
level intergovernmental working group on medical assistance in dying.
Q3. Are the proposed changes consistent with the results of the
January/February 2020 consultations?
The proposed changes were informed by concerns and issues raised by
Canadians, experts, practitioners, stakeholders, provinces and territories during
the January and February 2020 consultations.
A What We Heard report on the results of the consultations is now available
online on the Department of Justice Canada’s website. Accessible versions of the
report are also available online.
Q4. How did the Government of Canada take into consideration the views of
persons with lived experience of disability in developing the new legislation?
Ministers Qualtrough, Lametti and Hajdu met with, and listened to,
representatives of the disability community regarding MAID issues.
The Minister of Justice and Attorney-General, the Minister of Health, and the
Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion
sponsored and attended consultation meetings across Canada in January and
February 2020 regarding the Government’s response to Truchon. Representatives
of disability organizations and leading disability scholars participated in these
consultations. Their input informed the reforms proposed in this Bill.
Q5. A range of perspectives were presented from persons with disabilities and
disability stakeholder groups during the consultations. How do the proposed
amendments protect vulnerable persons?
The Government of Canada remains committed to protecting vulnerable
individuals and the equality rights of all Canadians, while supporting autonomy
for persons who wish to end their intolerable suffering by receiving MAID.
Under the proposed bill, eligible persons seeking to receive MAID but whose
death is not reasonably foreseeable will need to be assessed based on a different
and strengthened set of safeguards from those whose death is reasonably
foreseeable.
These proposed amendments would allow practitioners to better assess the
different types of MAID requests, and ensure that appropriate time, expertise and
consideration are devoted to them.
Q6. Advocates for persons with disabilities are saying that this Bill violates the
equality rights and dignity of persons with disabilities, contrary to the Charter of
Rights and Freedoms, and the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities. Does this Bill put the lives of persons with disabilities at risk as
advocates claim?
The Government of Canada fully respects the equality rights of Canadians with
disabilities and has taken concrete measures toward this end. As an example, we
have acceded to the Optional Protocol to the United Nations Convention on the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities, which means that Canadians will have
additional recourse to make a complaint to the UN Committee on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities, if they believe their rights under the Convention have
been violated.
The Bill contains revised safeguards to protect vulnerable persons from pressure
and coercion, and to ensure that MAID is always an informed and voluntary
choice.
Q7. What improvements does the Bill propose to federal data collection on
MAID? Why are these enhancements proposed?
Since the implementation of the monitoring regime, it has become clear that
capturing information based solely on the written requests for MAID received by
physicians and nurse practitioners has resulted in an incomplete picture of who is
requesting MAID across the country.
The proposed provisions would allow for the collection of data on all assessments
following an individual’s request for MAID, including any requests that have not
been put in writing or any preliminary assessments that may be undertaken by
other health professionals—such as other types of nurses—in the care team or
through a care coordination service. This would help provide a clearer
understanding of who requests MAID.
Once the Bill is passed, consultations will take place with key stakeholders
involved with MAID and MAID reporting, and amendments outlining the
additional data required will be reflected in the MAID monitoring regulations.
Q8. When will the proposed changes come into force?
The proposed changes to Canada’s MAID legislation were reintroduced in the
House of Commons on October 5, 2020.
The proposed amendments to the federal law would become law once it has gone
through the legislative process in Parliament and received Royal Assent.
For more information on how a proposed bill becomes law, visit the House of
Commons’ Legislative Process webpage.
Q9. How will the proposed legislative changes affect health services delivered
to specific federal populations (First Nations, Inuit, immigration detainees,
refugee claimants, federal inmates, veterans, members of the Armed Forces,
members of the RCMP)?
As part of the Criminal Code, the federal legislation on MAID dictates the
conditions under which MAID can be administered across the country for all
Canadians, including federal populations.
Q10. How would the revised medical assistance in dying federal regime interact
with provincial and territorial legislation and jurisdiction? Could another province
or territory allow MAID for patients suffering solely from mental illness?
Criminal law in Canada is federal and applies to the whole country. Provinces and
territories can establish health-related policies on MAID that are consistent with
the new legislation. However, they cannot permit actions that are prohibited
under Canada’s Criminal Code.
Q11. How will the federal government support health practitioners in
implementing the changes?
The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with provinces and
territories, health system partners and health practice regulatory bodies to
support the implementation of the proposed changes to the legislation, if passed
by Parliament. This includes the development of monitoring, reporting, best
practices and guidance for the MAID regime.
Q12. How will the proposed changes affect persons who are already in the
process of requesting MAID?
Until a new law is passed in Parliament, the existing law (from 2016) applies. This
means that persons who have signed and dated their written request before the
proposed changes to the law are enacted will go through the process as outlined
in the 2016 law. However, the 10-day reflection period will no longer apply, and
they will be able to benefit from the new rules surrounding waiver of final
consent if they are at risk of losing their capacity to consent on their chosen date.
If a person requesting MAID has not signed and dated their request by the date
the changes to the legislation become law, they would need to follow the new
law as passed by Parliament.
Eligibility
Q13. What are the remaining eligibility criteria for MAID if the “reasonable
foreseeability of natural death” criterion is repealed?
Once the Bill is enacted and becomes law, persons who wish to receive medical
assistance in dying will need to satisfy the following eligibility criteria:
• be 18 years of age or older and have decision-making capacity
• be eligible for publicly funded health care services
• make a voluntary request that is not the result of external pressure
• give informed consent to receive MAID, meaning that the person has
consented to receiving MAID after they have received all information needed to
make this decision
• have a serious and incurable illness, disease or disability (excluding mental
illness)
• be in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability
• have enduring and intolerable physical or psychological suffering that
cannot be alleviated under conditions the person considers acceptable
Q14. What types of medical conditions would make a person eligible for MAID
without the reasonably foreseeable natural death criterion?
Persons suffering from a wide range of serious medical conditions could become
eligible to receive MAID, should they meet all the eligibility criteria outlined in
Q13.
For example, under the proposed amendments, persons suffering from medical
conditions causing severe chronic pain or other persistent symptoms, severe
degenerative conditions, or static disabilities could be eligible for medical
assistance in dying. In the end, MAID is a very personal decision that is based on
an individual’s specific circumstances.
The Bill proposes to expressly exclude eligibility for persons who suffer solely
from mental illness.
Q15. Why does the Bill propose to expressly exclude individuals whose sole
underlying medical condition is a mental illness?
The Government of Canada recognizes the complexity and challenges associated
with allowing MAID for individuals suffering solely from mental illness.
The complexity was reflected by strong reservations expressed during the
roundtables and online consultation around expanding eligibility to persons
whose sole medical condition is a mental illness. The feedback noted challenges
with assessing capacity and the uncertain trajectory of mental illnesses.
This issue will benefit from a more comprehensive examination as part of the
broader parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
Q16. Would a person with both a mental illness and a physical condition be
eligible under the criteria proposed in this Bill?
A person who has both a mental illness and another medical condition could be
eligible for medical assistance in dying if the other condition qualifies as a “serious
and incurable illness, disease or disability” and they meet all other eligibility
criteria.
Safeguards
Q17. What are the safeguards proposed in the bill for a person whose death is
reasonably foreseeable compared to someone whose death is not?
The Bill proposes a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on
whether or not a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable. New and
modified safeguards would be applied to eligible persons whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable. Existing safeguards will be maintained and, in some
cases, eased for persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable.
Under the proposed legislation, eligible persons whose death is reasonably
foreseeable would be subject to the following safeguards:
• the request for MAID must be made in writing. This written request must
be signed by one independent witness, and it must be made after the person is
informed that they have a “grievous and irremediable medical condition”. A paid
professional personal or health care worker can be an independent witness.
• two independent doctors or nurse practitioners must provide an
assessment and confirm that all of the eligibility requirements are met
• the person must be informed that they can withdraw their request at any
time, in any manner
• the person must be given an opportunity to withdraw consent and must
expressly confirm their consent immediately before receiving MAID (however,
this “final consent” requirement can be waived in certain circumstances)
Under the proposed legislation, eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable would be subject to the following new and modified
safeguards, some of which are similar to those for eligible persons whose death is
reasonably foreseeable:
• the request for MAID must be made in writing. This written request must
be signed by one independent witness, and it must be made after the person is
informed that they have a “grievous and irremediable medical condition”. A paid
professional personal or health care worker can be an independent witness.
• the person must be informed that they can withdraw their request at any
time, in any manner
• two independent doctors or nurse practitioners must provide an
assessment and confirm that all of the eligibility requirements are met
o one of the two practitioners who provides an assessment of eligibility
must have expertise in the medical condition that is causing the person’s suffering
• the person must be informed of available and appropriate means to relieve
their suffering, including counselling services, mental health and disability support
services, community services, and palliative care, and must be offered
consultations with professionals who provide those services
• the person and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable and
available means to relieve the person’s suffering, and agree that the person has
seriously considered those means
• the eligibility assessments must take at least 90 days, but this period can be
shortened if the person is about to lose the ability to make health care decisions,
as long as both assessments have already been completed
• immediately before MAID is provided, the practitioner must give the
person an opportunity to withdraw their request and ensure that they give
express consent
Q18. Why do the proposed amendments make a distinction between people
whose deaths are reasonably foreseeable and those that are not if the
“reasonable foreseeability of natural death” requirement is repealed from the
eligibility criteria?
While “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” is removed as an eligibility
criterion in the proposed legislation, it is kept as a way of deciding which
procedural safeguards will be applied to MAID requests.
Under the proposed bill, a strengthened set of safeguards would be applied for
MAID requests where a person’s death is not reasonably foreseeable. These
proposed amendments would require practitioners take additional steps to
ensure that the request is fully informed and considered, and that patients have
explored all reasonable options.
When a person’s natural death is reasonably foreseeable, the existing safeguards
would be maintained and, in some cases, eased. For example, a person’s request
will need to be signed by one witness instead of two, and the 10-day reflection
period is eliminated.
Q19. Does keeping the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” condition as
a way to distinguish which safeguard regime should apply go against the Truchon
decision?
Keeping the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” condition as a way to
distinguish who will be subject to which type of safeguards does not contravene
the court’s ruling.
In its September 2019 Truchon decision, the Superior Court of Québec found that
it was unconstitutional to deny access to MAID for persons who met all the other
eligibility criteria, but whose death is not reasonably foreseeable. As such, the
court ruled that “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” was invalid as an
eligibility criterion.
In accordance with this ruling, this Bill proposes to remove the “reasonable
foreseeability of natural death” criterion from the list of eligibility criteria, thus
allowing a person whose death is not reasonably foreseeable to seek MAID should
they want to pursue a medically assisted death to relieve their intolerable
suffering.
Q20. What does “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” mean?
The definition of reasonable foreseeability of natural death has not changed in
the new legislation. Reasonable foreseeability of natural death is a familiar
concept for providers after four years of providing the service. By retaining the
same language in Bill C-7, practitioners will be using a standard that is already
familiar to them as a means to determine which safeguards to apply.
As before, a person does not necessarily need to have a single fatal disease to
satisfy the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” condition, as it depends
on all of that individual’s medical circumstances considered in totality.
Q21. Why does the Bill propose a 90-day assessment period for persons whose
death is not reasonably foreseeable?
The assessment of medical assistance in dying requests for persons whose death
is not reasonably foreseeable can be more challenging.
The proposed mandatory 90-day assessment period for persons whose death is
not reasonably foreseeable will ensure that enough time is devoted to exploring
relevant aspects of the person’s situation and to discussing possible options to
alleviate their suffering such as palliative care and other support services.
Q22. What is the difference between an assessment period and a reflection
period?
An assessment period represents the time taken by a practitioner to review a
patient’s medical assistance in dying request and assess whether all eligibility
criteria are met.
A reflection period, on the other hand, specifies a minimum amount of time that
must pass between the approval of a request and the provision of medical
assistance in dying. It aims to give the person some time to reflect on their
decision before pursuing a medically assisted death.
Under the proposed revisions, there would no longer be any reflection period for
people who seek MAID.
Q23. Why does the Bill require agreement that reasonable means to alleviate a
person’s suffering have been seriously considered?
The new and strengthened safeguards for eligible individuals whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable are specifically designed to support fully informed
decision-making while also respecting individual autonomy.
Under the proposed amendments, practitioners and patients whose death is not
reasonably foreseeable would be required to have discussed and seriously
considered reasonable means to relieve the patient’s suffering. This safeguard
requires the practitioner to explore reasonable treatment options with the
patient and be satisfied that they have fully explored and weighed the risks and
benefits of available treatment options. The patient is not required to undertake
treatments that may be unacceptable to them.
Q24. Why have you reduced the number of witnesses required? Doesn’t that
remove a safeguard for protecting vulnerable people?
MAID providers and assessors have consistently reported that finding two
witnesses who are not subject to the exclusions in the Criminal Code constitutes
an access barrier for many individuals seeking MAID. This is especially true for
individuals living in nursing homes or other residential settings where their family
and social networks may be very limited. During the roundtable consultations,
there was overwhelming support for removing the requirement for two
witnesses.
Reducing the required number of witnesses to one will not weaken protections
for vulnerable persons as the witness is only attesting to the signing and dating of
the request by the person requesting MAID. Witnesses play no role in assessing
the eligibility of person seeking MAID and are not responsible for establishing
whether they have been subject to undue influence or pressures. Full application
of the other safeguards is the responsibility of MAID assessors, providers and care
coordination teams.
Q25. How can you call the witness “independent” if they are a caregiver?
Paid professionals who provide personal care or health care are likely to be
among the limited number of personal contacts an individual living in a care
institution may have. Under the proposed changes, these individuals would still
be excluded from acting as a witness if they know or believe they are a
beneficiary of the person’s will or if they would receive a financial benefit from
the person’s death.
Any medical or other health care provider who is involved in the assessment of
the person for MAID eligibility or in providing MAID to the person would be
excluded from being able to act as an independent witness.
Waiver of final consent, “advance consent”, “advance request”, or “Audrey’s
Amendment”
Q26. The proposed amendments allow certain persons to provide “waiver of
final consent”. What does that mean?
The proposed amendments would allow the elimination of the requirement for
the patient to provide final consent right before receiving MAID. Under the
proposed bill, waiver of final consent would be possible for individuals:
• whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable;
• who have been assessed and approved to receive MAID; and
• who made an arrangement with their practitioner to waiver the need to
provide final consent because they were at risk of losing decision-making capacity
before their chosen date to receive MAID.
Including ”waiver for final consent” for persons in these circumstances, often
referred to as “Audrey’s Amendment” also responds to the concerns that were
raised by Audrey Parker, who chose to receive MAID earlier than she wanted to
out of fear of losing decision-making capacity before her preferred date.
The Bill would also render waiver of final consent invalid if the person, after
having lost decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or resistance to the
administration of MAID. Reflexes and other types of involuntary movements, such
as a response to a touch or to the insertion of a needle, would not constitute
refusal or resistance.
In addition, any person who is approved for MAID and chooses to pursue MAID
through self-administration would also be allowed to make arrangements with
their practitioner to waiver final consent, to allow for a physician to follow
through with providing MAID to the person should self-administration produce
complications and cause the individual to lose decision-making capacity. This type
of waiver of final consent would be available for all eligible persons, regardless of
their prognosis.
Q27. The provision that prohibits a practitioner from providing MAID to a person
who refuses MAID despite having waived final consent may not protect some
persons suffering from dementia. How will the law protect them?
Under the proposed bill, waiver of final consent would be possible only for
individuals:
• whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable;
• who have been assessed and approved to receive MAID; and
• who made an arrangement with their practitioner to waiver the need to
provide final consent because they were at risk of losing decision-making capacity
before their chosen date to receive MAID.
Persons whose death is not reasonably foreseeable would not be able to waive
final consent.
The Bill would also render waiver of final consent invalid if the person, after
having lost decision-making capacity, demonstrates refusal or resistance to the
administration of MAID. Reflexes and other types of involuntary movements, such
as a response to a touch or to the insertion of a needle, would not constitute
refusal or resistance.
Q28. How will the provider tell the difference between involuntary movements
and resistance? Won’t this provision scare off providers?
The Bill clarifies that reflexes or involuntary responses, such as response to touch
or the insertion of a needle, would not constitute refusal or resistance.
Practitioners generally meet often with a patient who has been assessed as
eligible for MAID to confirm their wishes and assess the risks related to potential
loss of decision-making capacity. However, clinicians will need to apply their
judgement and act accordingly if they have concerns. Provinces and regulators
may also develop guidance materials to support clinicians.
The Government will work closely with provinces and territories to support the
implementation of the legislative changes, including the development and sharing
of best practices and guidance for the MAID regime.
Q29. Why is the Bill not also proposing to amend the Criminal Code to permit
MAID on the basis of an advance request made after a diagnosis (e.g., a diagnosis
of Alzheimer’s disease)?
The Government of Canada recognizes the complexity and challenges associated
with allowing people diagnosed with illnesses that will affect their decision-
making capacity, such as Alzheimer’s, to prepare an advance request for MAID.
This type of advance request will no doubt be considered during the broader
parliamentary review of MAID legislation.
Q30. How do these Criminal Code amendments on “waiver of final consent” align
with the consultations on the same issue undertaken by the province of Quebec?
In November 2019, Quebec’s Expert Group on Incapacity and Medical Aid in Dying
released its final report, which addresses these issues under their current “end-of-
life” regime. In January 2020, the Government of Quebec announced its intention
to hold extensive public consultations on issues concerning the requirement to
provide final consent right before receiving MAID.
The Government of Canada will closely follow the public consultations that the
Government of Quebec has committed to undertaking.
Parliamentary review
Q31. When will the five-year parliamentary review of the MAID law take place?
What will be its focus?
Former Bill C-14, which created Canada’s current medical assistance in dying
legislation, requires a parliamentary review of the law’s provisions, as well as the
state of palliative care in Canada, by one or more committees, starting at the
beginning of the fifth year after becoming law.
The parliamentary review would allow for further public and parliamentary
debate on all aspects of medical assistance in dying in Canada, including some
excluded from the proposed legislative changes that were reintroduced in Bill C-7.
Important questions relating to MAID in Canada—such as advance requests for
persons newly diagnosed with a condition that could affect their decision-making
capacity in the future, eligibility for persons suffering solely from mental illness
and eligibility for mature minors—could be considered during this broader
parliamentary review of Canada’s MAID law.
Although this broader review was expected to start by June 2020, unprecedented
challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic have unfortunately delayed the
parliamentary review process.
The Government of Canada remains committed to supporting this broader review
of Canada’s MAID law and the state of palliative care in Canada in a timely
manner.
Decisions relating to the parliamentary review ultimately rests with Parliament,
including decisions on timing and scope.
Q32. Will the federal medical assistance in dying law change again because of
the parliamentary review?
The Government of Canada and parliamentarians will be responsible for
determining next steps after the review is complete.
Non-legislative measures
Q33. What is the Government of Canada doing to support persons living with a
disability?
Accessibility and disability inclusion are a priority for the Government of Canada,
including measures to support the financial security and social inclusion of
Canadians with disabilities, improvements to the Registered Disability Savings
Plan, and creation of employment opportunities for persons with disabilities.
In 2018, Canada acceded to the Optional Protocol to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities. In July 2019, the Accessible
Canada Act, considered one of the most significant advances in federal disability
rights legislation in over 30 years, came into force.
In 2020, the Government established the COVID-19 Disability Advisory Group to
advise the Minister for Employment, Workforce Development and Disability
Inclusion on the real-time lived experiences of persons with disabilities during the
pandemic on disability-specific issues, challenges and systemic gaps and on
strategies, measures and steps to be taken. To date, the Advisory Group has
contributed to the development of concrete measures such as public health
guidance, the procurement of personal protective equipment for persons with
disabilities, and the one-time $600 payment in recognition of the extraordinary
expenses faced by persons with disabilities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
As noted in the 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government is working to
bring forward a Disability Inclusion Plan that will include:
• a new Canadian Disability Benefit;
• a robust employment strategy for Canadians with disabilities; and
• a better process to determine eligibility for Government disability programs
and benefits.
Q34. What is the Government of Canada doing to improve palliative care across
the country?
The Government of Canada recognizes that access to palliative and end-of-life
care is an important issue for Canadians. Many people with life-limiting illness
wish to remain independent and receive the care they need at home or in their
community. Improving access to palliative care in a variety of settings is critical to
making this happen.
Through Budget 2017, Canada made historic new investments in health care,
which committed $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to mental health
and addiction services, as well as home and community care, including palliative
care.
In August 2019, Health Canada released an Action Plan that defines federal
activities and next steps linked to the Framework on Palliative Care in Canada.
The Action Plan outlines activities that are designed to:
• raise awareness
• increase support for health care providers, families and caregivers
• support data collection and research
• improve access to palliative care for underserved populations
• improve access to culturally safe, distinctions-based palliative care for and
in Indigenous communities
The Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces, territories,
people living with life-limiting illness, caregivers, stakeholders, and communities
to improve the quality and availability of palliative care for Canadians.
Q35. What is the Government of Canada doing to improve mental health and
suicide prevention efforts?
Addressing mental health is an important priority for the Government of Canada,
with good reason: mental illness affects many Canadian families and individuals,
and has an impact on our economy and society as a whole.
Through Budget 2017, Canada made historic new investments in health care,
which committed $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to mental health
and addiction services, as well as home and community care, including palliative
care. Budget 2019 also provided $25 million over 5 years to implement and
sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
Additional efforts and investments aim to:
• strengthen protective factors that lead to positive mental health
• reduce and address the risk factors that can lead to mental illness and
suicide
• provide culturally appropriate interventions, services and support for
Indigenous peoples, in partnership with them
• reduce the stigma and discrimination attached to poor mental health,
mental illness and problematic substance use
The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 continues to create stress
and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access
to their regular support networks. Therefore, in April 2020, the Government of
Canada launched the Wellness Together Canada portal, the first national program
of its kind, providing a 24/7 suite of free evidence-based tools and services.
Through Wellness Together Canada, Canadians across the country can access
supports ranging self-assessment, peer support, to confidential sessions with
social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
Q36. All services are available in both official languages, and phone counseling
sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects. How do you respond to criticism that Canada’s MAID legislation is going
against suicide prevention efforts?
Protecting vulnerable persons, including those suffering from mental illness or in
crisis, remains a priority for the Government of Canada. It is important to note
that international evidence does not suggest any relationship between the
availability of MAID and suicide rates.
Canada’s MAID regime
Q37. Does Canada’s medical assistance regime resemble that of other countries?
Of the jurisdictions that have a law permitting medical assistance in dying, most
allow it only under end-of-life circumstances, often defined by a six-month
prognosis or sometimes 12 months. Only Belgium, the Netherlands, and
Luxembourg currently allow medical assistance in dying for persons whose death
is not approaching but whose suffering can’t be relieved.
Under the proposed amendments, which remove the requirement for a person’s
death to be reasonably foreseeable, Canada’s law would move closer to those of
Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg. In terms of eligibility, Canada’s law
would be stricter than the laws of these countries, because it would require the
person to be in an advanced state of irreversible decline in capabilities.
However, the proposed amendments would make Canada’s medical assistance in
dying framework broader than that of Belgium, the Netherlands and Luxembourg
because it would not require that the practitioner and patient agree that there is
no prospect of improvement of the patient’s situation. Under the proposed
legislation, reasonable ways of relieving the person’s suffering will need to have
been considered, but not necessarily tried.
Q38. How many MAID deaths have there been so far in Canada?
There have been more than 13,000 reported medically assisted deaths in Canada
since June 2016. This figure is based on voluntarily reported data from the
provinces and territories prior to November 1, 2018, and data collected under the
new monitoring regime after that date.
There has been a consistent and gradual increase in MAID deaths over the last
three years as people become more aware of assisted dying as a legal option and
it gains greater acceptance by Canadians.
2% of all deaths in Canada in 2019 were a result of a medically assisted death.
This figure is in line with other permissive regimes, where assisted deaths account
for 0.3% to 4.6% of all deaths.
The Regulations require the federal Minister of Health to produce a report at least
once a year using the information collected on MAID.
Q39. What information does the federal government currently gather?
On November 1, 2018, regulations on the provision and collection of information
for the purpose of monitoring the implementation of MAID came into force to
support public accountability and transparency of this practice. The regulations
set out the framework for mandatory reporting for all physicians, nurse
practitioners and pharmacists who receive written requests for, and participate
in, MAID, as required in federal legislation.
The system currently collects data such as total numbers of medically assisted
deaths, settings where MAID is provided, medical condition, gender, and average
age.
The following health care providers are required to file information for monitoring
purposes:
• Physicians or nurse practitioners who receive a patient’s written request for
medical assistance in dying.
• Pharmacists who dispense a substance in connection with the provision of
medical assistance in dying.
MAID data is submitted to Health Canada in one of two ways. Some provinces and
territories collect the data from their practitioners and pharmacists and forward
this information to Health Canada. In other provinces and territories, practitioners
submit data directly to Health Canada through a secure online portal. More
detailed information about the reporting requirements including guidance
materials are available online.
Q40. Who is receiving MAID and why?
The average age of persons who received MAID in Canada was 75.2 years. More
than 80% of MAID procedures are provided to individuals aged 65 or older. A
nearly equal proportion of males (50.9%) and females (49.1%) received MAID.
Cancer (67.2%) was the most commonly cited underlying medical condition of
persons who received MAID, followed by respiratory (10.8%) and neurological
(10.4%) conditions.
Q41. How many MAID recipients received palliative care services?
The majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported to have
received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access
palliative care services prior to receiving MAID, the majority (89.6%) would have
had access to these services according to the reporting practitioner.
Q42. How many MAID recipients received disability support services?
Slightly under half (41.2%) of the MAID recipients were reported as requiring
disability support services, with the majority (89.8%) of these individuals having
received them. For the purposes of MAID reporting, disability support services
could include but are not limited to assistive technologies, adaptive equipment,
rehabilitation services, personal care services and disability-based income
supplements.
2020 Consultations
Q43. How did the Government protect the results of the online questionnaire
from being manipulated or skewed? How did you address campaigns that
encouraged people to skew the results of the survey by submitting multiple
questionnaires?
Over 300,000 Canadians participated in the online consultation on medical
assistance in dying that took place from January 13 to 27, 2020. Ensuring the
integrity of the data was very important to the Government of Canada.
Throughout the consultation, we regularly monitored and reviewed incoming
submissions for potential evidence of abuse. No major issues were identified.
Truchon Decision
Q44. Why did the Government of Canada not appeal the Truchon decision?
The Government of Canada announced in October 2019 that it would not appeal
the Superior Court of Québec’s Truchon decision, and committed to responding
to the court’s ruling.
Under the proposed bill, the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” criterion
would be removed from Canada’s MAID legislation, as per the Superior Court of
Québec’s ruling.
Q45. Why do the proposed amendments include “waiver of final consent” if it
was not an issue in the Truchon decision?
The Government of Canada made the decision to also include “waiver of final
consent” to the proposed amendments for persons whose death is reasonably
foreseeable, are assessed and approved to receive MAID, and who risk losing
their decision-making capacity before their chosen date.
Allowing ”waiver for final consent” for persons in these circumstances also
responds to the concerns that were raised by Audrey Parker, who chose to
receive MAID earlier than she wanted to out of fear of losing decision-making
capacity before her preferred date.
There was strong support for such an amendment during the Government of
Canada’s January and February 2020 consultations. The majority of Canadians
who participated in the consultations supported permitting MAID for persons
who have been assessed and approved but who have lost capacity before they
receive it. Over 300,000 Canadians participated in the online consultations held
from January 13 to 27, 2020.
Eligible persons who choose to pursue MAID through self-administration would
also be allowed to make arrangements with their practitioner to waiver final
consent, to allow for a physician to follow through with providing MAID to the
person should self-administration produce complications and cause the individual
to lose decision-making capacity. This type of waiver of final consent would be
available for all eligible persons, regardless of their prognosis.
Q46. What is the significance of the December 18, 2020 deadline?
On June 29, 2020, the Superior Court of Québec granted the request of the
Attorney General of Canada for a further extension, until December 18, 2020, of
the Truchon decision rendered in September 2019. This second extension was
necessary as the COVID-19 pandemic disruptions to the parliamentary process
have unfortunately rendered it impossible to meet the previous deadline of July
11, 2020.
The Court also recognized the Government’s diligence with regards to introducing
a bill that would modify the medical assistance in dying regime.
The Court allowed the possibility for individuals whose death is not reasonably
foreseeable and who wish to access medical assistance in dying to apply to the
Superior Court during the period of suspension.
Q47. How many individual exemption requests have been made to date? How
many have been granted by the Court? What was the AGC’s position?
As of October 1, 2020, 6 individual exemption requests for MAID have been
granted under this ruling by the Superior Court of Québec. The Attorney General
of Canada has not appeared or taken position in any of these cases.
A number of requests are also awaiting decision. The Attorney General of Canada
will consider its position on future requests on a case-by-case basis.
Q48. Do you think Parliament will be able to pass the proposed changes by
December 18, 2020? Will you request a third extension of the coming into effect
of the Truchon deadline?
The Government of Canada remains committed to implementing changes to
Canada’s MAID legislation before the court ruling comes into effect. The
Government will support Parliament in its review of this legislation as much as it
can. We hope that Parliament will do so expeditiously.
A request for an extension will be considered in due course if necessary.
Q49. What will happen if the ruling comes into effect before Parliament can
change the law?
Should the Superior Court of Québec’s ruling come into effect before a revised
legislation is enacted, the “reasonable foreseeability of natural death” criterion
from the federal law will no longer be applicable in the province of Quebec.
Prepared by: Caroline Claude, Senior Communications Advisor, Policy
Communications
Last update: October 5, 2020 (Final)
