Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:44.382680
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2021-2022:_Children’s_Sleepwear_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-childrens-sleepwear-regulations.html
Package ID: 497742b1-4333-4a0b-9928-a49ce33fe4ac
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of children's sleepwear with the requirements of the Children's Sleepwear Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Children’s Sleepwear Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Children’s Sleepwear Regulations Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of children's sleepwear with the requirements of the Children's Sleepwear Regulations. For this project, compliance of select children's sleepwear with the Children's Sleepwear Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors sampled relevant products from online establishments. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating inspections, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of children's sleepwear companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2021 to 2022 fiscal year, chemical and flammability testing of 19 different products was carried out. The flammability testing resulted in 1 advisory, 9 recalls, and the chemical testing resulted in 2 stop distributions. There were 7 instances in which no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Bella & Birdie Girl's Mom and Me Sleepshirt Giant Tiger No compliance issues detected None Betsy and Lace The Original Classic Vintage Nightgown Betsy and Lace No compliance issues detected None Boden UK Printed long-sleeved nightie Boden & Co. Ltd. Flame retardant detected. Did not meet labelling and toxicological requirements for use of chemical flame retardants. Stop distribution by Boden Children Dreamy World Bathrobe Boutique Québec Jouet Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Boutique Québec Jouet Cocoon Muslin Children's bathrobe (Little Barine) Agatha Boutique Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by One Sky Imports Disney Disney Kid's Loungee Costco No compliance issues detected None Hoppetta 2-way gauze sleeping bag 3M-3Y Baby Square Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Baby Square Joe Boxer Children's Robe – Pink Camo Joe Boxer Flame retardant detected. Did not meet labelling and toxicological requirements for use of chemical flame retardants Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Joe Boxer Joe Fresh Toddler Girls' Fleece Robe Joe Fresh No compliance issues detected None Leveret Cotton Terrycloth Hooded Bathrobe Leveret Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Leveret Moon Paris Fanny Pyjamas Set Poppys Collection Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Poppys Collection Nanö Nightgown Entrepôt enfant unique No compliance issues detected None Petite Plume Mini Gingham Victoria Nightgown Kiz Global Apparel Ltd. Flame retardant detected. Did not meet labelling and toxicological requirements for use of chemical flame retardants. Stop distribution by Kidz Global Apparel Ltd. Pottery Barn Kids Critter Robe Pottery Barn Kids No compliance issues detected None Rylee & Cru Organic girls Bedtime Sets Les Ptits Mosus Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Do-Gree Fashions Ltd. Urban Kids Girl's Soft Plush Hooded Critter Robe Urban Planet Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by YM Inc. Vertbaudet Hearts Bathrobe Vertbaudet Did not meet the flammability requirements *Public Advisory by Health Canada WATCO Children's Bathrobe Decathlon Canada Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Decathlon Canada Weddingstar Baby Girl Waffle Robe Weddingstar Inc No compliance issues detected None *A public advisory was posted in place of a recall because the foreign company failed to respond to Health Canada's request. Disclaimer: Inspectors apply a systematic bias during the selection of establishments and samples. Inspectors do not select products randomly; instead, they select the ones that are more likely not to meet health and safety requirements due to observed characteristics. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, Health Canada does not consider the findings of CV projects to reflect overall market compliance, unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria measured in this project. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-07-24 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy