Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:33.983319
Name: International_Cooperation_on_Cosmetics_Regulation_(ICCR)_13th_Annual_Meeting_held_in_Montreal,_Quebec,_Canada,_from_July_9-11,_2019
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/cosmetics/international-cooperation/annual-meeting-montreal-canada-july-9-11-2019.html
Package ID: 4bdb3111-ec63-42c3-a3e0-7ae7f3a5e331
Keywords: ['International-Cooperation on Cosmetics-Regulation', 'ICCR', '13th annual meeting', 'cosmetics regulatory authorities', 'cosmetics safety-and-regulation', 'cosmetics industry trade-associations']
Notes: The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities from Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, and to enter into a constructive dialogue with their relevant cosmetics industry trade associations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 13th Annual Meeting held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, from July 9-11, 2019 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Cosmetics International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 13th Annual Meeting held in Montreal, Quebec, Canada, from July 9-11, 2019 The International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) held its 13th Annual Meeting (ICCR-13) from July 9-11, 2019 in Montreal, QC, Canada. The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities from Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, and to enter into a constructive dialogue with their relevant cosmetics industry trade associations. As stated in the Terms of Reference, the purpose of this multilateral framework is to maintain the highest level of global consumer protection, while minimizing barriers to international trade. In 2019, representatives from Colombia, Israel, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand participated in the meeting as observers. As part of this meeting, the regulators entered into a dialogue with cosmetics industry trade associations from each jurisdiction on July 10, 2019. The Director General of the Consumer and Hazardous Products Safety Directorate - Health Canada, Mr. Tolga Yalkin, welcomed the group and made opening remarks. The President of the Cosmetics Alliance Canada, Mr. Darren Praznik, made an opening statement on behalf of industry. The following Joint Working Group topics were discussed at the meeting: Cosmetic Product Preservation Allergens Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients International Standards Microbiome Consumer Communications An open stakeholder session was held on July 10. Representatives from Humane Society International and the Rob Stewart Sharkwater Foundation made presentations regarding animal testing and ethically sourced ingredients in cosmetics. ICCR recognizes the importance of communication to the general public on both issues. With respect to alternatives to animal testing, ICCR continues to work on this topic. The following are the outcomes of the meeting: Cosmetic Product Preservation ICCR SC endorsed the "Overview of Key Scientific Elements and Principles to be Considered in Ensuring Access to an Appropriate Palette of Preservatives" report and will post to the website. ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will identify any new possible tasks by the first quarter of the next cycle. Allergens ICCR SC endorsed the "Allergens Working Group on Alternative Safety Assessment Tools for Identifying Potential Dermal Allergens" report and will post to the website. Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients A Workshop regarding Next Generation Risk Assessment (NGRA) took place this cycle. ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will complete a report following the Workshop. International Standards The "Updated Annex of Report International Standards in Cosmetics" report is accepted and will be posted to the website. Identification of new published ISO standards will be conducted every cycle. Activities surrounding the standards will be evaluated on an as needed basis. Microbiome ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will continue to work on the microbiome topic as it relates to cosmetics. Consumer Communications ICCR SC agreed to work on advancing this topic. ICCR Regulators and Industry agreed to modernize the ICCR website. The next ICCR meeting will be held in Brussels, Belgium in 2020 Page details Date modified: 2019-11-01 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy