Created: 2024-02-26T14:21:06.154483
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2019-2020:_Lighters_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2019-2020-lighters-regulations.html
Package ID: 4df2bfd8-04b3-4f2e-ab3d-c1de290f2048
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project', 'Lighters Regulations']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of utility lighters with the requirements of the Lighters Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2019-2020: Lighters Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2019-2020: Lighters Regulations Untitled Document Fiscal Year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of utility lighters with the requirements of the Lighters Regulations. For this project, compliance of select utility lighters with the Lighters Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors contacted establishments and requested samples of relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CV project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of utility lighter companies in Canada. Targets were selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, testing of 9 different products was carried out. The testing resulted in 3 recalls and 5 commitments to address non-compliance. There was one instance where no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action BIC Multi-Purpose Candle Edition Lighter BIC Canada No compliance issues detected None Bernzomatic LTR200 Flexible Lighter Home Depot Did not meet the flame height requirements Commitment by Home Depot Clipper Multipurpose Shiny Colour Lighter HBI Canada Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Voluntary Recall by HBI Canada CM BQ-4 Multi-flex BBQ Lighters Château Manis Electroniques Inc. Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Voluntary Recall by Château Manis Electroniques Inc. Coghlan's/KING Disposable Gas Utility Lighter Coghlan's Ltd. Did not meet the flame height and sudden increase in flame height requirements Commitment by Calico Brands, Inc. dLite Flexible Lighter Dorfin Inc. Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Commitment by Dorfin Inc. DUCO Windproof Mini BBQ Lighter Duco Group Incorporated Did not meet the after burn, child resistance, labelling and abnormal burning requirements. Voluntary Recall by Duco Group Incorporated Ronson Wind-Resistant Multi-Purpose Lighter Zippo Manufacturing Company Did not meet the after burn requirements Commitment by Zippo Manufacturing Company Xlite Party Lighter Xlite Corporation Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Xlite Corporation Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2022-05-20 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy