Created: 2023-03-30T16:08:14.649341
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_health_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(B)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/51af9782-3596-4de5-be92-a85bb55ba65c/resource/7a16be4d-3a9c-4765-8385-d1f2ba8dd9c2/download/supp-b-binder-min-duclos-full-text-en.pdf
Package ID: 51af9782-3596-4de5-be92-a85bb55ba65c
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Health', 'House committee', 'Standing committee on health', 'budget']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health's appearance before the standing committee on health on November 29, 2022 concerning the supplementary estimates B. 
The financial binder and the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction's binder are available as separate resources
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Supplementary Estimates (B)
MINISTER DUCLOS
Tuesday, November 29, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES B
NOVEMBER 29, 2022
OVERVIEW DOCUMENTS
1. Scenario Note
HOT ISSUES
2. Pediatric Analgesics Shortage
3. Post-COVIDCondition
4. RSV
5. HHR Crisis
6. Health Transfers
7. Dental Care–PT Jurisdiction
8. Dental Care–Work Towards Long-Term Program
9. Abortion Access
10. Psychedelics
11. Canada Mental Health Transfer
12. 3-Digit Hotline
13. ArriveCan App
14. OpioidOverdose Crisis
HEALTH CARE
15. Canada Health Act–Compliance Issues
16. Home Care
17. LTC Homes
18. MAID
19. Palliative Care
20. Primary Care
21. Thalidomide
22. Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
23. Anti-Microbial Resistance
DENTAL CARE
24. Dental Care–Challenges in Access
25. Dental Care–Fiscal Implications
26. Dental Care–HHR Impacts
27. Dental Care–Protection against Fraud
28. Dental Care–Public Education
MENTAL HEALTH
19. Mental Health and Substance Use Tools
30. Mental Health Supports for Children and Youth
1
31. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
32. Perinatal Mental Health
33. Suicide Prevention
34. Disparities in Rural Health–Children Mental and Physical Aspects
35. Virtual-Rural Mental Health
DRUG USE
36. Safer Supply
37. s.56 Requests to Allow for Personal Possession
38. BC Opioid Health Care Cost Recovery Legislation
CANNABIS
39. Cannabis
PHARMACEUTICALS (INCLUDING REGULATION)
40. Biomanufacturing
41. Drugs for Rare Diseases
42. Pharmacare
43. Regulating Pediatric Medicines
44. SAP (Special Access Programme)
SHORTAGES
45. Health Product Shortages
46. Infant Formula Shortage
COVID RELATED ISSUES
47. COVID-19 Therapeutics
48. OAG Audit Report on the Enforcement of Quarantine and Testing Orders
49. Testing and Screening
50. Global COVID-19 Efforts
51. GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network)
52. Impact of COVID-19 on Children’s Vaccination
53. NESS and PPE
54. OAG Audit Reports during the Pandemic
55. Vaccination–General
56. Vaccine Injury Support Program
57. Security at the NML
TOBACCO AND VAPING
58. Smoking and Tobacco
59. Youth Vaping and Substance Use
SEXUAL ANDREPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
60. Sexual and Reproductive Health
61. Support for 2SLGBTQI+: Health Portfolio
PESTICIDES
62. Pesticides
2
63. Transformation and PCPA Review
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS
64. Public Accounts
a. Health Canada
b. CFIA
c. PHAC
RESEARCH
65. CIHR-Funded COVID-19 Research
66. Health Research (non-COVID)
67. CIHR-Funded Mental Health and Addictions Research
HEALTHY LIVING / AGING
68. Healthy Eating Strategy
69. Diabetes
70. Healthy Living and Obesity
71. Seniors and Healthy Aging
72. Dementia
INFECTIOUS DISEASES
73. Seasonal Flu
74. Monkeypox
75. Ebola
76. Lyme Disease
77. Measles
78. HIV/AIDS Funding
CANCER
79. Cancer-General
80. C-224, National Framework on Cancers Linked to Firefighting Act
FOOD SAFETY
81. CFIA-Food Safety
3
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (HESA)–SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES
(B), 2022-2023
November 29, 2022
MEETING SCENARIO
• You will be supported by the following officials who will appear with you at the meeting:
o Health Canada
-Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
-Heather Jeffery, Associate Deputy Minister
-Dr. Supriya Sharma, Chief Medical Advisor
o PHAC
-Dr. Harpreet Kochhar, President
-Dr. Howard Njoo, Deputy Chief Public Health Officer
• Supporting you virtually will be:
o CIHR
-Dr. Mike Strong, President
o CFIA
-Philippe Morel, Vice-President, Operations
• The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will each have 5
minutes to deliver. You will then take questions from Committee members for the remainder of the
hour.
o The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
o In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5
minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will be the 44th time that HESA has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the 44th
Parliament. They are currently conducting thefollowing three studies concurrently:
1. Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic
2. Canada's Health Workforce (Consideration of a Draft Report)
3. Children’s Health
• The Committee has recently taken an interest in the supply of pediatric medications, in
particular, children’s analgesics. On November 15, the Committee questioned Health Canada and PHAC
officials followed by hearings with stakeholders proposed by each party. During the meeting, a motion
moved by Conservative MPDr. Stephen Ellis proposed that the Department provide the Committee with
weekly updates on the number of medications being imported into Canada to address the shortages.
After a period of debate and amendments, a revised motion was adopted on November 22, requiring
the Department to provide bi-weekly updates to the Committee. In the past, the Committee has taken
an interest in the proposed Canada Mental Health Transfer. In June 2022, the Committee adopted a
motion moved by the Conservatives to order Health Canada to produce all documents held by the
4
Department in relation to the new transfer. At other times, the Committee has indicated its desire to
undertake studies on women’s health, breast implants, and the national suicide hotline.
• At HESA, the Opposition role is led by the Conservatives, who have placed several key critics,
“shadow ministers,” on the Committee. Dr. Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health, Todd
Doherty is the Shadow Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention, Laila Goodridge is the
Shadow Minister for Addictions, and Matt Jeneroux is the Shadow Minister for Supply Chain Issues. Mr.
Jeneroux was previously Shadow Minister for Health during the first months of the COVID-19 Pandemic.
• The Conservatives remain critical ofCOVID-19 mitigation measures, including masking
mandates, border restrictions, and mandatory vaccination policies.
Dr. Ellis has raised these concerns at a number of meetings, even on issues that are seemingly not
connected. For example, at a recent meeting on the Committee’s Children’s Health study, Dr. Ellis raised
concerns that masking and other measures have had a negative impact on early childhood development.
The Conservatives have also raised the ongoing shortages of pediatric medicines at a number of
meetings. Ms. Goodridge has taken a leading role on this at the Committee, raising on a number of
occasions the difficulties she has had as a young mother to an infant. Additionally, the motion to invite
officials to discuss pediatric medicines on November 15 was an initiative proposed by the Conservatives.
• Bloc Quebecois members have responded consistently to any issue raised at the Committee by
tying it to their expressed desire for an unconditional increase in the Canada Health Transfer. Luc
Theriault, Bloc Quebecois Health Critic, is a member of the Committee. Mr. Theriault does not generally
attend the Committee’s meetings, but BQ members who have attended in his place have expressed this
position. BQ MP Jean-Denis Garon attends the Committee regularly and has repeatedly emphasized his
general skepticism about the ability of the federal government to deliver programs that may be similar
to those already existing in Quebec. During the debate on the interim Canada Dental Benefit, Mr. Garon
stronglyargued for the federal government to provide the money being spent on the benefit to the
Government of Quebec.
• The New Democratic Party presence is led by Don Davies, the party’s health critic, and long
standing member of the Committee. Mr. Davies hasbeen a Committee member since 2015. The NDP
supported the interim Canada Dental Benefit at the Committee and have raised the issue in conjunction
with their support of a national pharmacare program. NDP members attending the Committee have also
brought attention to the overdose crisis where they have been critical of the Government for not
pursuing the decriminalization of simple possession of drugs.
• The Portfolio has prepared a range of briefing products, addressing a variety of hot issues,
including the health human resources crisis, the ongoing shortages of children’s analgesics, the
proposed Canada Mental Transfer, and the opioid overdose crisis, among others. There are also notes
on broader, longer-term files, for example, medical assistance in dying, the interim Canada Dental
Benefit, COVID-19, pesticides, mental health, and healthy living.
5
SHORTAGE OF PEDIATRIC ANALGESICS
ISSUE
• Health Canada is aware that supply of many formats of non-prescription pediatric
acetaminophen andibuprofen products remains limited in retail locations and hospitals in various parts
of the country, causing significant concerns for people in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• Suppliers of pediatric acetaminophen and ibuprofen products are experiencing supply
constraints and intermittent stock-outs, due to unprecedented and unexpected demand levels. It is
unknown when balance will be restored between supply and demand.
• Supply of these products has been constrained since earlier this year, becoming more acute over
the late summer and fall.
• Health Canada continues to take action to address the shortage by working collaboratively with
key stakeholders, including industry and health care system partners, to implement shortage mitigation
measures to increase the supply of these important products, and monitor their supply across the
country.
• As of November 28 over 1.2 million units of foreign authorized supply of both ibuprofen and
acetaminophen have been imported. Distribution of exceptionally imported ibuprofen for use on
hospitals began on Nov 4th, while distribution of imported children’s acetaminophen began reaching
retail shelves on November 25.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government shares the concerns of many parents and caregivers who may not be able to
easily access these important medications to treat their children.
• To increase the supply of these products on store shelves, Health Canada has approved the
exceptional importation of over 1.2 million units, including acetaminophen from the global market that
hasstarted to become available to consumers in retail and community pharmacies.
• This also includes supply of the recently approved exceptional importation of ibuprofen from
the U.S. and acetaminophen from Australia, to supply hospitals in Canada. Importation of ibuprofen has
occurred, and distribution to hospitals has started. Children’s acetaminophen from Australia for
hospitals has arrived in Canada and distribution will begin shortly. These supplies are in addition to the
1.1M ibuprofen units produced in Canada by Haleon during the month of November 2022.
• All options continue to be on the table to address this situation.
• The Department will continue to work with multiple players along the supply chain, right to
patient groups, hospitals and pharmacies, to take any and all additional measures necessary to ensure
access to needed supply of these important medications for our children.
IF PRESSED ON WHY THE SHORTAGE ISN’T YET RESOLVED?
• My Department has been actively working with manufacturers and distributors of pediatric
acetaminophen and ibuprofen products, the provinces and territories, children’s hospitals, the Canadian
Pediatric Society, the Canadian Pharmacists Association, and Food, Health and Consumer Products of
Canada since first learning about supply constraints to help increase the supply of these medications.
• In response to unprecedented demand, manufacturers that supply the Canadian market have
increased production, someproducing at record levels, and they are exploring options to further
increase production and expedite re-supply where product is needed most. For example, during the
month of November a total of 1.1M units of domestically produced Children’s Advil products from
Haleon will have been made available for the Canadian market.
6
• In addition to the products already authorized for exceptional importation, we will continue to
work with suppliers to bring in additional imported products to increase the supply in Canada.
• I have spoken directly to the manufacturers of these medications and hosted two roundtables
with multiple stakeholders who are playing a role to resolve this situation.
• We will continue to treat this as a priority, with Health Canada reviewingadditional proposals
for exceptional importation.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IS THIS SO PRONOUNCED IN CANADA (ARE OTHER COUNTRIES EXPERIENCINGTHE
SAME SHORTAGE?)
• Other countries have reported signals of supply constraints, but none have seen the demand
thatwe have seen in Canada.
• We saw demand for analgesics rise over the summer months, which is the period manufacturers
normally use to restock analgesics for the fall and winter seasons.
• Combined with the increased attention on the issue in Canada in mid-August, and the viral
infections circulating, it has resulted in a drastic and unprecedented spike in demand.
IF PRESSED ON WHY DIDN’T HEALTH CANADA PERMIT IMPORTATION OF FOREIGN PRODUCTS EARLIER?
• Exceptional importation of foreign authorized drugs is considered when the Canadian drug is at
risk, or in critical shortage. This measure is always available for any shortage and was offered to
suppliers when we began to hear about supply constraints in the spring.
• When demand spiked to unprecedented levels in August, my Department intensified ongoing
efforts with industry and other stakeholders to explore all possible solutions. This included options to
further increase supply in the Canadian market, such as ramping up production and accessing foreign
supply.
• We are now seeing the positive results of these efforts. In addition to importing products from
the U.S. and Australia to supply hospitals in Canada, we have started to see children’s acetaminophen
on retail shelves in the last few days.
• We are continuing to work with manufacturers to increase supply in Canada and bring in
additional foreign-authorized products.
IF PRESSED ON WHY IT WILL TAKE SO LONG TO GET THE EXCEPTIONALLYIMPORTEDACETAMINOPHEN
TO STORE SHELVES?
• Each proposal received from a company to import a foreign authorized product undergoes
careful review by Health Canada to confirm that the product was manufactured according to the same
high quality standards thepeople of Canada expect.
• After careful review, the Department has approved the exceptional importation of
acetaminophen from the global market and products are already appearing on store shelves.
• The Department is actively working with distributors and retailers to ensure fair distribution of
supply across Canada.
BACKGROUND
On August 16, 2022, media reported that the SickKids Hospital in Toronto was warning parents and
caregivers that, due to nationwide shortages, a prescription would be required for liquid acetaminophen
and ibuprofen products, and that a pharmacist would provide the medication to them.
7
CBC News and Sick Kids issued corrective statements clarifying that prescriptions for these products
were not required. However, this media attention triggered a further spike in demand for these
products nationally, following reports of intermittent supply constraints that had been previously
reported. Companies have indicated they have ramped up production beyond normal historical demand
levelsbut that the current demand is outpacing production.
On August 30, the Canadian Pediatric Society issued guidance directed to caregivers and parents on the
use of these products.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers and all stakeholders across the supply chain to
identify mitigation measures to increase supply and meet demand for these products, including
reviewing proposals that may require regulatory flexibility or consideration of foreign supply.
Manufacturers are maximizing production, with some companies producing at 100% more than they
were at the same time in 2021, including Haleon’s production of 1.1M units of children’s Advil during
the month of November 2022.
The Department has prioritized information-sharing with provinces and territories via various FPT tables.
The Department has also involved PTs in broader multi-stakeholder discussions to identify solutions as
quickly as possible.
Health Canada has approved the importation of foreign supply of children’s ibuprofen and infant’s
acetaminophen for use in hospitals. Further to this, on November 4, 2022, the Department approved a
proposal from Johnson & Johnson for the exceptional importation of U.S.-labelled acetaminophen that
will help to fill the current supply gap in retail and community pharmacies. On November 10, 2022, the
Department approved the company’s proposed distribution and risk communication plan for the
product, including bilingual safety information and measures to enhance the supply of bilingually
labelled product to Quebec and to French language minority communities in Canada. More than 1.2
million bottles of product have already entered Canada to supply hospitals, community pharmacies and
retailers and products are already appearing on store shelves. An addition 500K units are expected at
retail within the next three weeks. The additional amount to be imported will help increase the supply
available to consumers and will continue to help address the immediate situation. Health Canada
continues to assess additional proposals for exceptional importation to further supplement this
increased supply.
Health Canada is prioritizing public communication by providing information and advice to Canadians.
This was done via a Departmental Statement, and PublicAdvisory issued on October 7, 2022. As well a
webpage was launch on October 26, 2022 dedicated to the analgesic shortage. Health Canada will
continue to keep Canadians up to date on this shortage and the products that have been approved for
importation through this webpage.
In addition to discussions with suppliers, on November 2, 2022, and November 17, 2022, the
Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, hosted roundtable discussions on the pediatric and
children’s analgesics shortage in Canada. Inattendance were external participants representing
manufacturers, distributors, pharmacists, children’s hospitals, and pediatricians. The objective of the
roundtable was to highlight actions to date and provide participants with an opportunity to share
perspectives on the shortage, measures taken, and ongoing challenges, while underscoring the need for
all stakeholders to continue taking measures to end this shortage as soon as possible.
8
POST COVID-19 CONDITION
Issue
While the typical duration of a COVID-19 episode ranges from two to six weeks, many infected
individuals experience new or persisting symptoms for weeks or months after the acute phase.
Key Facts
• While most people with COVID-19 recover fully from their illness, many people, including some
with a milder initial episode, report experiencing symptoms for weeks or months after their initial
infection. These longer-term symptoms (often wide ranging and varying in severity) are referred to as
“post COVID-19 condition” (PCC), or “long COVID”.
• PCC refers to symptoms that last for at least two months, that cannot be explained by an
alternative diagnosis, and that are experienced at 12 weeks or more after the onset of COVID-19.
• PCC can affect both adults and children, with preliminary evidence suggesting it is more
common among adults, and more common in those who experienced a severe COVID-19 illness.
• Based on new data from the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS) released
on October 17, 2022 by Statistics Canada, an estimated 14.8% of adults who reported a previous COVID-
19 infection experienced longer-term symptoms 3+ months after their initial infection. This translates to
about 1.4 million Canadian adults or 4.6% of the Canadian adult population.
• There are many scientific uncertainties about PCC, including how it develops, who is most at
risk, the effect of variants and the potential longer-term socioeconomic impacts.
• While clinical studies are underway in Canada and around the world, there is currently no
universally agreed-upon approach to diagnose and treat PCC.
• The best way to currently prevent PCC is to take measures to avoid getting infected.
• Individuals vaccinated with two or more doses of COVID-19 vaccines may have a reduced risk of
developing PCC if they become infected.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that many Canadians who contract COVID-19 face a prolonged
recovery, with symptoms that endure for some time after their infection.
• While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building, there is still
much that is unknown. The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international
experts to build the evidence base on post COVID-19 condition, to inform and identity strategies to
improve the prevention, diagnosis and treatment.
• The Chief Science Advisor of Canada, Dr. Mona Nemer, has convened a Task Force to develop a
scientific roadmap that will provide a comprehensive framework for addressing post COVID-19
condition. Once released, it will inform decision-making going forward to address its health and
socioeconomic impacts in Canada.
• Statistics Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada recently provided the first Canadian
data that provides insight into the magnitude and impacts of post COVID-19 condition on the Canadian
population. The reports, based on data from the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey Cycle
2, will help inform our way forward in supporting Canadians living with post COVID 19 condition and will
help to prevent future cases.
If pressed on federal actions to address PCC and on details of PCC funding for research, surveillance and
evidence-based guidelines in Canada
• The Government of Canada is making significant investments to build the evidence-base to
betterunderstand post COVID-19 condition.
9
• Since March 2020, our Government has invested $414 million for COVID-19 research through
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, including $17.7 million in targeted funding to study post
COVID-19 condition.
• Wehave also continued to build on these investments. Budget 2022 provided $20 million over
five years, starting this year, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research that will support a new
research network dedicated to understanding and addressing the long-term impacts of COVID-19
infections on people living in Canada and Canadian health systems.
• Budget 2022 also included $10 million over 3 years for the Public Health Agency of Canada to
develop evidence-based guidelines and tools for the identification, prevention, self-management, and
clinical treatment of post COVID-19 condition, and to undertake additional surveillance activities
If pressed on the prevalence or impacts of PCC in Canada
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to monitor developments on scientific evidence
nationally and internationally. This includes working with the provinces and territories to better
understand the long-term effects of COVID 19.
• Research in Canada and around the world is underway to better understand post COVID-19
condition and its impacts. Numerous studies have reported the estimated prevalence of post COVID-19
condition in different populations, though these estimates range considerably for several reasons,
including differences in when and where the studies were conducted.
• Results from the limited provisional release, on October 17th, 2022, of the Canadian COVID-19
Antibody and Health Survey by Statistics Canada, including some results on longer-term symptoms
present for 3 months or more following anacute COVID-19 infection.
• The preliminary findings indicate that 14.8% of Canadian adults who reported a COVID-19
infection reported longer term symptoms 3 or more months after the acute infection.
• In addition, new data published on October 20th bythe Public Health Agency of Canada show
that the impacts of these longer term symptoms are significant. Almost half (47.3%) experienced
symptoms for a year or longer, and 21.3% said that their symptoms often or always limited their daily
activities.
• These symptoms also had an important impact on employment or school attendance. Among
adults with longer-term symptoms who were employed or attending school, approximately three-
quarters (74.1%) missed some work or school due to their symptoms. On average, they missed 20 days.
• This study and others to follow will help to refine our understanding of the prevalence of post
COVID-19 condition in Canada, as well as potentially relevant risk factors.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also undertaking efforts to understand the socio-
economic impacts of post COVID-19 condition in Canada, and its potential implications for the health
care system, and the broader economy.
If pressed on the impact of vaccination on PCC in Canada
• Early evidence suggests that vaccination with two or more doses of COVID-19 vaccines helps to
reduce the risk of developing post COVID-19 condition if individuals become infected.
• The best way to prevent post COVID-19 condition is to take measures to avoid getting infected
in the first place. This includes following public health measures, reducing the risk of COVID-19
complications by getting vaccinated, and remaining up to date on booster doses.
If pressed on clinical services and supports available to Canadians with PCC
• Given the complexity of post COVID-19 condition, we recommend that Canadians experiencing a
delayed recovery from COVID-19 maintain an ongoing dialogue with their health care providers about
possible ways to manage their symptoms.
10
• The provinces and territorialgovernments are responsible for the management, organization
and delivery of health care services for their residents. Many jurisdictions have developed local
resources on post COVID-19 condition. This includes specialized clinics dedicated to post COVID-19
condition recovery.
Background
The World Health Organization (WHO) developed the first version of a clinical case definition of post
COVID-19 condition (PCC) in adults as follows: “Post COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a
history of probable or confirmed SARS CoV-2 infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19
with symptoms and that last for at least 2 months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis.”
The WHO is exploring the possibility of developing, in the coming months, a separate clinical case
definition for children.
There are currently many scientific uncertainties related to PCC and the evidence is slowly evolving. PCC
can affect many different organs, including the brain, the heart, and the lungs. The reported range of
symptoms is broad, varying from mild to severe, and can fluctuate in intensity and sometimes disappear
and reappear over time. Common PCC symptoms include fatigue, cough, shortness of breath, brain fog,
intolerance to physical activity, and others. Often these symptoms have a significant impact on everyday
functioning and quality of life. PCC can affect both adults and children, regardless of the presence
and/or severity of their initial COVID-19 symptoms. Studies in adults have reported that thosewho were
hospitalized or needed intensive care during recovery are at increased risk of experiencing longer-term
effects and PCC.
PCC will have a significant long-term impact on public health and the health care system in general. At
this point, there is insufficient evidence to determine the socio-economic impacts of PCC in Canada, and
its potential burden on the health care system, or the broader economy. The Government of Canada is
actively monitoring the latest research, as well as engaging experts and policy makers (domestic and
international) to help inform public health action.
National Surveillance and Research
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and partners
Statistics Canada, in partnership with PHAC and in consultation with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
have been working on the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS–Cycle 2). The first
wave of the survey was launched in April 2022 and the collected data will be used to estimate the
prevalence of PCC in adults in Canada.
• On September 6th, 2022, Statistics Canada released preliminary results from the CCAHS–Cycle
2 via “The Daily” page on the Statistics Canada website. Using responses received as of July 15th, this
first release will highlight the proportion of self-reported positive tests for COVID-19, as well as self-
reported suspected infections, and symptom prevalence.
• On October 17, 2022, further preliminary results about adults reporting longer-term symptoms
following a SARS-CoV-2 infection were released by Statistics Canada. Data from the CCAHS estimate that
14.8% of Canadian adults who contracted COVID-19 experience longer-term symptoms 3 months or
more after initial COVID-19 infection.
The Canadian Paediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a joint project of PHAC and the Canadian
Paediatric Society, launched a new two-year surveillance study of PCC in children and youth in Canada in
early September 2022. The CPSP study will also provide information on risk factors, symptoms, and
impacts on daily functioning. Preliminary results are not anticipated before early 2023.
11
Through Budget 2022, PHAC will receive $9 million over the next three years (2022-2023: $1
million; 2023-2024: $4 million; 2024-2025: $4 million) to develop and disseminate evidence-based
guidelines on PCC. Potential topics may include guidance for the identification, prevention, self-
management, and clinical treatment of PCC. PHAC is collaborating with partners to:
• Scope guidelines and evidence that are already available,
• Prioritize guideline topics and focus,
• Identify knowledge gaps and priority areas, and
• Establish a guideline panel of experts.
These guidelines will consider the Canadiancontext, and special populations (e.g. Indigenous, racialized,
etc.) will also be taken into consideration.
Budget 2022 also includes another $1 million to undertake additional surveillance activities.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
SinceMarch 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $414 million in 965
COVID-19 research projects, including $17.7 million to fund 41 targeted research studies on PCC.
Spanning a wide range of research interests the funded projectsacross Canada will yield important
results to inform how to manage and treat people with PCC.
Budget 2022 also provided an additional $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for CIHR that
will support the creation of a research network on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on
people living in Canada and Canadian health systems. The funding opportunity was launched on October
19, 2022, and it is anticipated that the successful network will be notified on January 12, 2023.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease
Preparedness. This global initiative is an alliance of research funding organizations that facilitates
rapid/effective research responses.
Office of the Chief Science Advisor of Canada
The Chief Science Advisor of Canada, Dr. Mona Nemer, has convened a Task Force on post-COVID-19
condition. With a focus on the Canadian context, the key objectives of the Task Force are to summarize
evidence that can inform the management of PCC, and to identify knowledge gaps in order to address
the health and socioeconomic impacts of PCC in Canada. To help meet these objectives, the taskforce
held a series of round tables with different stakeholders. The Task Force’s report is anticipated in
November 2022.
Prevalence of PCC
There is still uncertainty about the prevalence of PCC. Based on early published reports in 2020 and
before the development of a first case definition, the WHO estimated that at least 10% to 20% of people
would experience PCC after their initial COVID-19 infection. Several evidence reviews (including one led
by PHAC) from the initial phase of the pandemic (prior to the Omicron variant and roll out of vaccination
campaigns) found that about 30% to 40% of those not hospitalized still reported at least one symptom,
whether it be mild or more severe, beyond 12 weeks since their initial COVID-19 infection.
In these reviews, the prevalence estimates of PCC vary wildly, ranging from below 5% in some studies to
around 80% in studies among those with severe initial illness. The variation in estimates is likely due to
differences in the definitions used for PCC, in the characteristics of the study populations (e.g.
hospitalized for COVID-19 or outpatients), and in the methods and timing of assessment of PCC-related
symptoms.
The first results from CCAHS, related to PCC were released in October, estimating that 14.8% of adults
have longer term symptoms 3 months or more after initial COVID-19 infection. This represents
approximately 1.4 million Canadian adults, or 4.6% of the adult population. Data were collected from
April to August 2022.
12
Some preliminary evidence, including from the Oct 17th release from the CCAHS, suggests that
infections caused by the Omicron variant may beless likely to lead to PCC compared to other variants.
More research is needed to understand whether this is due to differences in variants or other factors
such as increasing population immunity (from vaccination and/or infection), or a combination of both.
The impact of multiple infections on the risk of PCC is also not yet well understood, but preliminary and
limited evidence suggests that the risks of PCC may increase with the number of reinfections.
At this time, the prevalence of PCC in children is not yet well-established, with high variability in
estimates being observed from only a small number of studies. These estimates will become more
precise as more studies, including the CPSP, are conducted and new evidence emerges.
Socioeconomic impacts of PCC
The socio-economic impacts of PCC bring emerging issues, for example in relation to the labour market.
In the United States, for example:
• Around 16 million working-age Americans (those aged 18 to 65) presently have PCC;
• Of those, 2 to 4million are out of work due to PCC; and
• The annual cost of those lost wages alone is around $170 billion a year (and potentially as high
as $230 billion).
The volume of media stories highlighting the plight of individuals suffering from PCC continues to
increase. These often focus on the dual barrier of accessing care, as well as the dire financial
implications; including loss of homes, jobs, custody of children, and draining of personal pension funds.
We learned from CCAHS that among adults with longer-term symptoms, 21.3% said that their symptoms
often or always limited their daily activities. Among adults with longer-term symptoms who were
employed or attending school, approximately three-quarters (74.1%) missed some work or school due
to their symptoms. On average, they missed 20 days. This loss of productivity results in adverse social
and economic consequences (e.g. loss of income, loss of employment among those experiencing
symptoms over a long time period)
PHAC is using modelling to quantify the economic impact of PCC cases averted due to vaccination (from
December 2020 to March 2022), focusing on the economic costs associated with reduced productivity,
and labour force participation among those with PCC. The results from the modelling work, generated
through a partnership with Finance Canada, will be published in 2023.
In addition, PHAC’s Office of the Chief Science Officer has initiated a scoping project with COVID-END
that will outline and synthesize the available evidence for these gaps.
Vaccination and post COVID-19 condition
PHAC continues to closely monitor the evidence for the impacts of vaccination on PCC. Findings from
PHAC’s latest review of the evidence (published up to July 7, 2022) continue to suggest that COVID-19
vaccination with two or more doses may reduce the risk of developing PCC among individuals who get
vaccinated prior to a COVID-19 infection. More research is needed to quantify the extent to which
additional doses may provide additional protection.
Support for Canadianswith PCC
In terms of financial support, Canadians suffering from COVID-19 or PCC, who are unable to work, may
be eligible to receive up to 15 weeks of income support through the Employment Insurance (EI) Sickness
Benefit. In recognition that some individuals require more time to recover from an illness or injury, ESDC
is planning to extend the EI sickness benefit from 15 to 26 weeks. This change has not been
implemented, and it is anticipated to be launched before year end.
13
The provinces and territoriesare responsible for the management and delivery of health care services
for their residents, including rehabilitation and treatment services for people with PCC. There are a
number of public and private clinics that provide care to individuals with PCC across Canada, with a
focus on interdisciplinary care. As of August 19, 2022, four provinces have clinics: British Columbia,
Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec.
14
RESPIRATORY SYNCYTIAL VIRUS
Issue
This fall, a rise in pediatric hospitalizations for respiratorysyncytial virus (RSV) is being reported across
the United States, with some pediatric hospitals reporting being ‘overwhelmed’. Several factors are
contributing to this, including a lack of normal exposure to the virus for children during the COVID-19
pandemic.
A similar rise in Canada was observed but appears to be stabilizing (1,944 detections; 7.6% positive in
the week ending November 19, 2022). RSV activity remains above expected levels, placing pressure on
pediatric hospitals in Canada, but is approaching levels typical of this time of year.
In Canada, activity of influenza is currently highest and increasing, especially in children and adolescents,
compounding already pressured pediatric hospitals.
Key Facts
• RSV is one of several seasonal respiratory viruses that circulate in the colder months from fall
through spring in Canada. Among non-SARS-CoV-2 seasonal respiratory viruses, activity of influenza is
highest and increasing; activity of both influenza and RSV remain elevated as of the week ending
November 19, 2022.
• RSV is the leading cause of acute lower respiratory tract infections in children, nationally and
internationally. Approximately 95% of children <2 years old develop at least one RSV infection.
• RSV is primarily spread via respiratory particles when a person coughs or sneezes, and through
direct contact with a contaminated surface.
• Canada typically sees increasing RSV activity over the fall and a seasonal RSV epidemic during
the winter months, peaking in December/January, each year.
• Based on surveillance data from theweek ending November 19, 2022, RSV activity in Canada
has stabilized (1,944 detections; 7.6% positive). Activity remains above expected levels for this time of
year but is approaching seasonal norms.
• The health risks from RSV are low for most Canadians, and people who get RSV will usually have
mild symptoms similar to the common cold, such as coughing and sneezing, and will recover quickly.
However, infants, young children and, to a lesser degree, seniors, are at a higher risk of severe illness
comparedto the general population.
• The federal Health Portfolio estimates that, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, each year RSV led
to an average of 1,042 hospitalizations per 100,000 infants under 2 years of age, 106 hospitalizations per
100,000 children ages 2to 4 years, and 52 hospitalizations per 100,000 seniors aged 65+. In comparison,
hospitalizations for the general population attributed to RSV are estimated at 27 per 100,000 people
annually.
• Currently, there is no vaccine to prevent RSV. Passive immunization with palivizumab is the only
pharmaceutical option for RSV prevention at this time. This is an antibody recommended for high-risk
infants.
• While there is no vaccine currently available, Health Canada received a submission from
GlaxoSmithKline on October 25 of this year for a vaccine for adults 60 years of age and older. Pfizer has
also notified Health Canada of its plans to submit two vaccine candidates in 2023 –one for seniors and
one for pregnant women. All submissions are reviewed by Health Canada using an independent process
based on scientific rigour and medical evidence.
Until a vaccine is available, the best guidance to protect each other, especially those at risk, is for all
Canadians to practice effective public health measures such as staying home when sick, wearing a mask,
and practicing frequent hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette. These actions can help reduce the
15
spread not only of RSV, but also of other respiratory illnesses such as seasonal flu, especially when used
together in alayered approach.
Key Messages
• The health and safety of people in Canada is the Government’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada monitors for respiratory syncytial virus (RSV). Based on
surveillance data from the week ending November 19, 2022, RSV activity in Canada has stabilized.
Activity remains above expected levels for this time of year; however, it is approaching seasonal norms.
• RSV is a common respiratory virus and the most common cause of respiratory hospitalizations in
children in Canada and worldwide. Most children will get an RSV infection before they turn two years
old. While many infections with RSV are mild, children and infants under the age of two years are
particularly at risk of serious complications of RSV infection, such as bronchiolitis or pneumonia, and
may be hospitalized.
• We are aware of reports of increased pressure on the health care system across the country,
especially pediatric hospitals, caused in part by RSV-related illness along with the co-circulation of
COVID-19 and influenza. Strain on the healthcare system may further be compounded by a shortage of
healthcare workers, and supply shortages of some over-the-counter medications.
• The use of personal protective practices, like staying home when sick, frequently washing your
hands, covering your coughs and sneezes, and cleaning and disinfecting frequently touched surfaces can
help prevent the spread of RSV and other seasonal respiratory viruses.
If pressed
• RSV, like seasonal influenza, causes annual seasonal epidemics. Due to reduced circulation of
RSV during the winter months of 2020–2021 and 2021 2022, older children might now be at increased
risk of severe RSV associated illness since they have likely not had typical levels of exposure to RSV
duringthe past two seasons.
• Given that many public health measures used to prevent the spread of COVID-19 (such as
gathering restrictions, lockdowns and mask mandates) have been eased, we expect increased cases of
RSV and other respiratory viruses for the current respiratory illness season. This occurred with RSV last
fall when an earlier than typical RSV epidemic placed time-limited, regional pressures on pediatric
hospitals in Canada over the fall and into the winter.
• Other factors that may also be contributing to a resurgence in respiratory illnesses, like RSV,
include more individuals moving into indoor settings due to the colder weather and a lack of population-
level immunity given the lower circulation of viruses during previous years of the pandemic, especially in
children.
• The federal government is committed to continue working with our provincial and territorial
counterparts, regulators, health workers and Canadians to identify and implement strategies to address
the current health human resource crisis. Collaborative work is underway to identify concrete solutions.
Background
RSV surveillance
Canada participates in national and international activities to detect and monitor the spread of RSV in
humans. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) maintains the Respiratory Virus Detection
Surveillance System, Canada’s national surveillance system that monitors the circulation of seasonal
respiratory viruses, including RSV, each week. PHAC also works with the Canadian Pediatric Society to
16
support enhanced surveillance pilot projects on pediatric RSV to prepare for new treatments and
vaccines to reduce the burden of RSV in vulnerable children.
Vaccine Development and Treatment
There is currently no vaccine to prevent RSV infections, but there are a few that are currently in
development. There is a drug (palivizumab) that can help protect young infants at high risk for severe
disease. Passive immunization with palivizumab is the only pharmaceutical option for RSV prevention at
this time. This is an antibody recommended for high-risk infants. Canada’s National Advisory Committee
on Immunization has issuedguidance on the recommended use of palivizumab to reduce complications
of RSV infection in infants.
Several vaccines and preventative agents are in development to prevent RSV disease in children, infants
and older adults. Earlier this fall, GlaxoSmithKline and AZ/Sanofi (collaboration) announced their new
drug submissions to Health Canada for prevention of severe diseases due to RSV.
Prevention
With the co-circulation of COVID-19, RSV and influenza across many communities in Canada, PHAC
continues to recommend a vaccine PLUS approach, which includes the layered use of personal
protective practices. Many of these measures have been used before and during the COVID-19
pandemic and continue to be important everyday practices. These include:
• getting your COVID-19 and annual influenza vaccines;
• staying home when sick;
• improving indoor ventilation, when possible, such as opening a window or door;
• frequently cleaning your hands;
• avoiding touching your face with unclean hands;
• covering your coughs and sneezes with a tissue or the bend of your arm; and
• cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects.
In addition, to reduce the spread of COVID-19, PHAC continues to recommend that individuals properly
wearing a well-constructed, well-fitting mask or respirator in public indoor settings, especially if they are
crowded or poorly ventilated. Masks can also act as an added layer of protection against other
respiratory illnesses such as RSV and influenza.
17
HEALTH WORKFORCE CRISIS
ISSUE
• Canada’shealth system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. High patient
workloads, lack of resources, mandatory overtime and fear for personal safety have led to high levels of
burnout, absences, and turnover. The impacts reverberate across all areas of the health system,
including the closure of emergency rooms, delayed screenings and delayed surgeries and have been
extensively reported in the media.
KEY FACTS
• There are not enough health care workers to meet the current demand for services.
- This year alone, vacancies among nursing occupations reached an all-time high between April
and June 2022, with 23,600 vacancies among Registered Nurses and Registered Psychiatric nurses, as
well as 10,800 vacancies among Licensed Practical Nurses. The job vacancy rate in the health care and
social assistance sector was 6.4% for Canada as a whole in August.
• The shortage is expected to get worse.
- A survey of Ontario nurses found that between planned retirements and anticipated post-
pandemic departures, the workforce could see a 15.6% loss in the nursing profession within the next
year (2022-2023).
- According to a report released in September 2022by the Mental Health Commission of Canada
that explored support for psychological self-care and protection from moral distress in the workplace,
40 per cent of health care workers are burned out, 50 per cent intend to leave the profession, and just
60 percent are satisfied with the quality of care they provide.
• 14.5% of Canadians do not have a primary health care provider. Not only is this harmful to the
health and wellness of Canadians, but it also creates problems in other areas of the health system.
• Without a primary health care provider, emergency rooms become the only accessible option
for seeking health care-in 2020, 38 percent of Canadians reported their last emergency department
visit was for a family health care treatable condition.
• Lacking in both staff and physical space for the increasing patient load, hospital emergency
rooms across the country have had to temporarily close their doors, particularly in rural areas.
• Nearly 90% of Canadians indicated that addressing shortages of doctors and nurses should be a
top or high priority in a survey conducted by the Privy Council Office in February 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the immense contributions health professionals make
every day and we share their concerns about the health workforce crisis we are facing.
• The Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health Workers that is
composed of health system experts who will identify concrete actions to drive pan-Canadian progress on
addressingthe crisis, informed by real world perspectives.
• The federal government is actively working with our provincial and territorial counterparts,
regulators, health workers and Canadians to advance concrete actions to address the crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES CRISIS INVOLVING CHILDREN AND YOUTH . . .
• COVID-19 has put Canada’s health systems under enormous strain, leading to staffing shortages
and backlogs in services, including for children and youth.
• The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and
territorial health systems address pandemic-related backlogs to health services.
18
• These investments are supporting provinces and territories to reduce backlogs and ensure that
Canadians, including children and youth, have more timely access to the services they need.
• To further strengthen health care, the federal government is committed to advancing the
priorities of Canadians, including for children and youth, with a focus on better access toprimary and
mental health care, dental care, home and community care, and the effective use of high quality data
and digital systems.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY …
• The federal government is committed to working with key partners on efforts to bolster
recruitment and retention of the health workforce.
• Recognizing that immigration plays an essential role in addressing the chronic human resource
needs in health care, Budget 2022 announced an investment of $115 million over five years, with $30
million ongoing, to expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000
internationally trained health professionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in
their field.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SUPPORT FOR HEALTH WORKERS …
• The Government is very concerned about the mental health and well-being of Canadians, and of
frontline workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
• In the previous 2 years the federal government has invested more than $290 million in funding
to support the mental health of Canadians.
• This includes investments specific to addressing PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential
workers, and the Wellness Together Portal, which features a distinct text line that health workers access
by texting FRONTLINE to the number for immediate access to supports.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO PROTECT HEALTH WORKERS AGAINST HARASSMENT…
• We have heard many stories about physicians,nurses and other health workers who have been
threatened and intimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely unacceptable.
• Our government took action to protect health workers, through amendments to the Criminal
Code (under the former BillC-3), in order to ensure health workers are safe and free from threats,
violence and harassment.
• All Canadians, and especially health workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe working
environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic has amplified many of the challenges facing the health workforce and it is well understood
that the path forward must address the root causes of this crisis. It will require transformative and
innovative solutions to problems that have existed for years, with new and different levels of
collaboration required across governments and stakeholders.
FPT Collaboration
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
19
territorial jurisdictions and their regulators. The federal government has had ongoing engagement with
provincial and territorial counterparts on the health workforce crisis. This work has included:
• Better understanding the challenges facing the health workforce through a Health Human
Resource symposium convened by Health Canada in May 2022 which included participation from
provinces and territories.
• Collectively identifying key areas for action (e.g., recruit, retain, plan and innovate)
• Considering approaches for accelerating pathways for internationally educated health
professionals
• Studying vacancy rates for key health occupations to better understand current state and trends
related to health workforce.
Health Canada will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to drive concrete
steps necessary to address health workforce situation.
Recent Federal Investments
The Canada Health Transfer continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories in the
delivery of health care. In 2023-24, the Canada Health Transfer is forecast to provide $49.3 billion in
support—an increase of 9.1 per cent over 2022-23.
In addition to this ongoing funding, in the previous two years, the federal government has provided
provinces and territories with $6 billion in top up funding through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system
pressures, including reducing medical backlogs caused by COVID-19.
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years to develop national standards for mental health and
substance use services, which will provide tools to support mental health providers in delivering high-
quality care.
Budget 2021 also provided $960 million over three years to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) for a new SectoralWorkforce Solutions Program to help connect Canadians with the
training they need to access jobs in high-demand sectors, such as healthcare.
Budget 2022 reiterated federal government’s commitment to reduce barriers to internal trade and
labour mobility through targeted investments, including:
• $115M over 5 years to expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to
11,000 internationally trained health care professionals per year get their credentials recognized and
find work in their field
• $26.2 million to enhance student loan forgiveness for providers who practice in rural and
remote communities and expand the program beyond physicians and nurses
The Government of Canada continues to provide surge support, including nurses and physicians, where
needed across the country to address critical pandemic needs.
20
Other Federal Government Actions
The federal response to the HHR crisis is focused on sustainably increasing the supply of health workers
and helping create healthier workplaces tosupport retention and the mental health of health workers.
Other recent federal actions and investments include:
• On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition will focus its efforts on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian action and
progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives.
• The Coalition comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities will report to the
Deputy Minister of Health.
• On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced Dr. Leigh Chapman as the federal Chief Nursing
Officer (CNO). Dr. Chapman will bring nursing issues in focus federally, while working closely with
provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments, provinces and
territories and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce challenges.
Mental Health
In September 2022, a Report from the Mental Health Commission noted that it remains critical to break
down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in health care organizations and prioritize psychological
health and safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and territorial
health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes investments through
Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion over 10 years to improve Canadians’ access to mental health
services. The establishment of a Canada Mental Health Transfer will build on these agreements to
provide a permanent and ongoing source of funds for mental health services.
On June 28, 2022 the Government of Canada, announced an investment of $28.2M for nine projects to
address PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential workers, and others whose mental health has been
significantly impacted by the COVID-19pandemic.
• These projects will help to deliver and test interventions, develop resources for affected or at-
risk populations, and create resources and guidance for service providers and organizations.
• The investment will also facilitate aKnowledge Development and Exchange Hub, which will use
data from these projects to help inform mental health interventions and enhance Canadian public
health policy and practice.
21
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The Government remains committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories
(PTs) to strengthen Medicare and provide funding through transfers and bilateral agreements. In
addition to the Canada Health Transfer, the Government has provided significant funding directly to
provinces and territories to help them manage the pandemic, and directly invested many more billions
to support the fight against COVID, including funding for public health support and the purchase of
vaccines and tests. This is in addition to targeted funding provided to the PTs to support specific health
care priorities, such as home care, mental health, substance use, long term care and virtual care.
• Moving forward, the Government is committed to work with provinces and territories to
improve ourhealth care systems by addressing our shared priorities. Our Government wants to ensure
that any additional federal funding will improve Canada’s health care system and focus on delivering
health care outcomes for Canadians.
KEY FACTS
• In November 2022the Government passed Bill C-31, the legislation that will enable the Canada
Dental Benefit, the first step in the Government’s proposed dental plan for low and middle income
families. This interim measure will provide up to $650 annually (per child) for two years directly to
families who earn $90,000 or less, to pay for dental visits for children under 12 years of age.
• In July 2022, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $2 billion
one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer, to further help them to address pandemic-related
health system pressures, particularly the backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
• This is in addition to the $5 billion health care funding our Government provided to provinces
and territories in July 2021, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer to
support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support
vaccine roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19
billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
• Furthermore, our Government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and territories
improve the standard of care in their long-term care facilities
• For more information on federal spending, please see the Background.
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our Government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
• Canadians deserve high quality health care and our Government is confident we can build on
our strong partnership with provinces and territories to transformhealth care.
22
IF PRESSED (GENERAL) …
• From the beginning, the Government of Canada has been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight COVID-19
and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2021-22, the Government of Canada provided $43.1 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and by over 9%
to $49.3 billion in 2023-24. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to billions in pandemic support
for provincial and territorial health care systems committed over the course of the pandemic (e.g. $4 B
to help address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government has
committed billions in direct health investments to support the fight against COVID-19, including public
health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests.
• Between 2019and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-
19 spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to provinces and territories
through the Safe Restart Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over 40 billion in
direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and thestandard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER–PLATFORM COMMITMENT …
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring Canadians have access to mental health
and substance use supports when and where they need them. That is why it is so important to assist
jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health and substance use
services.
• The Government of Canada has already made significant investments in this area, including $5B
to support mental health and substance use services through its bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories. The Government of Canada is committed to make significant additional investments,
with accountability and data to demonstrate results for Canadians. We want to ensure that Canadians
get the services and supports they need and that our investments have a positive impact on their mental
health.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC …
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreements will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support
home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our Government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec also received $450 million and $902.4 million as part of its share of the $2 and $4 billion,
one-time top-ups to the CHT, and a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
23
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS …
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to transfer $5 billion in targeted funding
for home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• In 2021-22, these agreements were amended to accommodate a $1 billion for Safe Long-term
Care Fund.
• Our Government is working with provinces and territories on negotiate new agreements to
enable access to the remaining 5 years of funding.
• In addition, as per the Budget2021 commitment a further $3 billion over five is available to
support provinces and territories in applying LTC standards and making permanent changes.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
cause the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, an increase of $31 billion from its current level of $45 billion in
2022-23, or an increase from its pre-pandemic 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also
called for the CHT to grow by an annual escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and has continued to
reiterate its demand for 35%, most recently with a “public awareness “campaign consisting of radio,
print, online and billboard ads that was launched on 24 October 2022.
In July 2022, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $2 billion one-time
top-up to the Canada Health Transfer, to further help them to address pandemic-related health system
pressures, particularly the backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health
care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of
procedurescaused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to
support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address
infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that
also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable
funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are:
universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs
will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and to $49.3 billion in
2023-24.
Pandemic Funding:
Throughout the pandemic, the federal government has provided billions of dollars, beyond the Canada
Health Transfer, inpandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems to support the
fight against COVID, as well as, billions in direct federal spending to support public health and purchase
vaccines and tests and other equipment.
24
Between 2019 and 2027,the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to provinces and territories through
the Safe Restart Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over40 billion in direct federal
spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all provinces and territories and posted to
Health Canada’s website. New agreements will be required for provinces and territories to access the
remaining five years of this funding (2022-23 to 2026-27).
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
25
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The Government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
26
DENTAL CARE
P/T Jurisdiction
ISSUE
• Whether the federal government can deliver a Canada Dental Benefit, in light of PT jurisdiction
over health care delivery.
KEY FACTS
• Under the Canada Health Act, provinces/territories (PTs) provide residents with medically or
dentally required emergency/catastrophic surgical-dental procedures performed by a dentist in hospital
as publicly-insured services. Outside of those services, PTs are not required to provide dental care under
the public health care system.
• All PTs provide additional dental coverage, at their discretion, although eligibility and coverage is
limited and varies greatly.
• In total, PTs spend an estimated $650 million a year on public dental programs.
• The federal government also plays a key role in health care in Canada. It is able to use its
spending power, as long it is done in a manner that does not amount to regulation of a space that is
under PT jurisdiction, which the proposed benefit does not.
• On October 20, 2022, the Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) released a Legislative
Parliamentary Note that included a supplementary information table with estimates of costs for the
interim Canada DentalBenefit for each province.
• Some MPs have expressed concerns that these costing estimates imply that Quebec and Atlantic
provinces with robust programs for children would be receiving a disproportionate amount of funding.
• The proposed delivery model for the interim Canada Dental Benefit does not include funding to
the provinces or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible
Canadians through the tax system.
• The eligibility criteria and level of payment will be the same for all Canadians across the country.
KEY MESSAGES
• Although health care delivery is under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal
government continues to play an important role in health care inCanada and, in fact, we already play a
significant role in dental care delivery for federal populations.
• It is within our jurisdiction to exercise the federal spending power to provide support to
Canadians and that is what we are doing here-so that they can get the help they need to make dental
care for their children more affordable.
• We remain committed to finding ways to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to
improve access to oral health in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON DISTRIBUTION OF FUNDING BY PROVINCE …
• Provincial and territorial dental programs for children vary widely in terms of who and what is
covered. For example, in Quebec where a universal program exists for children under 10, important
preventative services are not covered (and older children are not covered at all).
• In those cases, families living in those jurisdictions with out-of-pocket expenses over and above
what those programs cover will still be eligible to apply for the interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• The proposeddelivery model for the interim benefit does not include funding to the provinces
or territories–rather the Canada Revenue Agency will make payments directly to eligible Canadians
through the tax system.
• The eligibility criteria and level of payment will be the same for all Canadians across the country.
27
DENTAL CARE
Government of Canada is working toward a long term dental care program
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada has committed to making access to dental care more affordable.
Budget 2022 proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion
ongoing for a national dental care program for Canadians who earn under $90,000.
• The Canada Dental Benefit is an interim measure that will allow Canadian families to access
funding as soon as possible to begin dealing with some of their eligible children’s dental care needs.
While this temporary program is in place, the Government of Canada is working to build a national
dental care program.
• Discussions with key stakeholders, including provinces and territories, as well as industry and
clinical experts, are ongoing to help inform the Government’s decisions on implementing a national
dental care program.
• On October 28, 2022, the Government of Canada issued an Invitation to Qualify (ITQ) to engage
with experts in the field of health care claims processing services. This ITQ will allow the government to
create a list of qualified vendors who could deliver a long-term, national dental care program with the
scope and scale that would be needed to serve all eligible Canadians.
• In addition, the Minister of Health and Health Canada officials have been meeting with key
stakeholders, including experts, academics, and dentistry associations and organizations over the past
severalmonths to discuss the design and delivery of a national dental care program.
• More details will be available as decisions are finalized regarding a new national dental care
program.
KEY MESSAGES
• Budget 2022 committed $5.3 billion over five years, and$1.7B ongoing, to provide dental care
for Canadians who are unable to access care because of the costs.
• The Government remains committed to providing dental care to Canadians and continues to
take the necessary steps to build a national dental care program.
• Although we are working as fast as we can, it will take time to get it right.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with key stakeholders, industry partners,
academics, and dentistry associations and organizations to help inform decisions on implementing a
national dental care program.
• For example, the Government of Canada issued an Invitation to Qualify (ITQ) On October 28,
2022, to engage with experts in the field of health care claims processing services. This ITQ will allow the
government to create a list of qualified vendors who could deliver a long-term, national dental care
program with the scope and scale needed to serve all eligible Canadians.
• At the same time, Health Canada has been reaching out to provinces and territories to better
understand their current dental care programs and seek their views on how best to implement a long-
term program.
• Budget 2022 committed to provide dental care starting in 2022 for families with children under
12. The interim Canada Dental Benefit is an important step in this direction.
28
CANADA HEALTH ACT–ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
• In June 2022, the United States Supreme (US) Court overturned Roe v. Wade which repealed the
US federal constitutional protection for abortion servicesand now defers to the individual states to
regulate abortion services. This decision has reignited the discussion around access to abortion services
in Canada and has brought about questions of Americans living in states with restrictive abortion laws
accessing abortion services in Canada, and potential implications for Canadian providers.
• Although access to abortion services in Canada has been improved by the approval and roll-out
of Mifegymiso for medical abortion, the availability of surgical abortionvaries both between provinces
and territories and nationally. Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for
surgical abortion services in a limited number of private clinics in both New Brunswick and Ontario.
Patient charges for access to abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges
under the Canada Health Act.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• In addition to enforcing the Act, over $3.5 million of funding targeted at improving access to
abortion services has been announced through Budget 2021’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTIONUNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT …
• While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done
to improve access in many areas of the country.
• Health Canada continues to work with Ontario on its Reimbursement Action Plan to ensure that
patients do not face financial barriers when accessing insured surgical abortion services.
• New Brunswick will continue to be subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions as long as the
province refuses to cover insured surgical abortion services provided at private clinics, resulting in
patient charges.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND…
• This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health services more
accessible, with an emphasis on populations experiencing the highest risks and greatest barriers,
including Indigenous people, racialized populations, members of 2SLGBTQI+communities, women and
youth. That is why Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, directed to community-based
organizations that help to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information,
and services for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
29
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including women
who choose to end their pregnancy. The Government of Canada unequivocally supports the right to
choose, and works to ensure that safe and legal abortion services are available to everyone. Abortion
services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories. Individuals
should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where the services are
provided.
The Canada Health Act establishes criteria and conditions related to insured health services and
extended health care services that the provinces and territories must fulfill to receive the full federal
cash contribution under the Canada Health Transfer (CHT). The aim of the Act is to ensure that all
eligible residents of Canadian provinces and territories have reasonable access to medically necessary
hospital, physician, and surgical-dentalservices that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis,
without charges related to the provision of insured health care services.
Roe v. Wade
On June 24, 2022, the US Supreme Court overturned Roe v. Wade. This decision repealed the US federal
constitutional protection for abortion services and now defers to the individual states to regulate
abortion services.
The overturning of Roe v. Wade has galvanized the discussion about access to abortion in Canada as well
as questions surrounding Americans from states with restrictive abortion laws crossing border to access
abortion services in Canada and possible implications for Canadian providers. Similar to other health
care services, Americans coming to Canada would be able to obtain safe abortion care in Canada, but
would have to pay for the service out-of-pocket. Media articles have reported an increase in phone
enquiries from Americans seeking information since the decision, but no increase in the booking of
appointments.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges
for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act
and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since March 2020,
deductions totaling $269,916 have been leviedagainst the NB’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments
in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for abortions performed
in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution. Currently, Clinic
554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion services.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20. The Association was
granted standing in the case by the NB Court of Queen’s bench on June 2, 2021. The group argues that
the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had
previously advised the province it would take legal action if the regulation was not amended to permit
coverage for abortion services received outside hospitals. The province filed their Statement of Defence
30
on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does
not violate the Canada Health Act.
The case is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is awaiting information from the province,
which was requested in January 2022. The CCLA has stated that if the information is not provided in a
timely matter they may bring forward a motion for the Court to compel the information. To date, no
trial date has been set. Following the overturn of Roe v. Wade, the CCLA wrote to the NB Government to
reiterate their position.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, media stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical
abortion services in some private clinics. Health Canada followed up on these reports by analyzing clinic
websites, and by making phone or email inquiries to clinics of concern. While the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations the patient charges discovered were
reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021 and March 2022
deductions (totaling $20,465). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to
Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical
abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as it works to
implement its action plan and eliminate patient charges for accessto abortion services and the province
will provide an updated status report in the coming months, which will be published in the Canada
Health Act Annual Report for 2021-2022.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces and
territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
Additional Federal Initiatives with Respect to Sexual and Reproductive Health
Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund is advancing work nationwide to increase access
to sexual and reproductive health. Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, starting in
2021-2022, to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information, and services
for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
Health Canada has announced more than $3.5 million in funding for two projects, coming out of the
Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund. These projects will improve access by removing barriers to vital
abortion services, including financial assistance for those travelling for abortion services, and offering
accurate reproductive health information to Canadians.
31
PSYCHEDELICS
ISSUE
• There is significant interest in the potential use of psychedelics, particularly psilocybin (“magic
mushrooms”) and MDMA, for the treatment of a variety of serious mental health conditions including
major depressive disorder, treatment-resistant depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. At
present, there are no drugs containing psilocybin or MDMA approved for sale in Canada or
internationally. Patients, practitioners, and researchers are asking Health Canada to consider increasing
access to psychedelics so they can explore their potential use as therapeutic products.
• Sexual misconduct allegations on clinical trials sponsored by the Multidisciplinary Association for
Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) have also drawn recent media attention. The Department is reviewing
information from a related complaint received in March 2022, along with any new information that
becomes available, and will not hesitate to take appropriate enforcement action,should non-
compliance with federal requirements be identified.
KEY FACTS
• In Canada, psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy is being tested in clinical trials to treat patients
with selected mental health disorders.
• Health Canada has authorized several clinical trials with psilocybin, and we are encouraging
further research in this area.
• On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments were made to allow health care practitioners, on
behalf of patients, to request access to restricted drugs, including psilocybin and MDMA, through Health
Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP).
• Health Canada has also granted exemptions under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to patients with serious or life-threatening illnesses, when conventional treatments have
failed, to allow them to possess psilocybin while undergoing psychotherapy as well as to a small number
of health care professionals for professional training purposes.
KEY MESSAGES
• While the therapeutic use of psychedelics like MDMA and psilocybin [sai·luh·sai·bn] have shown
promise in clinical trials, further research is needed. At this time, with the exception of ketamine, no
psychedelic drugs have been approved in Canada or elsewhere.
• Clinical trials are the most appropriate and effective way to advance research with unauthorized
drugs while protecting the health and safety of participants.
• The number of authorized clinical trials with psilocybin has increased significantly over the past
year–a trend our government is hoping will continue.
IF PRESSED ON ILLEGAL “MAGIC MUSHROOM” STORES …
• The production, sale and possession of magic mushrooms are illegal in Canada.
• Currently, no therapeutic products containing psilocybin, one of the controlled substances in
magicmushrooms, have been approved in Canada or elsewhere.
• Storefronts or online vendors selling magic mushrooms are illegally supplied and provide
products that are untested, unregulated and that may be unsafe. The Government of Canada supports
law enforcement actions to address illegal storefront or online distribution and sale of magic
mushrooms in Canada.
32
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT OF ALBERTA’S ANNOUCEMENT TO REGULATETHE USE OF
PSYCHEDELIC DRUGS …
• Health Canada is responsible for authorizing drugs;provinces and territories are responsible for
regulating the practice of medicine and delivery of health services within their jurisdiction.
• Ketamine is currently the only psychedelic drug in Canada approved for therapeutic use.
• Alberta has announced that its new regulations are intended to provide additional safeguards
and oversight for how psychedelic health services are delivered in their province.
• Health Canada will closely follow the implementation of these new regulations.
IF PRESSED ON PSILOCYBIN EXEMPTION REQUESTSFOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS …
• The use of psilocybin is being studied in clinical trials by researchers in Canada and
internationally, but there are no approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin in Canada or
elsewhere.
• Clinical trials are the most appropriate mechanism for health care professionals who wish to use
psilocybin to improve their knowledge of psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT PROTECTION IN CLINICAL TRIALS …
• It is important thatCanadians have access to safe clinical trials.
• Health Canada’s role includes a rigorous, science-based review of all clinical trial applications in
Canada, and subsequent inspection activities to help ensure compliance.
• Research Ethics Boards help toensure the protection of participants, while provincial regulatory
colleges ensure quality care is provided by their members.
• When clinical trials include psychedelics, additional safeguards are implemented to protect
participants.
IF PRESSED ON THE MDMA TRIALS AND THEIR CONTINUATION (HPFB, ROEB INPUT) …
• In June 2022, Health Canada conducted onsite inspections of two active MDMA clinical trial sites
in Toronto and Montreal.
• The inspection of the clinical trial in Montreal, sponsored by MAPS, was found to be satisfactory.
• Health Canada suspended the clinical trial in Toronto, sponsored by the Remedy Institute, based
on observations that the trial was not being conducted in compliance with Good Clinical Practices
requirements.
• The corrective actions proposed by this sponsor have since been deemed satisfactory and the
clinical trial authorization has been reinstated.
IF PRESSED ON THE CLINICAL TRIAL INSPECTIONS INVOLVING KETAMINE (ROEB INPUT) …
• Health Canada has authorized a number of clinical trials involving the use of ketamine for the
treatment of mental health disorders.
• Since February 2022, Health Canada has conducted inspections at three sites of a clinical trial
involving ketamine, twoof which received a non-compliant rating.
• Of the two non-compliant sites, one has submitted corrective actions that were found to be
satisfactory and the clinical trial can now resume.
• Health Canada is currently assessing the corrective actions submitted by the second non-
compliant site.
33
BACKGROUND
USE OF PSYCHEDELICS FOR THERAPEUTIC PURPOSES
Interest in the potential therapeutic use of psychedelics–particularly MDMA and psilocybin –for the
treatment of various mental health and substance use disorders is on the rise. Psychedelics are typically
being studied in combination with psychotherapy (i.e., psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy).
Most psychedelics (also known as hallucinogens) are controlled as “restricted drugs” under the
ControlledDrugs and Substances Act (CDSA). Restricted drugs do not currently have approved
therapeutic uses and can only be used for research or scientific purposes, including in authorized clinical
trials. With the exception of ketamine, no psychedelic drugs have been approved for sale in Canada or
elsewhere. Psilocybin and MDMA have received “breakthrough-therapy” designation from the United
States Food and Drug Administration in an effort to help bring these drugs to market more quickly.
Advocates continue to push Health Canada to increase access to psychedelic drugs, especially psilocybin
(“magic mushrooms”), for therapeutic purposes. Some stakeholders are advocating for the creation of a
separate medical access pathway for psilocybin, similar to cannabis. In addition, some stakeholders and
Indigenous partners are requesting access to psilocybin for traditional, spiritual, and/or ceremonial uses.
LEGAL ACCESS PATHWAYS
There are times when access to unauthorized drugs may be appropriate. In some circumstances,with
the support of a regulated health care practitioner, it may be possible for individuals to legally access
psilocybin through one of three pathways: 1) through participation in an approved clinical trial; 2)
through the Special Access Program; and 3) through a subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA.
Clinical trials and Health Canada’s Special Access Program are existing regulatory options through which
a legal source of psychedelic restricted drugs may be accessed. Both clinical trials and the Special Access
Program have safeguards and requirements in place to protect the health and safety of patients, help
ensure the quality of the drug, and provide for administration and oversight by a qualified professional.
These pathways should generally be pursued instead of an individual exemption under the CDSA, unless
it can be demonstrated that access is not possible or suitable through these existing legal routes. The
Special Access Program and individual exemptions from the CDSA are not mechanisms to encourage the
early use of unauthorized drugs, nor are they meant to be used as a means of circumventing clinical
development or the established drug review and approval process.
Government of Alberta’s Regulatory Amendments Related to Psychedelics
On October5, 2022, the Alberta Government announced amendments to the Mental Health Services
Protection Regulation that will come into force on January 16, 2023. These Regulations set out new
requirements for the use of psychedelic drugs in the treatment of psychiatric disorders in Alberta. While
some stakeholders initially interpreted this announcement to mean that psychedelic drugs would be
more broadly accessible in Alberta, Alberta has since clarified that its Regulations are intended to
increase oversight of psychedelic-assisted therapy in the province to ensure its safe and effective use.
34
Charter Challenge
In August 2022, seven patients and one health care practitioner filed a Charter challenge against the
Government of Canada regarding access to psilocybin. They assert that the current avenues of accessing
psilocybin are insufficient and a violation of Section 7 of the Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms,
which guarantees the right to life, liberty, and security of the person. While it is too early to predict how
this case will progress, Charter challenges can take years to work their way through the courts.
Legal Challenge for Exemption Requests from Health Care Professionals
On July 11, 2022, a group of Applicants filed an application that challenges decisions made by the
Minister on June 9, 2022, refusing their applications for exemptions under ss.56(1) of the CDSA to
possess, transport, consume and destroy psilocybin to be used as part of an experiential training module
(psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy).
The constitutionality of the CDSA is not challenged in this matter. As with the Charter challenge, this
matter is still in its very early stages.
Clinical trials
Health Canada has authorized several clinical trials with psilocybin and MDMA since 2018 (most of the
psilocybin clinical trials have been authorized within the past year). These include clinical trials to assess
the efficacy of psilocybin in patients with depression or treatment-resistant depression, post-traumatic
stress disorder, alcohol use disorder; the safety of low doses of psilocybin; and the safety of psilocybin
for health care providers enrolled in a psychedelic training program. In Spring 2022, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research launched a funding opportunity that will provide up to $3 million to
support clinical trials to assess the therapeutic efficacy and safety of psilocybin-assisted psychotherapy
for the treatment of substance use and mental health disorders.
Safety Requirements for Clinical Trials
To date, Health Canada has received two complaints related to the conduct in clinical trials investigating
MDMA-assisted therapy and one complaint related to ketamine-assisted therapy as treatment for
certain mental health conditions. In these cases, Health Canada quickly took appropriate compliance
and enforcement actions to investigate allegations of non-compliance with the FDA and its associated
regulations.
Current Status (ROEB input)
In June 2022, Health Canada conducted two MDMA clinical trial inspections The MDMA clinical trial in
Montreal, sponsored by MAPS, received a compliant rating. The MDMA clinical trial in Toronto,
sponsored by the Remedy Institute, received a non-compliant rating (NC) and a notice of immediate
suspension. The Department has received and reviewed the corrective actions from Remedy and
deemed the sponsor’s response satisfactory. The clinical trial authorization was reinstated on
September 23, 2022.
35
In July 2022, Health Canada participated in a joint inspection with the U.S. Food and Drug Administration
(FDA), of MAPS in San Jose, California (headquarters). There were no major findings identified by Health
Canada and the FDA after conducting a full sponsor inspection.
Ketamine Clinical Trials (ROEB input)
Health Canada has authorized a number of clinical trials involving the use of ketamine for the treatment
of mental health disorders. In October 2021, a complaint was received alleging issues with the general
oversight of the ketamine clinical trial sponsored by the University of Ottawa-Institute of Mental Health
research.
Current status (ROEB input)
Starting in February 2022, Health Canada conducted inspections at the three sites of the clinical trial
sponsored by the University of Ottawa-Instituteof Mental Health Research. One trial site received a
compliant rating. The other two sites each received a non-compliant rating. One of these two sites has
since submitted a satisfactory response of corrective actions and the Department has informed them
that they can proceed with their trial at this site. Health Canada is currently reviewing the corrective
actions for the second site.
Special Access Program (SAP)
On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments came into force which allow health care practitioners, on
behalf of patients with serious or life-threatening conditions, to request access to restricted drugs
through the SAP when other therapies have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable in Canada.
Individual subsection 56(1) exemptions
Many factors are considered when reviewing and making a decision on a request for a subsection 56(1)
exemption to use psilocybin in relation to a medical condition. These factors may include but are not
limited to (as per Health Canada web page):
• The availability of clinical trials or other regulatory pathways, such as the Special Access
Program, to request access to the substance;
• The medical condition for which the psilocybin is requested to be used;
• The existing scientific evidence to support the use of psilocybin for the treatment of the
condition;
• Whether other conventional therapies have been considered;
• Whether the use of the substances is supported by a health care practitioner;
• Public health and public safety objectives of the CDSA;
• Other federal, provincial, and/or municipal laws or regulations that may apply to the proposed
activity; and
• Risks, including risk of diversion.
36
CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER
ISSUE
• The mental health needs of Canadians and priority populations, which were already increasing,
have been further exacerbated by the Covid-19 pandemic. Barriers to care such as variable service
availability, fragmented services, lack of equitable access, lack of culturally sensitive/appropriate
services, lack of capacity and stigma prevent many from receiving necessary care.
• A Canada Mental Health Transfer (CMHT) will help ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of the universal health care system by expanding the capacity of provinces and
territories to provide services with a permanent and ongoing source of funding.
KEY FACTS
• Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the mental health of Canadians was in decline and needs were
increasing. Positive mental health declined between 2009 and 2019, especially for children and youth,
63% of whom reported excellent or very good mental health in2019 compared to 77% in 2009. 68% of
adults reported excellent or very good mental health in 2019 compared to 73% in 2009. During this
time, there was also an increase in Canadians reporting having been diagnosed with depression or an
anxiety disorder. Foryouth, these diagnoses doubled, increasing from 7% to 15% in 2019, and for adults
they increased from 10% in 2009 to 13% in 2019.
• The pandemic has further emphasized the need for increased mental health care. Positive
mental health further declined throughout the pandemic, with only 60% of adults and 54% of children
and youth reporting excellent or very good mental health in 2021. In fall 2020, one in five Canadians
reported a need for mental health care in the past year. Of those, 45% reported thattheir needs were
either unmet or only partially met. A delay in mental health support is linked to decreased positive
health outcomes, therefore timely support is particularly important.
• Among other priority populations, Canadian youth, Indigenous andthose identifying as
LGBTIA2+ report greated need for mental health care than adults, non-Indigenous Canadians and those
not identifying as LGBTQIA2+. Of those who need care, these groups are also more likely to report that
their needs are unmet or partially met.
KEY MESSAGES
• Minister Bennett, as the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, is committed to
ensuring that mental health is treated as a full and equal part of our health care system.
• At the November 7-8 Health Ministers’ Meeting inVancouver, we engaged provinces and
territories on critical issues to improve health care, including addressing health workforce challenges,
health data and digital health, and integrated mental health and substance use services.
• Our health system is experiencing significant challenges and it’s important that we work
together to support better health care for Canadians. We have provided record federal investments, and
this needs to be matched with the quality of care Canadians deserve.
• Canadians deserve better access to family health services as well as mental health and
substance use services. That’s why Minister Bennett has been consulting with Canadians and people
with lived and living experience on how to improve our system and inform a comprehensive strategy.
The discussions at the Health Ministers’ Meeting are going to inform health funding discussions going
forward.
IF PRESSED ON BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDING ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS SERVICES …
• Budget 2017 committed $5 billion over ten years to support provinces and territories to increase
the availability of mental health and addictions services for Canadians.
37
• Budget 2022 reaffirmed our intention to engage provinces and territories on the development
of a Canada Mental Health Transfer.
• As a result of the first five years of this investment, provinces and territories have implemented
new initiatives to improve access, integrate service delivery and spread evidence-based models of
mental health and addictions services.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
access to mental health and addictions services for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS TO DATE ON CMHT RELATED ENGAGEMENT …
• Our Government is committed toengaging with provinces and territories, and a diverse range of
stakeholders, partners and individuals with lived/living experience to inform the development of the
CMHT.
• This engagement will help us to build from the ground up a comprehensive strategyfor mental
health and substance use, including actions that we can advance with provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS TO DATE ON ROUNDTABLE DISCUSSIONS …
• Over the last few months, Minister Bennett held roundtables with a number of provincial and
territorial governments to discuss their wise practices in the areas of mental health and addictions.
• Minister Bennett has travelled all over the country to hear first-hand from community
organisations, experts and people with lived and living experience about what works.
• Minister Bennett has also hosted a series of roundtables on topics such as:
o Perinatal mental health
o Integrated youth services
o Mental health of black youth
o Safer supply
o Stigma
o Suicide prevention
• OnSeptember 23, 2022, Ministers Hajdu and Bennett participated in an Indigenous Mental
Wellness Summit in Toronto to hear about best practices from all corners of the country.
IF PRESSED ON UPCOMING ACTIVITIES…
• Minister Bennett will be meeting with my PTcounterparts in the coming weeks to discuss how
we can collaborate to leverage all this great work that is happening across the country.
IF PRESSED ON FPT DISCUSSIONS …
• On October 17, 2022, Minister Bennett met virtually with PT colleagues, Ministersresponsible
for Mental Health and Substance Use. They discussed:
o Innovative approaches that each jurisdiction is taking to respond to the opioid overdose crisis,
and addressing mental health challenges and substance use harms; and,
o Issues related to Health Human Resources (HHR) challenges and opportunities in the delivery of
mental health and substance use services.
• On November 8, 2022, Minister Bennett and I had the opportunity to attend the Health
Ministers’ Meeting in Vancouver. We had a productive discussion on mental health and substance use
issues, including:
o Ways to work together to enhance access to integrated mental health and substance use
services, with a particular focus on children and youth, as well as integration with primary care; and,
38
o Opportunities to collaborate to build systems that are welcoming for all, by addressing
structural stigma and ensuring cultural safety in the provision of mental health and substance use
services and care.
BACKGROUND
The mental health needs of Canadians and priority populations (e.g., youth, Indigenous populations,
racialized and LGBTQ2S+ communities), which were increasing pre-pandemic, have been further
exacerbated by the pandemic. Moreover, persistent barriers to care remain and have worsened during
this time. Some of these barriers include variability in service availability, fragmented care (i.e., lack of
integration between mental health care/primary care/other services), lack of equitable access to care,
including virtual care options, lack of culturally sensitive/appropriate services, lack of capacity and
stigma.
These barriers have put increased strain on the healthcare system (e.g., increase in number of
individuals in mental health crisis going to Emergency Departments for care). The pandemic is not yet
over and experts predict that its impact will be felt for many years, if not decades to come.
Ongoing and pandemic-response measures while generally effective are not sufficient to address the
increased demand and barriers. More support is needed to ensure that the mental health needs of
Canadians are addressed while the strain on the health care system is lessened. Given this the
government appointed the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions. She is working to ensure that
mentalhealth is treated as a full and equal part of the universal healthcare system and that health
equities are understood and addressed.
Ongoing Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health and addictions services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateralagreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread
proven models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to
primary health services.
Agreements outlining how provinces and territories applied federal investment over the first five years
expired in March 2022. Work has begun to implement one-year extensions of the agreements, which
provide provinces and territories the opportunity to evaluate current needs and adjust priorities as they
plan for the remaining four years of targeted funding.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million overtwo years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
39
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP). The Government has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health forchildren, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons)for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30,2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
40
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada isinvesting $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada. 2023, this service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of
their choice (voice, text or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts of COVID-19 on Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist withfinding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
41
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
42
3-DIGIT NUMBER (9-8-8) FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION
Issue
In theMinister of Mental Health and Addiction’s Mandate Letter, the Minister was directed to
implement a three-digit suicide prevention number. On December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted
unanimously in favour of a motion sponsored by MP Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia)
calling on the federal government to act immediately to set up a national 9-8-8 number to consolidate
all existing suicide crisis numbers.
Key Facts
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recentlyannounced
that it will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and
suicide prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada welcomes thedetermination from the Canadian Radio-television
and Telecommunications Commission to adopt 9-8-8 as the number to call or text for Canadians in need
of immediate mental health crisis and suicide prevention support effective November 30, 2023.
• The Government of Canada announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health will
lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada.
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring this service hasthe quality and capacity to
meet the demand, connecting people to effective crisis support when they need it the most.
If pressed on timing for the implementation of a three-digit number for suicide prevention crsis support
• The CRTC announced the 9-8-8 number will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• In preparation, the Public Health Agency of Canada contracted a firm to analyze service volumes
associated with launching a three-digit number, and estimated that service volumes may increase four
to six-fold by 2027. This analysis will help identify the resources required to support the service.
• The Agency is also engaging with a range of stakeholders, experts and representatives from
provincial and territorial governments for their perspectives on what a successful roll-out will require.
If pressed on what service providers need to implement 9-8-8
• As highlighted in the CRTC’s decision, telecommunication service providers will need to
implement 9-8-8 dialing across Canada. This includes:
o Introducing ten-digit local dialing in areas where seven-digit dialing is still the default; and
o Making the necessary changes to their networks to enable callers to dial or text 9 8-8.
• The objective is to ensure that everyone in Canada will be ableto use the 9-8-8 number, and
these important steps will help get us there.
If pressed on why Budget 2022 did not announce funding to support a three-digit number
• The CRTC’s decision and ongoing engagement will help to determine resource requirements for
9-8-8.
• While three-digit crisis line support is in development, we will continue to support Talk Suicide
Canada and surge capacity for distress lines and Kids Help Phone to meet demands for services.
• Crisis support is available to people in Canada through:
o Talk Suicide Canada (1-833-456-4566)
o 1-866-APPELLE (277-3553) for people in Quebec
o Hope for Wellness for Indigenous peoples (1-855-242-3310)
43
o Kids Help Phone (1-800-668-6868)
o Provincial and local distress lines
o Trans Lifeline (1-877-330-6366)
If pressed on U.S. experience implementing a three-digit number
• In the United States, preparations for a three-digit number took place over a four-year period.
• The choice to assign 9-8-8 in Canada and the United States is due to the unavailability of a three-
digit number ending in 11 (e.g., 411, 911).
• We are working closely with our counterparts in the United States, and learning from their best
practices, to help guide Canada’s approach to implementing a three-digit number.
• Our goal is to be ready for a safe and seamless rollout so that calls do not go unanswered.
If pressed on the contract with PricewaterhouseCoopers, which is analyzing anticipated service volumes
• The Public Health Agency of Canada contracted PricewaterhouseCoopers to understand
anticipated service volume and demand for 9-8-8.
• This analysis factored in anticipated demand over time, the impact of diverted calls from other
services, including 911 and local crisis lines, as well as new growth associated with introducing an easy-
to-remember number.
• This analysis forecasts a four to six-foldincrease by 2027. This will inform planning, including
costs and resources.
• This exercise builds on forecasting analysis undertaken by the U.S. which estimated a four- to
tenfold growth in service volumes within the first five years of launching 9-8-8.
• The U.S. experienced a higher volume of calls and texts than initially forecasted. These findings
will inform the service volume forecast for Canada.
If pressed on why it took so long to begin the consultation on the 9-8-8 service model and
implementation
• In April 2022, the CRTC asked the Public Health Agency of Canada to determine the termination
point of calls made to the abbreviated number, the entity that would manage calls to the abbreviated
number, as well as the scope of the services being provided.
• The CRTC noted that these determinations would need to be informed through engagement
with partners, including provincial and territorial governments, suicide prevention stakeholders, and
Indigenous organizations. The CRTC asked for receipt of thisinformation in fall 2022. The Public Health
Agency of Canada has confirmed that this engagement is underway and it will provide a response in this
timeframe.
• Engagement with representatives from provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations and
key stakeholders began in May 2022 and is ongoing. It will inform implementation planning so that 9-8-8
is operational on November 30, 2023.
Background
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
44
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, and People with Lived Experience on thescope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which estimated a fourfold to tenfold increase in
call volumes for their service when it launched on July 16, 2022, after over 4 years of preparation.
This initiative builds upon the Government’s current support of a pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service. PHAC is currently investing $21 million over 5 years ($4.2 million per year) for CAMH, with their
partners, to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. In addition, $800,000 per year is allocated to
PHAC to cover the oversight, administration, reporting and evaluation activities associated with the
Contribution Agreement with CAMH. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service provides people across
Canada with suicide crisis support from trained responders via phone (1-833-456-4566), in English and
French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. Calls to the service are answered by trained responders from
a network of 11 community-based distress centres across Canada and a back-up hub of responders.
As highlighted in Budget 2021, the government is committed to ensuring funds are available to support
the creation of this three-digit number.
45
ARRIVECAN
Issue
ArriveCAN was launched in April 2020 to support the digital submission of mandatory public health
information required from travellers coming into Canada. ArriveCAN evolved in lockstep with the border
measures to expedite the processing of travellers at all of Canada’s ports of entry including at the very
beginning of the pandemic before vaccines and when little was known about the emerging variants.
Key Facts
• In the face of the global COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took measures to close
borders and drastically reduce international travel, in addition to many other heightened public safety
measures.
• Past requirements for travellers to provide contact details and information on their plans for
quarantine increased border processing times. Modern tools in stakeholder data collection and analysis
were leveraged.
Key Messages
• In the context of a global pandemic, the need to take timely action drove innovation. ArriveCAN
evolved with the pandemic, mirroring thechanges adopted through the Orders in Council and reflecting
the advice and trajectory of the pandemic.
• It was the best way to collect and share traveller information to operationalize the measures
and enable compliance and enforcement while avoiding crowding at Canada’s ports of entry.
• Since October 1st, travellers no longer have to submit information through the ArriveCAN
app/website. However, if they choose to, they can continue to use the optional Advance Declaration
feature in ArriveCAN before arriving at Toronto-Pearson, Montreal-Trudeau, or Vancouver international
airports. Travellers choosing to do this can use either the free ArriveCAN mobile app or the website.
• Our measures have evolved over the past two and a half years and they could change again. We
need to remain ready to respond quickly with a fully accessible, secure app and web-based tool for data
collection that is respectful of both official languages, so we can protect Canadians from new significant
emerging public health threats.
If pressed on using GPS or location data
• The ArriveCAN app did not collect any location data. There is no location data stored in any
database.
• When an app is registered in the app store, there are services listed that the app “may” use.
ArriveCANuses a software that allows the app to easily look up an address to make it easier for
travellers to enter their travel destination information.
• This software can also be used to allow people to use their location by default, however,
ArriveCAN does not,and has never, used that feature. But because the software is there, the app stores
show that the app “may” use location data.
• Let me be clear, ArriveCAN does not, and has never collected any location data from users.
Background
To support the administration and enforcement of the Quarantine Act and Emergency Orders made
under it, CBSA and PHAC developed ArriveCAN, an integrated digital solution that enables real-time
collection of information at Canadian Ports of Entry (POE) for all incoming travellers. ArriveCAN enabled
46
travellers to provide their information digitally as was previously required by law under the Quarantine
Act, to support compliance and enforcement and public health measures.
ArriveCAN first launched in April 2020 and is available as a mobile app on the Apple App and Google Play
stores or by signing in online atCanada.ca/ArriveCAN.
Development of the ArriveCAN app and sign in online platform
In February 2020, Canada began collecting mandatory information from travellers who had been in
specific geographical locations in the previous two weeks, such as Hubei province in China, Italy and
Iran. Travellers submitted this information via the Coronavirus Form.
The Coronavirus Form was modified to become the Traveller Contact Information Form to support the
first Mandatory Isolation Order in late March 2020. The form was made available digitally via a website
in March 2020.
The ArriveCAN app was first developed to digitize the paper Traveller Contact Information Form used at
Canadian POEs. Heavy reliance on the paper form led to a number of inefficiencies, including inaccurate
or incomplete submissions and lengthy digitization processing that led to delays in sharing the
information with the provinces and territories. The app and sign-in online platform reduced points of
contact at POEs, improved processing times at the border and reduced crowding, and allowed for faster
sharing of information with provinces and territories.
On April 30, 2020, ArriveCAN Phase I was launched which digitized the mandatory collection of
information occurring via the paper form and the website. ArriveCAN Phase I allowed travellers to enter
information in advance, but they could only submit at the border upon entering a token. No information
was collected from exempt travellers.
On July 20, 2020, the federal government released the full launch of ArriveCAN Phase II, including the
accessible sign-in online platform. The same information was collected in Phase II–the personal contact
and travel information, symptom self-assessment, and quarantine plan questionnaire.
A few functionalities to note:
- Phase II allowed travellers to submit their information 48 hours in advance of their arrival to
Canada (previously, travellers could only submit at the border upon entering a token).
- Starting June 30, 2020, CBSA asked exempt travellers for information. Exempt travellers were
encouraged to use ArriveCAN to reduce processing times at the border and to receive important public
health information.
- Phase II enabled travellers to use ArriveCAN to voluntarily check in to their place of quarantine
or isolation, and to provide symptom self-assessment throughout their 14 days of quarantine.
Mandatory Digital Submission: ArriveCAN Phase III
ArriveCAN stopped being mandatory as of October 1st, 2022.
Submission of traveller information using ArriveCAN was initially voluntary. However, on November 21,
2020, it became mandatory for air travellers to submit their information digitally in advance of arriving
inCanada (i.e., before boarding the aircraft to Canada). At the time, travellers entering Canada by air
accounted for approximately 20% of all travel. As of February 22, 2021, it became mandatory for
travellers entering via land to submit their information through ArriveCAN prior to arriving at the border
crossing. Travellers entering Canada by land accounted for approximately 78% of total travel.
Travellers were not denied boarding their aircraft for failing to comply with the digital requirements;
however,they faced potential enforcement actions upon entry ranging from a verbal warning to a
$5,000 fine.
Once in Canada, it was mandatory for non-exempt travellers from all modes (air, land, marine) to
provide information digitally, including daily symptom self-assessments, throughout their 14-day
quarantine, and confirm that they have reached their place of quarantine through ArriveCAN or the toll-
free number.
47
Although exempt travellers were mandated to provide contact information in advance if travelling by air
or land, they were exempt from post-border reporting as they were exempt from the mandatory
isolation order. Approximately 75% of travellers were exempt from the mandatory requirement to
quarantine, including travellers who entered Canada for the purpose of performing cross-border work,
medical support, essential services, or trade or transport.
During the period when the mandatory requirements were in effect, usage of ArriveCAN for air
travellers was consistently at or above 85% and above 80% for land travellers since January 2022.
Information provided through ArriveCAN was shared with provinces and territories and law
enforcement agencies for public health follow-up and to verify compliance with the Quarantine Act.
ArriveCAN was part of a broader suite of activities and tools supporting Canada’s evolving border
policies throughout COVID-19.
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore how digital tools can further support Canada’s
public health data needs.
48
OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened long-standing challenges regarding substance use and
the opioid overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose deaths and
harms.
• In addition, people who use drugs are alsofacing additional barriers and risks related to the
toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to health and social services, including life-saving
harm reduction and treatment.
KEY FACTS
• Most recent national data indicates that 29,052 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred
between January 2016 and December 2021. 2021 was the worst year on record with approximately 21
people dying per day in Canada. The toxicity of the illegal drug supply continues to be a major driver of
the crisis with asmany as 86% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2021 (January to
December) involving fentanyl.
• The government’s commitment to addressing this crisis has seen us commit over $800 million,
including nearly $350M for community-based interventions under the Substance Use and Addictions
Program.
• Between June 2017 and June 2022, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received close
to 3.6 million visits, reversed some 40,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over
185,000referrals to health and social services.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s history.
• Substance use is a public health issue, not an issue forthe criminal justice system.
• The pandemic has highlighted the gaps that exist in our health system and social safety net.
• That is why we are exploring new ways to ensure that Canadians receive the life-saving
substance use and health supports that they need, and that the health systems that underpin these
important supports are robust.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to working with national partners on a whole-
of-society approach to address the opioid overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THEALBERTA’S OVERDOSE DEATH NUMBERS …
• The opioid overdose crisis affects each part of the country differently. While Alberta’s latest
data points to recent improvements, it is important to acknowledge that that the number of deaths in
Alberta remains above pre-COVID levels.
• It is too early to say what the actual trends will be over a longer period of time and it is difficult
to attribute changes to deaths and harms to one specific factor.
• That is why the Government of Canada’s strategy takes a comprehensive evidence-based
approach that includes harm reduction, treatment, prevention, and enforcement.
IF PRESSED ON PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO B.C.’S OPIOID DAMAGES ANDHEALTH CARE COSTS
RECOVERY ACT…
• We are aware of the proposed amendments to the Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs
Recovery Act.
49
• The Government of Canada continues to support and work collaboratively with the provincial
and territorial governments in British Columbia’s proposed legal action against opioid manufacturers
and distributors.
• We are exploring all appropriate options to hold industry accountable for its role in the opioid
crisis.
IF PRESSED ON CHANGES TO ALBERTA’S MENTAL HEALTHSERVICES PROTECTION REGULATION…
• Our Government is taking a wide range of actions, including prevention, treatment and harm
reduction, to help people who use drugs get the supports they need.
• We support lower-barrier approaches that can help to save lives due to the significant risks
posed by the highly toxic illegal drug supply in Canada, including enhancing access to safer supply.
• We are aware of the policy change in Alberta.
• We are committed to working with provinces, territories, and key stakeholders, to continue
sharing the evidence on innovative practices that can save lives.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONSTO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS…
• The overdose crisis is a public health issue and increasing access to evidence-based treatment
and life saving services is a key priority of the Government of Canada.
• Through the Substance Use and Addictions Program, we have committed nearly $350 million
since 2017 to pilot and build the evidence-base for promising community-based interventions, such as
providing medication as alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• We provided $150 million to provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
• Moving forward, we will continue to work with partners and stakeholders to address barriers to
accessing services, the inconsistent quality of services, and limited front-line workforce capacity. These
challenges make it more difficult for people in Canada to get the substance use services that they need.
BACKGROUND
On April 14, 2016, BC first declared a public health emergency due to the rise in opioid-relateddeaths.
Since then, two other PTs have also declared emergencies: Alberta declared a public health crisis in May
2017 and the Yukon declared a substance use health emergency in January 2022.
Most recent national data indicates that 30,843 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and March 2022. Toxicity of supply continues to be a major driver of the crisis with as
many as 85% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2022 thus far (January to March) involving
fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with death most
common among males and individuals aged 20 to 59 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencinghigher risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Several jurisdictions have observed unprecedented numbers
and rates in relation to the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be
highly impacted. In 2021, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 2,267 illegal drug toxicity
deaths, a 28% increase from 2020 and a 130% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. There have
been 1,468 deaths in the first eight months of 2022 in BC, a decrease of 1 over the same time period in
2021 (1,469 deaths)
50
Data released by Alberta in November 2022 indicated that in 2021 the province reported 1,824 deaths
from all substances, the highest number per year since the province began tracking such deaths in 2016.
Of these deaths, 1,614 were related to opioids. The highest opioid-related death count was in Edmonton
(620) followed by Calgary (501).
A dynamic and complex set of factors influence who is most at risk, including but not limited to: gender,
age, being part of a racialized or Indigenous community, and having a history of criminalization,
discrimination or trauma. So far in 2022 (January to March), males accounted for the majority (76%) of
accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths. Among both males and for females, the majority of
accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths were among individuals aged 20 to 59 years.
Among youth 0-19, between January 2016 and March 2022, the total number of opioid and stimulant-
related poisoning hospitalizations among girls was consistently higher compared to their male
counterparts. Between 2018 and 2021, girls aged 0-19 years experienced fewer accidental apparent
opioid toxicity deaths compared to boys of the same age; however, preliminary data from 2022 (January
to March) shows higher numbers of deaths among girls over boys in that age category (11 and 7 deaths,
respectively).
Data points to people commonly dying of overdoses alone and mostly indoors. In Ontario, from March
to December of 2020, 73% of fatal overdoses occurred where no one was present to intervene. In BC, in
2021, 83% of fatal overdoses occurred indoors, more specifically, 56% occurred in private residences.
Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people have also surged. First Nations people in BC died
of an overdose at 5.4 times the rate of other BC residents in 2021. In Alberta, First Nations people died
of an accidental opioid overdose at seven times the rate of other residents between January and June of
2020. In Saskatchewan, almost three times as many First Nations females died from accidental deaths
involving opioids than Caucasian females did in 2021.
The impact of thecrisis is not measured in deaths alone and, in particular, the healthcare system has
also been impacted by marked increases in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations and calls for
emergency medical services (EMS) since the start of the pandemic. Compared to the two-year period
before the pandemic (April 2018–March 2020, 9,470 hospitalizations) there was a 24 percent increase
in opioid-related poisoning hospitalizations during the first two years of the pandemic (April 2020 –
March 2022, 11,760 hospitalizations).
COLLECTION OF NATIONAL OPIOID-AND STIMULANT-RELATED DATA
The Public Health Agency of Canada publishes quarterly data on opioid-and stimulant-related harms on
behalf of the Special Advisory Committee (SAC) on the Epidemic of Opioid Overdoses.Data on opioid-
and stimulant-related deaths is provided by Chief Coroners and Chief Medical Examiners. The time
required to complete an investigation into the cause of death for someone suspected of an overdose
can range from approximately three to 24 months.
PHAC also conducts modelling to understand potential trajectories of opioid-related deaths as the crisis
evolves.
51
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS
To reflect the Government of Canada’s comprehensive approach to addressing the overdose crisis,
targeted funding of $815M have been allocated across federal departments and agencies (including
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Public
Safety Canada, the Canada Border Services Agency, and Statistics Canada) to address key, interrelated
priorities:
• Over $656M allocated or committed to increase access to evidence-based treatment and life-
saving services, such as harm reduction;
• Over $43M allocated for awareness, prevention, and stigma reduction activities;
• Over $74M allocated for data, research, and surveillance initiatives;
• Over $42M allocated for collective law enforcement efforts to enhance safety and security.
To effectively deliver on the federal response to the overdose crisis, federal departments and agencies
require salary and operational costs for staff, and other necessary resources. These are standard costs
associated with delivering policies and programs in the federal government, and are thoroughly
reviewed onan ongoing basis. For example, operational costs have been allocated to support, but are
not limited to:
• Health Canada’s Drug Analysis Service (DAS), in which employees provide scientific and technical
services to help Canadian law enforcement agencies in their activities involving illegal drugs, including
helping police forces safely dismantle illegal drug laboratories;
• Border control agents disrupt the flow of illegal substance into Canada; and
• The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) analysts that receive and review applications
to ensure funding is disbursed to communities for quality projects in a timely manner.
Of the $656M for increased access to evidence-based treatment and life-saving services, such as harm
reduction, $157M is allocated for operational costs since 2017. Of the $43M for awareness, prevention,
and stigma reduction activities, $18M is allocated for operational costs since 2017.
The Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on Substance Use in March 2021 that provided
expert advice on Canada’s federal drug policy, including examining potential alternatives to criminal
penalties for personal drug possession. The Task Force provided its final advice on alternatives to
criminal penalties in May 2021, and on federaldrug policy in June 2021. Both reports of the Task Force
have been made publicly available and can be found online at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-
force-substance-use/reports.html.
LITIGATION AGAINST OPIOID MANUFACTURERS CANADA
On October 17, 2022, the Province of British Columbia announced that it would be introducing
amendments to its Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act that would allow the federal
government to join a B.C.-led class-action lawsuit against opioid manufacturers and permit the
expansion of the number of defendants.
Amendments to the B.C. legislation will enable the governments of British Columbia and Canada to
pursuerecovery from opioid manufacturers, wholesalers and other potential defendants in a class-
action lawsuit that is in progress. The amendments will strengthen the act by ensuring directors and
officers of corporate defendants may also be held accountable.
52
In 2018, B.C. commenced a class-action lawsuit against over 40 manufacturers and distributors of
opioids on behalf of provincial and territorial governments in Canada and enacted the Opioid Damages
and Health Care Costs Recovery Act to support the class action. The aim of the class action and
legislation is for governments to recover costs for health care provided to patients that resulted from
wrongful conduct of opioid manufacturers, distributors and their consultants. The class action is
expected to be certified in 2023.
On June 29, 2022, Purdue Pharma Canada agreed to a proposed $150 million settlement with provinces
and territories for the recovery of health care costs related to the sale and marketing of opioids.
53
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes its responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary healthcare.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES USING PRIVATE FACILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF INSURED
SERVICES…
• Our government is committed to preserving and improving our publicly funded health care
system, which values equity and fairness over profit and preferred access in the provision of medically
necessary health care.
• The Canada Health Act does not prohibit the use of private facilities in the delivery of insured
health services as long as patients are not charged.
• Provinces and territories thatallow patient charges for insured health services at private
facilities are subject to mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from their federal Canada Health Transfer
payments.
IF PRESSED ON THE APPEAL OF THE CAMBIE DECISIONTO THE SUPREME COURT OF CANADA…
• Our government fully supports the British Columbia Court of Appeal’s decision, which validates
the fundamental principle of Canada’s health care system–access to medically necessary health
services should be based on medical need, and not on the ability or willingness to pay.
• We will continue to work with British Columbia to vigorously defend Canada’s publicly funded
health care system, which values equity and fairness over profit and preferential access to required care.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services in NB
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. NB is the only province with a private abortion clinic
(Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act (CHA), and
raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since March 2020,
deductions totalling $269,916 were levied against the province’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT)
payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for abortions
54
performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution.
Currently, Clinic 554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion services.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, media stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical
abortion services in some private clinics. Health Canada followed up on these reports by analyzing clinic
websites, and by making phone or email inquiries to clinics of concern. While the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations, the patient charges they discovered
were reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021 and March
2022 deductions (totaling $20,465). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan
to Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured
surgical abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as it works to
implement its action plan and eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services and the province
will provide an updated status report in the coming months, which will be published in the Canada
Health Act Annual Report for 2021-2022.
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA) Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces
and territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
Appealof Cambie Surgeries Corporation et al. v. BC (Attorney General) to the Supreme Court of Canada
On September 29, 2022, Cambie Surgeries Corporation et al. (Cambie) initiated the process to request
that the Supreme Court of Canada hear an appeal of the British Columbia (BC) Court of Appeal decision
in Cambie v. BC (Attorney General). On July 15, 2022, the BC Court of Appeal released its decision in this
case, upholding the ruling of the Supreme Court of BC which dismissed the constitutional challenge to
provisions of BC’s Medicare Protection Act.
These specific provisions prohibit patient charges for insured services and the purchase of private
insurance to cover these services, as well as dual practice, which occurs when physicians work within the
publiclyfunded health care system and privately, at the same time. While the Canada Health Act (CHA)
is not under direct challenge in this case, the federal government joined the proceedings as a party to
support BC in its defence of its legislation, which mirrors the fundamental principles of the CHA, namely
that access to required care should be based on need, and not on the ability or willingness to pay.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
55
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, including a
deduction, all deducted amounts have been reimbursed as the province has successfully eliminated the
charges.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
BC continues to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address patient charges for insured surgical
services. Since March 2018, BC’s CHT payments have been deducted $76,018,712 in respect of patient
charges at private surgical clinics. To date, Health Canada has reimbursed $61,047,012 of these
deductions in recognition of the province's efforts to eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy is aimed at eliminating patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic
services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the long-standingfederal position that all
medically necessary services, including diagnostic services, are insured services, regardless of the venue
where the services are delivered. Seven provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic
services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
Following consultations between Health Canada and provincial and territorial governments, the
Diagnostic Services Policy was communicated to jurisdictions in August 2018 via a Canada Health Act
interpretation letter, and came into effect on April 1, 2020. These timelines were intended to give
jurisdictions time to align their health care systems with the policy’s requirements. Under the Policy,
provinces and territories will be expectedto report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Provinces and territories have an opportunity to receive an immediate
reimbursement of any deduction if they eliminate these patient charges before March 2023. Health
Canada continues to engage with provinces and territoriesaffected by the Policy.
56
HOME CARE
ISSUE
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most provinces and territories.
There is evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during the
pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care. This situation
increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for familycaregivers.
KEY FACTS
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
• The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories
to strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can
get the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be
key to ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system
data, as well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care.
• Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Work with the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provinces and territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
• Minister of Seniors mandate letter contains a commitment to establish an expert panel to
provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home Benefit, with the support of the Minister of
Health.
KEY MESSAGES
• As of 2017, our government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over ten years, directly to
provinces and territories to help support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• We recently announced that the National Seniors Council will serve as an expert panel to
examine measures, including a potential aging at home benefit, to further support Canadians who wish
to age within the comfort of their own homes.
• Our government will continue to work alongside the provinces and territories to enable seniors
to live longer at home, where they prefer to be.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDEDBY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Our government committed to strengthening our healthcare system, especially for vulnerable
members of our communities –this includes care at home.
57
• In 2020, $3 billion in federal funding was provided to provinces andterritories to temporarily
increase the wages of low-income essential workers during the pandemic, including personal support
workers in home care settings.
• Budget 2021 announced a $90 million investment over three years to launch the Age Well at
Home initiative to assist community-based organizations in providing practical support to help low-
income and vulnerable seniors age in place.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUÉBEC HOME CARE FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT…
• The Government of Canada made historic investments in health care, committing $11 billion
over 10 years in targeted funding for provinces and territories to help improve access to mental health
and addiction services as well as for home and community care.
• On November 21, 2022, the Government announced the signing of an agreement with Quebec,
which will provide $268 million in 2022-23 to continue to help improve access to these services.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces and territories to
strengthen Canada’s health care systems.
BACKGROUND
Home Care in Canada
Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and territorial
(PT) governments.
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health care
services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these services,
including home care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
Home care is not publicly insured under the Canada Health Act.
While notmandatory, every PT offers home care programs and services, with variations across each PT.
COVID Impacts on Home Care
In July 2021, the Canadian Institute for Health Information highlighted the following impacts COVID-19
has had on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
Seniors’ services are likely to continue to be affected by the ongoing transmission of COVID-19 variants
and rising rates of other respiratory viruses. Many provinces and territories are experiencing health care
staffing issues due to workers being exposed to or testing positive for COVID-19.
58
Budget 2022
Budget 2022 proposes the creation of an expert panel to study the idea of an Aging at Home Benefit.
The panel will report to the Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health.
Other Relevant Budget 2021 Commitments
Budget 2021 committed to:
• supportingretirement savings for personal support workers, through funding of $27.6 million
over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees
International Union Healthcare. The funding will support incentives for worker participation;
• increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022; and,
• establishing a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program ($960 million over three years, led by
ESDC). The purpose of the program is to help employment sectors design and deliver relevant training,
and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this
program will help to address the need for more skilled personal support workers who provide care for
Canadians at home.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B). Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all provinces and territories and posted to
Health Canada’s website. New agreements will be required for provinces and territories to access the
remaining five years of this funding (2022-23 to 2026-27).
FPT Health Ministers will work together to improve access to appropriate services and supports in home
and community, including palliative and end-of-life care, by pursuing one or more of the following
actions:
• Spreading and scaling evidence-based models of home and community care that are more
integrated and connected with primary health care;
• Enhancing access to palliative and end of life care at home or in hospices;
• Increasing support for caregivers; and
• Enhancing home care infrastructure, such as digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology
and facilities for community-based service delivery.
Québec Asymmetrical Agreement
The Government of Canada and theGovernment of Quebec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement
distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based on the asymmetrical agreements of
September 2004.
While agreements with other provinces and territories included an action plan outlining how federal
funds were used, Quebec provided an annex to the Agreement outlining activities that the province
undertook more broadly, in alignment with priorities for the federal investment. This annex is available
online with the Quebec agreement.
Over 10 years, the federal government will provide Quebec with $2.47 billion in funds targeted to help
support initiatives in home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
59
Shared Health Priorities Indicators for access to home andcommunity care (Canadian Institute for
Health Information)
• Hospital Stay Extended Until Home Care Services or Supports Ready
• Caregiver Distress
• New Long-Term Care Residents Who Potentially Could Have Been Cared for at Home
• Wait Times for Home CareServices
• Home Care Services Helped the Recipient Stay at Home
• Death at Home/Not in Hospital
PT Action Plans for the Home and Community care bilateral agreements
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, which are all posted publicly,
and lay out the initiatives that each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s
population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model forintegrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
60
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
ISSUE
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to support
residents and staff.
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted livingfacilities, and seniors’
residences. Even residents of facilities not affected directly by the virus have faced social isolation and
reduced services.
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can get
the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to
ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as
well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Working with the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provinces and territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has been devastating for Canadians in long-term care, their families, and for the
hardworking people who care for them.
• We have committed to strengthen health care for everyone, including Canadians living and
working in long-term care homes.
• We have invested up to $4 billion dollars to help provinces and territories improve the standard
of care in long-term care facilities.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to improve access to quality long-
term care and to support training and better wages for personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• We understand that the Health Standards Organization and the CSA Group have conducted
extensive public consultations and completed a public review of their draft LTC standards.
• We look forward to the release of the final long-term care standards this winter.
• This is an important step to improving care for seniors that will setthe bar higher for safe and
respectful care in these facilities.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to help ensure standards for long-
term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
61
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT…
• As long-term care falls under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, any legislation will be
designed in a manner that reflects jurisdictional responsibilities.
• The federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories,while
respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these
services, including long-term care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• While the Canada Health Act (CHA) covers physician and hospital services, long-term care is not
publicly insured under the CHA.
• While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
Situation in LTC homes throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in long-term care have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19
pandemic. This includes issues related to infection prevention and control; HHR; compliance with
standards and regulations; infrastructure; and PPE. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered major COVID-
19 outbreaks and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the firstwave, outbreaks in LTC and
seniors’ homes accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many stakeholders have released reports and
recommendations on addressing issues faced in LTC facilities.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improving LTC include:
62
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Several provinces have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities, including Alberta,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of the ongoing
investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results. Several provinces have already announced
initiatives to address gaps in LTC.
Government of Canada initiatives to support PT actions in Long-term Care
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with provinces and territories throughout the
COVID-19 pandemic to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has
responded to COVID-19 through a number of initiatives.
Aging at Home Benefit Panel
The Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health have recently announced that the National Seniors
Council (NSC) will serve as an expert panel to examine measures, including a potential aging at home
benefit, to further support Canadians who wish to age within the comfort of their own homes.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 builds upon previous COVID measures taken by the Government of Canada to support
seniors and vulnerable populations across the country. Commitments included:
• $3 billion over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based
organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age
in place.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement
saving for personal support workers.
• $960 million over three years for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC. The
purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and connect Canadians
63
with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would include the need for
more skilled personal support workers.
Fall Economic Statement 2020
To address significant challenges revealed during COVID-19, in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the
federal government announced the creation of a new Safe Long-Term Care Fund. This fund transferred
$1 billion to the provinces and territories to protect people living and working in long-term care.
Provinces and territories can use this money to improve infection prevention and control in facilities,
including to assess infection prevention and control readiness, improve infrastructure such as
ventilation, and address workforce gaps, including hiring more staff or raising wages. As of March 31,
2022, we had reached agreements with all provinces and territories. In addition to the $1 billion in
funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to Healthcare Excellence Canada’s LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000
facilities across Canada. The goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any
future outbreaks. Participating teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to
training sessions and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’skey components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
In addition, the Government of Canada:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to
work with the provinces and territories to ensure LTC facilities have access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least two doses.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specificto LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low-income essential workers, which included front line workers in hospitals and LTC facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories,
including to address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick-start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
64
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care (HSO), and the health infrastructure and environmental
designof long-term care facilities (CSA Group). The process is being undertaken by expert standards
development organizations with broad engagement, and is taking place at arms-length from the
Government of Canada.
The Health Standards Organization and the CSAGroup have completed the 60-day public review period
of their draft LTC standards. Both organizations expect to release their final LTC standards by January
2023.
The Government has reiterated the commitment to national LTC standards in the Minister of Health’s
most recent mandate letter: “This includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection
prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe
Long-Term Care Act to ensureseniors get the care they deserve”. We will continue to work with
provinces and territories to monitor progress on improvements in LTC, including using federal funding,
and consider how these new standards might inform federal legislation.
Private Member’s Motion M-47, Improvements to Long-Term Care
Private Member’s Motion M-47 was placed on notice by the Liberal Member for Avalon, Ken McDonald,
on February 7, 2022. It called upon the House to recognize the long-standing issues affecting LTC that
have been exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the need to ensure conditions of work reflect care
standards seniors deserve, and for the government to work with PTs to improve LTC. These
improvements are as follows:
“[...] the government should work with PTs to (i) improve the quality and availability of LTC homes and
beds; (ii) implement strict infection prevention and control measures, including through more provincial
and territorial facility inspections for LTC homes; and (iii) develop a safe LTC act collaboratively to ensure
that seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.”
The motion repeated the commitments made in the Liberal Party of Canada’s 2021 electoral platform
and aligned with the Minister of Health’s 2021 Mandate Letterand the Liberal Party of Canada’s and
New Democratic Party’s new Supply and Confidence Agreement. The first hour of debate on this motion
took place on April 25, 2022 and the second hour of debate took place on June 22, 2022.
Federal government ownershipof long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
65
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)–ELIGIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL DISORDER AS THE
SOLE UNDERLYING MEDICAL CONDITION IN MARCH 2023
ISSUE
• The Government Response to the Interim Report of the Special Joint Committee on Medical
Assistance in Dying (AMAD) was tabled on October 20th. AMAD’s Interim Report, focused on the topic
of MAID and mental disorder, made no formal recommendations but urged the federal government to
support the timely implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental
Illness (the Panel). The Government Response outlines the Government’s progress to this end.
• Central to AMAD’s concerns are practitioner and health system readiness for March 17, 2023
(when MAID for persons with a mental disorder as a sole underlying condition will be permitted). As
outlined in the Government Response, the Government is actively supporting the practitioner
community in ensuring the safe and consistent implementation of MAID in Canada through practice
guidelines, accredited practitioner training and a strengthened monitoring system.
KEY FACTS
• AMAD is responsible for the parliamentary review of Canada’s legislation on MAID as required in
former Bill C-7. As specified in the legislation, AMAD’s review must cover mature minors, advance
requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada and the protection of Canadians with
disabilities. Its final report covering all of these issues is due to be tabled no later than February 17,
2023.
• The Panel was commissioned last yearto make recommendations respecting protocols,
guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests from persons with mental disorders. Its final report
contains 19 recommendations, the first of which calls upon FPT governments to facilitate the
development ofMAID practice standards for use by health professional regulatory bodies. Most of the
remaining recommendations provide guidance on MAID assessment and provision in complex cases,
while others focus on broader measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime, though
training, oversight, data collection, research, and Indigenous engagement.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government acknowledges concerns regarding the end in March 2023 of the temporary
exclusion from access to MAID for persons with a mentaldisorder as their sole underlying medical
condition.
• The mandatory eligibility criteria and safeguards in the legislation set a very high bar for access
to MAID. We laud the rigor and diligence demonstrated by MAID practitioners who abide by all the
requirements of the legislation.
• We are working hard with provinces, territories, clinicians and regulatory bodies on MAID
practice standards and accredited training programs, which will ensure MAID assessors are well
equipped to make decisions on complex requests for MAID.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER INITIATIVES THEFEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS UNDERTAKING…
• Our Government is working with provinces, territories and partners on implementation of key
recommendations of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness.
• We have convened a task group to develop MAID practice standards that will provide clinicians
with guidance when assessing complex MAID requests, including those involving mental disorders.
• We are also funding the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers to develop a
fully accredited MAID training curriculum. Modules will be rolled out early in 2023.
66
• Over the longer term, we will implement a research agenda that aims to provide greater insight
into the circumstances and experiences of people who seek MAID.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL DISORDERS AS THE SOLE
UNDERLYING CONDITION OR THE EXPERT PANEL REPORT…
• Our Government is working to support MAID practitioners who, after March 17, may receive
MAID requests from persons with a mental disorder as their sole underlying medical condition.
• Some MAID practitioners have already assessed cases that involve mental disorders, alongside
other conditions. We are working on further guidance to help providers interpret the eligibility criteria
and apply the safeguards to these complex cases.
• We have convened a task group to develop MAID practice standards that will be available in
early 2023, providing clinicians across the country with consistent guidance when assessing complex
MAID requests, including involving mental disorders. We are encouraging provincial and territorial
governments and medical regulators to work collaboratively to consider and adopt these practice
standards.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLYTHOSE
WITH A MENTAL DISORDER …
• The latest review of international studies suggests that the availability of MAID does not have a
statistically significant impact on suicide rates.
• The MAID framework sets a high bar for access. Just as persons with physical ailmentsmust be
suffering grievously and be in an advanced state of irreversible decline arising from an incurable
condition in order to receive MAID, only individuals with severe and long-standing mental illnesses that
have been resistant to multiple treatments and interventions will ever be considered for MAID.
• The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness also noted that suicide assessments are already
part of MAID practice. This includes ensuring that a person’s request is consistent, unambiguous and
rationally considered during a prolonged period of stability, and not during a time of crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAIDDUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES…
• We do not comment on individual cases,as only the individuals and their clinicians involved
truly know the full circumstances.
• While a person may say they want to receive MAID due to inadequate services, the eligibility
criteria and safeguards in the law are robust. Two independent practitioners must conclude a person is
eligible and an offer of available services and supports must be made and considered by the requester.
• No person would ever be approved for MAID simply because they lack adequate support
services.
SAFEGUARDS FOR WHERE DEATH IS NOT REASONABLY FORSEEABLE(ALSO KNOWN AS TRACK 2 CASES)…
• Recognizing the variability in the types of applicants who might make a request, the legislation
established new and enhanced safeguards that require among other things, inclusion of professional
expertise in the assessment process, and offering of alternate options to alleviate suffering.
• These safeguards ensure that practitioners consider the physical, psychological and social
circumstances of requesters who are not nearing a foreseeablenatural death.
• We are also supporting development of MAID practice standards to help clinicians consistently
interpret and apply eligibility criteria and safeguards when assessing complex requests that may fall
under the track two stream, including requests where a mental disorder is involved.
67
IF PRESSED ON UPCOMING REGULATORY AMENDMENTS TO EXPAND DATA COLLECTION FOR MAID…
• The amendments to the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID will respond to the changes to
the MAID legislation in 2021, and will provide for the collection of new data related to race, gender and
Indigenous identity, as well as disability status of MAIDrequesters.
• These amendments are on track to be published in Canada Gazette, Part II prior to January 1,
2023.
IF PRESSED ONINDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT ON MAID…
• Health Canada is committed to engaging with Indigenous peoples on the culturally safe
implementation of MAID, guided by principles respecting the Government of Canada’s relationship with
Indigenous peoples, and based on recognition and respect for the right to self-determination.
IF PRESSED ON THE POTENTIAL ELIGIBILITY OF MATUREMINORS FOR MAID …
• Many Canadians have strong views about MAID. There may be additional tensions and
sensitivities when considering potential eligibility for mature minors.
• Generally speaking, mature minors are those under 18 with the capacity to make informed
health care decisions and the ability to act voluntarily on those decisions.
• In many provinces and territories, mature minors already have the right to make important
decisions regarding their care. This includes the right to consent to or refuse lifesaving medical
treatment.
• Medically assisted dying is still relatively new in Canada and we are still learning. That is why the
Government will be working closely with experts and other stakeholders to support necessary research
on its implementation. We also look forward to reviewing the Special Joint Committee’s final report on
MAID, expected in October 2022.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Québec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Québec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new 2021 MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
68
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months,
and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
IMPLEMENTING KEY RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
The revised legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests from
individuals where mental illness is the sole underlying condition. After March 17, 2023, individuals with
a mental illness as their sole condition will be able to request and receive MAID, providing they meet all
other eligibility criteria.
During this exclusion period, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to
conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panelon MAID and Mental
Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It includes 19 recommendations that provide guidance
on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated safeguards, and the
assessment process, as wellas advice on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime
more broadly.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that the existing MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards (interpreted
appropriately) buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices in related areas of healthcare, can
provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex (track two) MAID requests, including
where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations that will help
prepare the MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress
included: developing a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID
curriculum; enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of
MAID; plans for Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The new legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal
Assent. The Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The committee
reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report, specifically focused on
MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The committee’s final report is
due no later than February 17, 2023.
69
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO MAID REGULATIONS
On May 21, 2022, the proposed amendments to the existing 2018 Regulations for the Monitoring of
Medical Assistance in Dying were published on the Canada Gazette, Part 1 website for a 30-day public
comment period. The proposed regulatory amendments support Canada’s MAID regime by allowing for
enhancements to data collection and reporting through the federal MAID monitoring regime to provide
a more comprehensive and inclusive picture of how MAID, with expanded eligibility, is being
implemented in Canada.
Once the amended Regulations are enacted, the expanded data collection requirements will commence
and the information collected will be reflected in the federal annual report on MAID in Canada for 2023,
to be publicly released in thesummer of 2024.
INDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT
Throughout various consultative and Parliamentary discussions on MAID, Indigenous participants, as
well as several Parliamentarians, spoke to about the lack of and need for meaningful engagement with
Indigenous peoples on the topic of MAID to understand their diverse views and perspectives. This view
was most recently echoed by the May 2022 final report by the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness,
and the June 2022 Interim Report of the Special Joint Committee on MAID. These calls for engagement
come from the concerns raised around the potential impacts of MAID on Indigenous peoples, such as:
• Undermining of suicide prevention efforts;
• Straining already inaccessible culturally-safe health care services, including palliative care; and
• Exacerbating systemic racism experienced by Indigenous peoples in the health care system.
FUNDING FOR MAID INITIATIVES
Expanded access to MAID (as codified in the new legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility
assessments and requires the administration of the enhanced safeguards aimed at protecting vulnerable
people who might be induced to seek an assisted death. Budget 2021 provided $13.2 million to Health
Canada over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the
development of training and guidance materials for practitioners, as well as a policy driven research
agenda. This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to support safe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
MAID AND MATURE MINORS
Generally, mature minors are those under 18 with the capacity to make informed health care decisions
and the ability to act voluntarily on those decisions. While provinces and territories may have different
requirements, in some cases mature minors are already legally capable of making end-of-life decisions
(such as withdrawing life-sustaining treatment), but this is dependent on the capacity of the young
person to understand their decision and their ability to provide consent.
Individuals under the age of 18 are not currently eligible for MAID. In 2016, the federal Ministers of
Health and Justice tasked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) with completing a review of
questions related to complex MAID requests, including MAID and mature minors. The CCA report,
tabled by the Ministers in December 2018 indicated:
o The need for key safeguards for mature minors, noting that autonomy develops in a relational
context, where decision making should involve the patient, their family (parents or guardians), and an
inter-professional healthcare team;
o While chronological age can provide some developmental generalizations about decision-
making abilities, it is not the most important variable in determining capacity for informed consent;
70
o Capacity of a minor to consent to a healthcare intervention must be determined on a case-by-
case basis by considering their experiences, maturity, circumstances, and the gravity of the decision at
hand; and,
o Any deliberation on whether to permit MAID for currently excluded groups would benefit from
greater engagement with Canadian society, especially those groups most likely to be affected. They also
noted that the voice of youth is missing in the discussions surrounding access to MAID for mature
minors.
There is limited research in the area of assisted dying for mature minors. Understanding the views of
minors, family members and health care professionals about MAID requests for mature minors will
inform future policy development. To this end, Health Canada is in the early stages of launching research
that will generate nationally informed evidence for policymakers to consider in deliberations pertaining
to requests for MAID from mature minors.
The mandate of the Special Joint Committee on MAID includes the question of MAID and mature
minors. The final report of this Committee is due by February 17, 2023.
71
PALLIATIVE CARE
ISSUE
• Federal action to improve access to palliative care in Canada
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has strained resources and exposed gaps and systemic vulnerabilities in
palliative care delivery across all settings.
• Federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027 will
advance the Government’s Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated
action on supportive care needs.
• This funding complements federal investments exceeding $6 billion over 10 years to provinces
and territories for home and community care, including palliative care, under the Common Statement of
Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians with serious illness or approaching the end of life deserve to receive care in the
setting of their choice with comfort and dignity.
• Our Government has collaborated with provinces, territories, health care providers and
stakeholders, to develop aFramework and implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care, including
investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021, and $29.8 million from 2021-2027.
• This funding complements federal support exceeding $6 billion over 10 years to provinces and
territoriesfor home and community care, including palliative care.
IF PRESSED ABOUT THE ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE …
• The Action Plan on Palliative Care lays out Health Canada’s multi-year plan to tackle issues
identified in the Framework on Palliative Care in Canada. Actions include raising awareness of the
importance of palliative care; providing public education on grief; improving palliative care skills and
supports for health care providers, families, caregivers, and communities; enhancing data collection and
research; and improving access to culturally sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
• Our government will continue to work with provinces, territories and health partners to improve
access to home, community and palliative care.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS DONE TO SUPPORT PALLIATIVE CAREDELIVERY
DURING THE PANDEMIC …
• While continuing to work with health partners to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care,
Health Canada has invested $10.3 million in funding for Action Plan initiatives that respond to urgent
needs created by the pandemic. These projects leverage virtual tools and caring communities to
improve palliative care delivery across all settings, including at home and in the community.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
o While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to palliative
home care services.
72
o Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care unit.
COMPLEMENTARY MECHANISMS
The Framework on Palliative Care sets out an approach under which all governments, communities, and
Canadians play a role in improving palliative and end-of-life care. The Framework was built through
participation and direction-setting with key organizations, provinces and territories (P/Ts), other federal
government departments andindividuals, including people living with a life-limiting illness, caregivers,
health care providers, and researchers. The penultimate version of the Framework was shared with
P/Ts, stakeholders, and other participants in the development process, and theirfeedback incorporated.
Although formal endorsement was not sought, other jurisdictions and key stakeholders were
comfortable in sharing their approaches to palliative care to be included in the Framework and being
named as contributors in the final document. A list of the main groups and individuals that contributed
to the development of the Framework is contained in the document.
The Action Plan on Palliative Care focuses on the federal role in implementing the Framework. The
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, as described below, outlines the way that
the federal government and provincial and territorial government work together to improve palliative
care, and complements the Framework and Action Plan.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, FPT Ministers of Health (except Quebec) agreed to the Common Statement of Principles
on Shared Health Priorities (CSoP) which set out a shared agenda for improving access to home and
community care (including palliative care) and mental health and addiction services supported by
federal investments. Based on the asymmetrical agreements of 2004, the Government of Canada and
the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from the CSoP.
Following the endorsement of the CSoP, the Government of Canada negotiated and finalized bilateral
agreements with each jurisdiction, which are posted publicly online. These agreements detail how each
province or territory will use federal investments to increase access to services in the two priority areas.
Each jurisdiction developed its own action plan, annexed to the bilateral agreement, which identifies the
new or expanded programs in home and community care and mental health and addiction services to
be supported by the federal investments.
Six billion dollars in funding over 10 years was committed for home and community care (including
palliative care), and was allocated to each province and territory on a per capita basis. While the first
phase of bilateral agreements recently expired (March 31, 2022), federal, provincial and territorial
governments will work together to renew or extend agreements in fiscal year 2022-23 so that provinces
and territories can use the remainder of the funding over the next five years to support home and
community care (including palliative care).
RESPONDING TO NEEDS CREATED OR EXPOSED BY COVID-19
In addition to the initiativesidentified in the Action Plan on Palliative Care, Health Canada and its
partners are also working on initiatives that will contribute to the delivery of palliative care in the new
environment created by the pandemic. They have responded to current priorities including symptom
control, information sharing, virtual care, advance care planning, and isolation. Recent activities include:
o Funding projects in support of palliative care delivery:
73
• In addition to the $2.5 million investment over the past five years, the Canadian Hospice
Palliative Care Association received an additional $612,829 to develop advance care planning tools and
resources for long-term care residents and family, as well as tools and resources for health care
providers and workers in long-term care facilities.
• The Canadian Virtual Hospice has received $586,534, in addition to the $2.5 million already
committed to develop resources for underserved populations (francophones, LGBTQ2S, children, MAID),
to develop a series of online learningmodules for caregivers and palliative care patients; host discussion
forums for healthcare professionals; raise public awareness; and develop modules to provide grief
support to care providers.
• William Osler’s RELIEF Project received $1.4 million to facilitate palliative care delivery to
vulnerable populations through the use of technology to enable Remote Self-Reporting of Symptoms by
Patients with Palliative Care Needs.
• University of British Columbia received $2.25 million for its Volunteer Navigation in Palliative
Care: Adapting and Expanding the Nav-CARE program-in which trained volunteers provide navigation
services to persons living at home with life-limiting illness using a palliative and compassionate
community approach.
• Pallium Canada received $450,000 to provide webinars, training and other resources to
clinicians responding to the pandemic. In addition, Pallium is receiving new funding of $5 million for
Project ECHO. This project is building local palliative care capacity among health careproviders through
a tele-mentoring approach, including the regular and ongoing provision of information, resources, and
ongoing supports, such as how to effectively deliver virtual palliative care services.
• Bruyère Research Institute received $2.5 million to expand the work of the Pan-Canadian
Palliative Care Research Collaborative in conducting 14 research studies to improve patient and
caregiver outcomes, palliative care health system performance, and people’s experience of palliative
care, and by building knowledge translation capacity to share the results of this research;
• McMaster University received $1.5 million to expand its Strengthening a Palliative Approach in
Long-Term Care Program, which aims to improve the access and use of knowledge, tools, and resources
to improve the quality of living and dying for residents and their family members within all long-term
care homes in Canada, by curating, adapting, and disseminating resources for direct care, program
development and staff training, and consolidating these resources in an accessible national repository.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years to improve home
and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. In addition, funding was identified in Budget
2021 to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care. Approximately $4.1 million of this funding is
earmarked for Indigenous palliative care, with $1.1M for the Indigenous engagement process, and the
rest for targeted investments which will be allocated according to the priorities set through the
engagement process and a subsequent Indigenous palliative care framework. During the development
of the Framework and Action Plan, National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) indicated their interest in
discussing Indigenous-led engagement processes toward the development of a separate distinctions-
based framework on palliative care. This engagement is planned in collaboration with ISC. Engagement
with Indigenous groups will be acomplex and multi-faceted process. ISC has begun the engagement
process with First Nations and Inuit peoples on long-term care, including palliative care. Plans for other
streams of engagement by Health Canada (e.g., Indigenous health providers, Métis peoples, urban
Indigenous populations) are also underway.
Responding to advice from Elders, Knowledge Carriers, community health professionals and researchers,
the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is launching a multi-year pan-Canadian initiative that
74
will make tools, resources and education available to improve home and community-based palliative
care for First Nations, Inuit and Metis communities. Leveraging our ongoing partnership with CPAC,
Health Canada is providing additional funding ($1 million over 2 years) to allow the initiative to reach
more Indigenous communities wishing to improve their end-of-life care.
PALLIATIVE AND END-OF-LIFE CARE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
Children and youth who have a life-limiting illness or condition, or who havea family member or friend
with one, require appropriate supports and acknowledgement of their experience, including when they
are grieving a loss. Depending on their needs, young people may be cared for by their family physician,
pediatrician, allied health care providers, and/or pediatric palliative care specialists. Young people and
their families and caregivers may also benefit from community and online information and other
resources which address their experiences and aim to alleviate their suffering. The federal government
has supported the development of content for websites such as:
• CaringTogether.Life to educate, support, and empower parents caring for a seriously ill child and
those who are experiencing pregnancy or infant loss;
• LivingOutLoud.Life for teens and young adults living with advanced illness; and
• KidsGrief.ca, for parents supporting their children when someone in their life is dying or has
died.
Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID): In Canada, a person must be at least 18 years to request MAID;
therefore, mature minors are currently not eligible for MAID. “Mature minor” is a legal term that refers
to young people below the age of majority who are deemed competent to make their own medical
decisions. The issue of MAID and mature minors is one of the topics to be addressed by the Special Joint
Committee on MAID (AMAD), in addition to the state of palliative care.
OTHER FEDERAL INVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), has supported theCanadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centres
of Excellence Program, with an investment of $47.8 million between 2012 and 2023. This network aims
to improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through the development, evaluation,
and implementation of health care technologies.
In 2020-21 alone, CIHR, through its Institute of Aging, invested $2 million in palliative care research.
More broadly, between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested more than $464 million in researchon
aging. This includes research to promote healthy aging and to address causes, prevention, treatment
and palliation for a wide range of conditions associated with aging.
75
FAMILY HEALTH TEAMS
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that family health care plays a critical role in the delivery
of health care services for Canadians and is the backbone of high-performing health care systems.
However, Canadians still struggle to secure timely access to these services.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing issues of access to family health services and
created new ones, with health workers bearing the brunt of extreme pressures on the health system,
leading to vacancies, shortages, stress and burnout.
• Experts agree that supporting the transition to team-based models of care-where a team of
professionals with different skills provide care centred around a patient’s needs–will help improve
access to care and address health workforce challenges.
• The Government of Canada will continue towork with provinces and territories and other
partners toward a future in which all Canadians and residents have timely access to high-quality family
health team services.
KEY FACTS
• In 2021, 14.5% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular healthcare provider.
• Indigenous Canadians face significant health inequalities. For example, during the first years of
the pandemic, 21% of First Nations people living off reserve reported an unmet need for health care
services in the first year of the pandemic compared to 15% of non-Indigenous people.
o When asked about the impact of the pandemic and delays in receiving health care services, 31%
of First Nations people living off reserve and 31% of Métis, compared to 20% of non-Indigenous people,
reported thedeterioration of their overall health or worsening of a condition (data is unreliable for
Inuit)
o There are significant data gaps regarding FNIM health disparities in primary care.
• As it stands, many Canadians living in rural areas lack access to physician and other critical
family health services. Budget 2022 announced $26.2 million in funding to increase the maximum
forgivable amount of Canada Student Loans for doctors and nurses who practise in rural and remote
communities by 50%. This will mean up to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses and up to $60,000 in
loan forgiveness for doctors working in underserved rural or remote communities.
• Budget 2022 also committed to expanding the list of eligible professionals under this program in
order to help bring more health care workers to the communities who need them most.
• Budget 2022 also announced an investment of $115 million over five years, with $30 million
ongoing, to expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally
trained health professionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in their field.
• In March 2022, the Minister of Health outlined five key priority areas for health system
transformation. These include:
o Better access to familydoctors and teams;
o Reducing backlogs and growing our health workforce;
o Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
o Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
o Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
• The first two, better access to family health services and growing our health workforce, are
needed to foster integrated team-based models of family health care that will have the highest potential
to improve Canadians’ overall health, and more broadly strengthen the health care system.
76
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes the importance of timely access to high-quality family health
services.
• To support this, we are increasing the maximum amount of forgivable Canada Student Loans by
50% for providers working in underserved rural and remote areas to improve access to care in these
locations.
• We also announced $115 million to help internationally trained health providers get their
credentials recognized and start working in Canada.
• We will continue to work with all partners to support Canadians in having timely access to family
health services.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES FOR PRIMARY CARE …
• Over the last two years, our Government has worked with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by over $240M in funding.
• This funding is providing Canadians with new ways to access the family health services on which
they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health services.
• Weare committed to continuing to work with provinces and territories to shift family health
care toward integrated, digitally-enabled models of team-based care.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR ACCESS TO CARE IN UNDERSERVED/REMOTE COMMUNITIES …
• Our government is making targeted investments to increase the number of doctors and nurses
in underserved rural and remote communities.
• In Budget 2022, we committed $26.2 million over four years and $7 million ongoing to increase
the maximum amount of forgivable CanadaStudent Loans for doctors and nurses who work in those
communities.
• We will also expand the current list of eligible professionals under the program in order to help
bring more health care workers to the communities who need them most.
BACKGROUND
Family health services are the backbone of high-performing health care systems. They serve a dual
function in the health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination
function to ensure continuity across health care settings.However, Canadians continue to struggle to
access family health services. In 2021, 14.5% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care
provide, with gaps felt particularly acutely by Indigenous populations.
Health human resources (HHR) arecurrently in a state of crisis in Canada. Key challenges are impeding
the ability to grow Canada’s health workforce in a manner that aligns with the health system priorities
and health care needs of Canadians. Some of these challenges include the long and costly road to
practice for internationally educated health professionals (IEHPs), obstacles to cross-jurisdictional
licensure, limited pan-Canadian data and staffing shortages in rural, remote and urban areas.
The impacts of the COVID-19pandemic on the workforce are increasingly clear–Issues such as
mandatory overtime, lack of a supportive working environment, concerns about health and safety, and
poor mental health are causing health workers to leave the profession, leading to criticalshortages in
the health workforce.
77
Canadians are feeling the impact. Wait times are longer, there are delays in needed medical procedures,
limited access to primary care providers and temporary closures of Emergency Rooms. Canadians
rightfully expect that their federal, provincial and territorial governments will work collaboratively to
address this crisis. Although actions are already underway at FPT levels on health workforce, an
opportunity exists to support and demonstrate further FPT collaborationand engagement.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance family health service
priorities.
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to family health services, particularly in northern, rural and remote communities. The
adoption of virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to
sustain access to primary care and specialist health services. On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister
announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for Canadians. $150M of this funding is
being provided to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual services.
Health Canada has also been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify
ways in which virtual care can be leveraged to support access to and delivery of high-quality care,
including within the context of primary care.
Budget 2022 signalled a continued needto strengthen the health care system and ensure it delivers the
care that Canadians deserve by increasing the number of doctors and nurses. To help bring more health
care workers to the communities that need them most, Budget 2022 will be providing $26.2 million over
four years, starting in 2023-24, and $7 million ongoing, to increase the maximum amount of forgivable
Canada Student Loans by 50% for doctors and nurses who work in underserved rural or remote
communities, including in the North. This will meanup to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses and up
to $60,000 in loan forgiveness for doctors working in underserved rural or remote communities. In
addition, the federal government will expand the current list of eligible professionals under the
program, with details to be announced in the coming year. The government is also undertaking a review
to ensure that the definition of rural communities under the program does not leave out certain
communities in need.
The federal government has also provided a $2 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfers
to support provinces and territories in reducing medical backlogs caused by COVID-19, which provinces
and territories can use to strengthen their health workforces in respective jurisdictions.
Akey area for action is creating greater efficiencies and streamlining processes for international
educated health professionals (IEHPs) to join the Canadian workforce. Currently, the process for
foreign-trained nurses or physicians to become licensed to practice in Canada can be lengthy, highly
complex, and expensive. Many IEHPs who may have not reached licensure for various reasons may be
well positioned to join and contribute to the health workforce. The federal government is actively
working with partners to identify concrete solutions that would create more efficient and supportive
pathways for IEHPs to join the workforce.
78
Budget 2022 also confirmed federal interest in continuing to expand virtual care and improving access to
high-quality primary care.
In March 2022, Minister Duclos outlined five pillars for health to address systemic challenges to
enhancing access to high-quality, integrated care. These include:
• Better access to family doctors and teams;
• Reducing backlogs and growing our healthworkforce;
• Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
• Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
• Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
79
THALIDOMIDE
ISSUE
• The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) was established by Order in
Council (OIC) in April 2019. The OIC sets out a probability based medical assessment process for
determining eligibility under the program, which is designed to align with international best practices.
An independent third-party administrator is responsible for determining eligibility of applicants.
• In resolution of two judicial reviews filed in 2021-22 (Pektau v. Attorney General of Canada and
O’Neil v. Attorney General of Canada) regarding decisions at Step 2 of the eligibility assessment process,
a process change was negotiated between the parties. On August 9, 2022, the Federal Court issued a
judgment approving this change. Applicants denied due to an "unlikely" or "uncertain" outcome of the
diagnostic algorithm will now be able to proceed to the multidisciplinary committee for review.
• Also in 2021-22, two claimants filed judicial review applications in Federal Court challenging the
date of birth criteria and the administrator’s decision denying their application for eligibility under the
program. While one application is before the Court (Richard v. Attorney General of Canada), the other is
in abeyance pending resolution of the first (Cabana v. Attorney General of Canada).
• In February 2021, a small group of confirmed thalidomide survivors, who refer to themselves as
the Thalidomide Survivors Task Group, filed a Charter Claim against the Crown (Ontario Superior Court).
The claim alleges that the Crown breached theindividuals’ rights with respect to the provision of
services to individual plaintiffs, mismanagement of the impact of thalidomide on the plaintiffs, and the
overall funding and management of the CTSSP.
KEY FACTS
• The CTSSP application process was launched on June 3, 2019 and will remain open for a period
of five years. The CTSSP is currently helping to support 123 survivors. Although new survivors are being
admitted to the program each year, a few existing survivors have passed away.
• To date, 255 applications have been submitted to the administrator and are at various stages of
the probability based medical assessment process. Applicants denied at any step of the process have
until the application closing date, June 3, 2024, to provide additional information to support their
submission.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to supporting Canadian thalidomide survivors and help them live
the rest of their lives with dignity.
• The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program uses a probability-based medical
assessment process to determine eligibility based on international best practices.
• Recently, the Federal Court issued a judgment that changed the eligibility assessment process,
allowing all applications entered in the diagnostic algorithm, regardless of result, to proceed to the
multidisciplinary committee for review. The Administrator has contacted all previously denied applicant
directly to notify them of the change in process.
• Individuals who believe they are thalidomide survivors are encouraged to apply before the
application deadline on June 3, 2024.
• Applicants who are missing information or who are denied at any step of the assessment
process may submit additional information to the third-party administrator to support their request.
80
IF PRESSEDON THE DATE OF BIRTH CRITERIA…
• The date of birth parameters are based on the global market availability of thalidomide (West
Germany October 1, 1957) and a five year period following the removal of the drug from the Canadian
market(March 2, 1962).
• The CTSSP will consider individuals born in Canada between December 3, 1957 and December
21, 1967, and whose date of birth coincides with maternal ingestion of thalidomide in the first trimester.
This 10-year eligibility period factorsin possible premature birth at 22 weeks gestation and possible
post-term delivery at 42 weeks gestation.
IF PRESSED ON INDIVIDUALS WITH CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS WHO WERE BORN OUTSIDE THE
DOB PERIOD…
• Sadly, to this day, a number of children are born withspontaneous or otherwise unaccountable
malformations similar to those caused by thalidomide.
• According to the World Health Organization, congenital malformations may be the result of one
or more genetic, infectious, nutritional, or environmental factors. Approximately half of all birth defects
cannot be linked to a specific cause.
BACKGROUND
Early History
Thalidomide, developed as a non-addictive sedative, was approved by the Department of National
Health and Welfare (now Health Canada) and prescribed off-label to treat morning sickness in expectant
mothers.
Government records show that thalidomide was authorized for use in Canada in sample form on June
23, 1959. It was licensed for prescription use on April 1, 1961, and remained legally available in Canada
until March 2, 1962, when it was removed from the market due to its side effects.
In 1991, the Government of Canada finalized an Extraordinary Assistance Plan (EAP) of $8.5M for
persons born with disabilities as a result of thalidomide.
Thalidomide Survivors Contribution Program (TSCP) (2015)
The TSCP used a documentary evidence-based process, developed in 1991 for the Extraordinary
Assistance Plan for Thalidomide Victims, to determine eligibility. Supports included a tax-free, lump sum
payment, ongoing annual payments based on level of disability, and access to an Extraordinary Medical
Assistance Fund(EMAF) to cover medical expenses such as specialized surgery and home or vehicle
adaptations not otherwise covered by provincial/territorial health care plans.
Among the 193 individuals who applied to the TSCP, 25 new survivors were confirmed.
Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) (2019)
The CTSSP uses a probability-based medical assessment process that considers date and place of birth,
congenital malformations, and any available evidence of maternal use of thalidomide during the first
trimester of pregnancy.
81
Eligible applicants will receive an ex gratia payment of $250,000, and ongoing tax-free payments. The
EMAF increased from $500,000 to $1,000,000 per year to account for an anticipated increase in the
number of recognized survivors.
Survivors supported by the TSCP were transferred to the CTSSP, continue to receive their benefits and
received an ex gratia payment of $125,000 to equalize the ex gratia payments to survivors under the
two programs.
Media
In October 2022, a coupleof articles in the media garnered some interest in relation to the August 9,
2022 Federal Court judgment that benefits applicants, but that had not yet been communicated to all
those affected.
82
PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Issue
On November 8, 2022, federal, provincial, and territorial Health Ministers met to discuss the draft co-
developed Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. The provinces and territories were unwilling to endorse
the Strategy, pending further discussions on health transfers to the provinces and territories to support
priority work.
Key Facts
• There are persistent and important gaps in data collection, protection, access, sharing and use
that cost lives and negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-
making.
• These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for Canadians, and
contribute to health inequities.
• The pandemic revealed the critical importance of timely health data. Public health decision-
making is impeded when health data are uncoordinated, contain incomplete information, and are not
linked across various points of care and across jurisdictions. Ultimately, this negatively impacts the
health outcomes of Canadians.
• The draft co-developed Strategy did not envision or create a single large technology system.
Rather, it would have facilitated the creation of a new enabling environment where collaborative work
in common areas would support the creation of a world-class health data system, enabling Canadians to
harness health data to achieve better health outcomes.
Key Messages
• A strong health data foundation, based on federal, provincial, territorial collaboration, is needed
to responsibly harness the power of health data to strengthen our public health responses, reduce
health inequities, and modernize our health system.
• Toachieve this, the Government of Canada is committed to working with the provinces and
territories to improve Canada’s collection, protection, access, sharing, and use of health data, and lay
the foundation for a world-class health data system.
• The Strategy co-development with provinces and territories was informed by expert advice, with
the desired end goal of making it more simple for Canadians to access and use their own data, helping
health providers deliver better quality care, and making it easierfor data to be used to support critical
decisions on improving health systems and public health.
If pressed on the November 8th Health Ministers Meeting
• Our health system is experiencing significant challenges. It’s important that we work together to
support improved health data management to achieve better outcomes for Canadians, and to
strengthen public health responses.
• There are numerous barriers toachieving a much-needed world-class health data system that
can only be addressed through federal, provincial and territorial governments working together. For
example, when someone moves from one province or territory to another, they should be able to bring
their health data with them, so that their healthcare providers have the information they need to
provide the quality of care that everyone in Canada deserves.
• The Government of Canada intensively collaborated with provinces and territories to finalize the
draft Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy and identify common commitments and actions that can
advance the use of health data and digital health tools to meet Canadians’ needs.
83
• We are disappointed by the outcome of the meeting and the statement made by provincial and
territorial Premiers. However, our government remains ready to work with provincial and territorial
governments to further discuss health priorities, actions and measureable results to improve our health
system using health data more effectively.
If pressed on links to health priorities and health data
• The five priorities announced by the Minister of Health in March 2022 included using modern
health data and digital health more effectively in Canada. Health data was reiterated as a priority at the
November 2022 FPT Health Ministers Meeting.
• Our Government is committed to advancing health priorities, actions and measurable results to
improve public health responses and health services for all Canadians.
• Reliable, timely, and relevant health data are crucial to inform decision-making during public
health events and drive progress in improving access to care. What is measured matters.
• Our Government remains committed to working with provinces and territories to overcome
health datamanagement barriers that slow progress on these priorities, and to improve long-term
health benefits for people in Canada.
If pressed on public engagement
• Canadians should have a say in how their health data is used, so consultation and engagement
arekey for this work.
• Our Government has and will continue to engage with Canadians’ to solicit their views on how
health data can serve them better, both during and between public health events.
If pressed on recommendations in the final report of the Expert Advisory Group
• In its final report, the EAG recommended governments work together to expedite the creation
of a person-centred, world-class health data system.
• The advice contained in the latest report of the EAG has been considered by the Government of
Canada, provinces and territories and our health data partners throughout the co-development of the
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy.
If pressed on privacy
• Our Government knows that Canadians value the privacy of their health information and want it
to be appropriately safeguarded.
• Canadians also expect that their data be used to inform public health measures, stimulate
research on new treatments, and improve our health care systems.
• Our Government’s approach to strengthening healthdata collection, access, sharing and use
recognizes Canadians’ rights to have their personal information protected while benefiting from the
insights that can be generated by sharing it.
If pressed on Budget 2022 commitments
• Our government recognizes how important it is to be able to effectively
anticipate and respond to public health risks that threaten the health and safetyof Canadians. It is
crucial to take immediate steps to improve oursurveillance and data capabilities so we are better able
to detect and respond to public health events and emergencies in the future.
• That is why the federal government has committed to supporting the Public Health Agency of
Canada to strengthen key surveillance and risk assessment capacities.
84
• In addition, the federal government has committed to work with provinces and territories to
ensure that the health care system is underpinned by health data that supports system improvements
and Canadians’ access to their own personal health records.
Background
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
Health data (which encompasses public health, health system and population health data) are collected
by numerous organizations and governments. However, as SARS and COVID-19 have demonstrated,
there are persistent and important gaps in data collection, access, sharing and use that cost lives and
negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making. Overall, these
impacts reduce health outcomes for Canadians.
In December 2020, the Government ofCanada, in collaboration with provinces and territories, began
developing a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report it
was recommended that Canada create a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (PCHDS) to address
foundational issues related to health data in Canada. The November 2021 Speech from the Throne
underlined the importance of improving data collection across health systems to inform future decisions
and ensure the best possible health results for Canadians. In the December 2021 Office of the Chief
Public Health Officer report, A Vision to Transform Canada’s Public Health System, it was recommended
that Canada create a world-class public health system and noted that the PCHDS is an actionable idea to
improve public health tools. The December 2021 Mandate Letter for the Minister of Health
acknowledged the need for a health data system that is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected, and
comprehensive. Most recently, the Minister of Health was tasked through the mandate letter and the
Federal Budget 2022 to establish the foundation of a world-class health data system so that all
Canadians have meaningful, timely access to their own health information.
The goal of the Strategy was to identify commonly-supported, implementable solutions to address
persistent barriers to the use of critical health data. Once identified, and when supported by provinces
and territories, Canadians would be better served by their own health data, accelerating the
transformation towards person-centred health care systems and strengthening public health decision-
making during and between health emergencies.
At the November 8, 2022 FPT Health Ministers Meeting, the Federal and PT Ministers of Health were
unwilling to endorse the Strategy. The Federal Minister of Health reiterated the Government of
Canada’s commitment to improve health services for all Canadians, including using health data and
digital health more effectively.
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Engagement
Canadians should have a say on how their health data is used, therefore engagement is key for this
work. The Government of Canada has engaged with experts and patient advisors during the
development of the Strategy. Informed stakeholder consultations started in summer2021 and
continued into fall 2021. Engagement sessions focused on overcoming the identified root causes
impeding the better use of data. We will continue to ask Canadians for their feedback as we implement
the Strategy across the country.
85
The Governmentof Canada will also continue to work with First Nations, Inuit and Métis partners, as
well as provinces and territories, to support Indigenous data sovereignty by building connections
between national and regional Indigenous health data governance and the Strategy.
Expert Advisory Group
A PCHDS Expert Advisory Group (EAG) was established in fall 2020 to provide advice and guidance to
inform F/P/T co-development work. Specifically, the EAG was mandated to provide advice on:
• strategic direction for the useof health systems, population, and public health data to improve
the health of Canadians;
• principles to guide the creation, collection, storage, and use of data; and
• a practical and phased roadmap for the implementation of measures to sustainably address
areas of greatest opportunity and impact.
The EAG published two reports in 2021. The first report described the systemic barriers to effective
health data managementwhile the second report contained recommendations on how to overcome
these barriers to optimize the use of data for better health outcomes and more effective public health
event management.
The EAG published their third, and final report on May 3, 2022. In the report, the EAG recommends
adopting a person-centric approach to health data that gives patients, and their health care providers,
access to health information in an integrated system–leading to better comprehensive care and an
integrated healthdata system that supports robust public health responses. These recommendations
are reflected in the draft PCHDS co-developed with provinces and territories. The EAG’s work has now
been completed.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) Health Data Investments
PHAC is working directly with ISC to find alignment and synergies with Indigenous health data initiatives
announced in Budget 2021. Access to reliable and culturally relevant data on Indigenous peoples is
critical to building a complete portrait of Indigenous lived experiences, unmasking inequalities, and
ensuring delivery of effective policies and programs. Engagement will enable alignment with Indigenous-
led data strategies, which can further self-determination by providing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis
Nation governments and organizations with the data they need to support their communities.
86
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
Issue
Antimicrobial resistance has become a leading cause of death and has been declared a top global health
threat by the World Health Organization. Coordinated ‘One Health’ action across the human and animal
health sectors and the environment is needed to address the growing threat to Canadians and our
healthcare system.
Key Facts
• Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the top 10 global public health issues and Canada needs
to be prepared to face this threat.
• AMR is characterized by a decline in the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs in treating an
infection. In Canada, AMR is rising at an alarming rate, with 26% of infections already resistant to first-
line antimicrobials.
• Resistance can have far-reaching consequences since antimicrobial use in humans, animals, or
the environment can impact the health of all three sectors, making it a “One Health” issue.
• Antimicrobials have been instrumental in medical advances and saving lives. Without effective
antimicrobials, our ability to fight infectious diseases will significantly decline. Routine medical
procedures such as cesarean sections and joint replacements, and even chemotherapyfor cancer
patients that depend on antibiotics, will become riskier for Canadians.
• A 2022 study revealed that AMR is now a leading cause of death worldwide –estimated at
causing over 1.2 million deaths in 2019. The study has garnered significant media attention, ringing the
alarm on the next public health threat.
• There is growing international attention (e.g., G7 and G20) on the urgent need to combat AMR.
The 2022 G7 Germany Presidency identified 3 health priorities of which controlling AMR was one.
Canada is lagging behind its international partners who are taking aggressive and concrete steps to
address AMR. Canada tied last among G7 countries in a 2021 study on AMR Preparedness.
• Domestically, the Canadian Antimicrobial Innovation Coalition (CAIC)and McMaster University
recently released a new report “Antibiotic access and capacity: A grassroots solution to improving
patient access to novel antibiotics in Canada.” The report underscores the seriousness of AMR, its
impacts on the Canadian health care system, and the need for coordinated action across multiple
disciplines and sectors to improve access to antimicrobials through incentivization and regulatory
changes.
• In 2018, an estimated 15 deaths a day were directly attributable to AMR. The economic cost of
AMR is currently estimated at $2 billion and is projected to grow to $20 billion by 2050.
• Concerted action through the One Health approach that takes into account the linkages
between the health of people, animals, and the environment is necessary to combat AMR.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada recognizes that antimicrobial resistance is increasing worldwide and
is posing a serious and growing threat to human health, the health of animals, and their shared
environment.
• We have made acommitment to work with partners to take increased and expedited action to
monitor, prevent, and mitigate the serious and growing threat of AMR and preserve the effectiveness of
the antimicrobials Canadians rely upon every day.
• In October 2021, thePublic Health Agency of Canada created a dedicated AMR Task Force to
drive progress on policies, programs and actions to combat AMR both domestically and globally.
87
• We have identified two main priorities that will have the greatest impact on tackling AMR:
securing access to new antimicrobials for Canadians, and preserving the effectiveness of existing and
new antimicrobials
• The Government of Canada is making progress in both areas. Significant investments have been
made in research in areas such as antimicrobial discovery and alternatives and diagnostics. We are also
currently undertaking a comprehensive assessment of economic pull incentives for encouraging market
entry and sustained market availability of high-value antimicrobials in Canada.
• In parallel to securing access to antimicrobials, we are taking steps to preserve the effectiveness
of the life-saving antimicrobials we currently have.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed over $28 million over five years, beginning in
2021-22, to expand efforts in key areas of surveillance and monitoring, including integrating wastewater
into our surveillance of antimicrobial usage, and leveraging Canada’s success with its COVID-19
wastewater surveillance experience.
• In addition, we are using public opinion research and behavioural science to better understand
what Canadians know about AMR and antimicrobial use. We will leverage surveillance data and trends
to better target public awareness initiatives, and to implement successful stewardship policies and
practices.
• The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has taught us the importance of a responsive and prepared
public health system. Investing further in antimicrobial resistance efforts now will ensure that Canada
addresses this growing threat in an impactful way to better protect Canadians.
If pressed: work being done by government scientists to address the urgent problem of antibiotic
resistance
• The Government of Canada is seized with the growing global public health threat of AMR and
has committed to taking increased and expedited action to mitigate its emergence and spread.
• The COVID-19 pandemic showed us that an effective response to a health crisis requires
concerted action with domestic and international partners and across One Health sectors.
• AMR is a silent pandemic, and one we can prepare for right now.
• Working together in a coordinated manner and leveraging the systems, processes,
infrastructure and, most importantly, relationships, that were established during COVID-19, is essential
to making meaningful progress on AMR.
• The Government’s AMR strategy focusses on securing access to the antimicrobials that
Canadians need, and preserving the effectiveness of existing and new antimicrobials. Both are essential
to reducing the adverse healthand socio-economic impacts of AMR both at home and across the world.
• Domestically, we are working closely with federal/provincial/territorial partners, industry, and
other stakeholders to advance initiatives that can have the greatest impact on those populations most
vulnerable to infectious diseases and the effects of AMR. This includes detecting, understanding, and
acting on data gathered through surveillance throughout Canada and across human and animal sectors,
which this Government supported in Budget 2021.
• Internationally, we continue to work in tandem with our global partners and multilateral
institutions to build awareness and momentum on combatting AMR, and acting collaboratively and with
purpose to create a global pandemic preparedness systemthat is effective, efficient, and supports the
needs of those most at risk.
88
Background
The antibiotics we rely on to treat common infections are becoming less effective, resulting in serious
illness and death. Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of antibiotic treatment.
In Canada in 2018, it is estimated that antimicrobial resistance (AMR) resulted in 5,400 deaths, $1.4
billion in healthcare system costs, and a loss of $2 billion in GDP. If current AMR trends are left
unchecked, by 2050 cumulative costs could rise as high as 396,000 lives, $120 billion in healthcare costs,
and $388 billion in GDP.
There is sustained momentum to address AMR through collaboration and concerted action, both
domestically and globally.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
The Government of Canada, through Budget 2021, committed $28.6 million over five years, beginning in
2021-22, with $5.7 million per year ongoing, to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health
Canada, and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. These investments will support efforts to prevent
the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand efforts to monitor the emergence of AMR in Canada.
An AMR Task Force was created within PHAC to establisha clear focus for AMR work across federal
departments and agencies. The AMR Task Force will spearhead and coordinate federal actions to
combat AMR, as well as mobilize and collaborate with domestic and international partners and
stakeholder groups to optimize the effectiveness of AMR actions.
The Government of Canada outlined its commitment to addressing AMR in the Federal Framework on
AMR and its supporting Action Plan under a One Health approach. In July 2018, the first Progress Report
on the Federal Action Plan was released.
Recognizing that the federal government cannot reduce the threat of AMR alone, and consistent with
our international partners, the Government of Canada led efforts with provinces, territories, and
stakeholders to develop the pan-Canadian AMR Framework, which was released in September 2017.
Work has been underway on a pan-Canadian AMR Action Plan to identify optimal and concrete actions
to address this complex issue across the human and animal health, and agri-food sectors. This work has
been undertaken in consultation, and with input from provincial and territorial partners and key
stakeholders. The focus by all jurisdictions on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed
progress on finalizing the Action Plan. PHAC is working with federal departments, and provinces and
territories to determine the way forward to ensure that governments and stakeholders can advance
priority actions on AMR in the short and medium-term.
The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), leads Canada’s
research efforts and is a global leader in AMR research. Over the past five years, CIHR has invested over
$138 million in AMR-related research to strengthen research in areas such as antimicrobial discovery,
targetidentification, alternatives, diagnostics, surveillance, and stewardship.
CIHR is also a founding member and major funder of the Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial
Resistance (JPIAMR)—a collaboration of 28 member states aimed at coordinating research in AMR to
achieve long-term reductions in resistance levels and better public health outcomes. Through CIHR,
Canada is leading the development of the JPIAMR Virtual Research Institute—a global virtual network of
researchers, facilities and infrastructure of AMR research.
89
The Government of Canada participates in international forums, such as the G7, G20, World Health
Organization and United Nations to advance AMR and other priorities with like-minded partners. At the
G7 Health Ministers’ call on November 17, 2021, and the G7 Finance Ministers’ call on December 13,
2021, Canada supported statements calling for efforts to promote the appropriate valuation of
antimicrobials and expand consideration of options to improve the antimicrobial pipeline. At the
working level, the federal government participates on numerous technical groups to address AMR and
antimicrobial use issues related to human health, animal health, and food production.
Regulatory and Policy Changes
As of 2017, amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations, including policy changes under
existing regulatory tools, to address gaps in the regulation of veterinary drugs to support the prudent
use of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) in animals by:
• controlling the “own use”importation of veterinary drugs
• increasing oversight on importation and quality of veterinary active pharmaceutical ingredients
• facilitating access to low risk veterinary health products, as additional tools to enhance animal
health and wellness
• requiring reports of veterinary antimicrobial sales to support resistance surveillance;
• removing growth promotion claims from MIAs
• increasing veterinary oversight with prescriptions required before the sale of all MIAs
Health Canada continues to work with other federal partners to focus on enhancing animal health and
wellness in order to reduce the reliance on routine use of antimicrobials in animals. In 2020, Health
Canada published a risk-based approach to determine whether the availability of antimicrobials in
veterinary medicine may contribute to AMR in humans (that is, whether it increases the risk that
antimicrobials become ineffective in treating infections in humans).
Additionally, Health Canada maintains a Pathogens of Interest List that servesto inform companies of
the bacterial pathogens in most urgent need of innovative therapeutic products in Canada. Health
Canada has also sponsored a challenge under the Innovative Solutions Canada program, where up to $1
million is available to innovators and entrepreneurs to support the development of new, easy-to-use
and cost effective, point-of-care diagnostic tools to help combat the rise of AMR.
90
DENTAL CARE
Challenges accessing the interim Canada Dental Benefit for potential recipients who do not file taxes.
KEY FACTS
• Applications for the interim Canada Dental Benefit will rely on income verification performed by
the Canada Revenue Agency, based on the previous year’s tax return.
• It is estimated that approximately 10-12% of Canadians may not be receiving benefits to which
they may otherwise be entitled because they do not file tax returns.
• People who have low household incomes, newcomers to Canada and members of marginalized
groups may be part of this group.
• Some of these groups, such as newcomers to Canada, will continue to be able to apply for
benefits through initiatives such as the Interim Federal Health Program, administered by Immigration,
Refugees and Citizenship Canada.
• Potential barriers to filing include a lack of understanding of the relationship between filing an
income tax return and benefit eligibility, not having a bank account, not having a stable address, not
having regular access to the internet or to a telephone, or not having access to identity documents.
KEY MESSAGES
• Public education on the importance of filing a tax return and the relationship between tax filing
and benefit eligibility will be an important part of ensuring that the interim Canada Dental Benefit
reaches those who need it most.
• The Canada RevenueAgency already provides robust support to help Canadians file their taxes if
they need assistance. Health Canada will work closely with CRA to support tax filing and, in turn, uptake
of this benefit.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit is the first stageof the Government’s plan to deliver dental
care for families with income under $90,000 who do not have access to dental insurance, starting with
uninsured families with children under the age of 12.
• As we work to develop the long-term program to provide coverage to under 18-year-olds,
seniors and persons living with a disability, the needs of these vulnerable populations will be taken into
account.
BACKGROUND
Because this benefit will be disbursed through the Canada Revenue Agency (CRA), people who do not
currently file taxes, or who are otherwise not engaged with the existing federal benefits infrastructure,
will not have access to it.
Tax Non-Filers in Canada
Eligible individuals will only be able to apply for the interim Canada Dental Benefit through existing CRA
infrastructure, either online through MyAccount or by telephone through the CRA call centres. In order
to determine eligibility, CRA will calculate family income based on the last year’s tax return. This means
that individuals who do not file taxes, or whose household members do not, will not be eligible for the
benefit.
It is estimated that approximately 10-12% of Canadians do not file a tax return annually. In one study,
people whose family income was below the Market Basket Measure werethe least likely to file taxes,
91
and approximately one-fifth of working-age adults in the bottom decile for family income did not file a
return. People with a high school degree only, newcomers to Canada, and people who rented, rather
than owned, their homes, were also less likely to file. This raises the concern that some of the
individuals the Canada Dental Benefit is attempting to reach may not be eligible for the benefit due to
tax return non-filing.
Barriers to Accessing Benefits for Childrenthrough CRA Delivery
Since the Canada Dental Benefit will be available to eligible families currently receiving the Canada Child
Benefit, uptake of the Canada Child Benefit may serve as a reasonable proxy for estimating uptake of
the dental benefit.
In the first year of availability, approximately 12% of eligible families did not receive the Canada Child
Benefit. The reasons for this are likely to be complex and multi-factorial, but may include a lack of
understanding of the relationship between filing anincome tax return and benefit eligibility, not having
a bank account, not having a stable address, not having regular access to the internet or to a telephone,
or not having access to identity documents. Members of marginalized groups may also be reluctant to
provide personal information to the Government of Canada in order to receive the benefit, due to a lack
of trust in government.
Mitigations
Given that income must be assessed in some way for this income-tested program, and the need to
develop and implement this benefit quickly using existing systems and definitions, the focus will be on
helping those individuals file their taxes in order to become eligible. By doing so, they may also become
eligible for other government benefits. The benefit application periods are long and would allow
sufficient time for someone to file taxes and then return to apply for the benefit, should they wish.
92
DENTAL CARE
Fiscal implications of interim Canada Dental Benefit
KEY FACTS
• Funding to deliver the interim Canada Dental Benefit is sourced from Budget 2022, which
provided funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion ongoing to Health
Canada to provide dental care for Canadians.
• Specifically,the cost of the dental benefit represents a savings of $94 million over the next three
years, starting in 2022-23, relative to the funding provided for dental care in Budget 2022.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children could benefit from this targeted investment
of $938 million.
• On October 20, 2022, the Office of the Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) released a Legislative
Parliamentary Note that estimated the cost of the interim Canada Dental Benefit to be $703M.
• Health Canada officials have met with the PBO’s office to discuss its costing and have
determined that the variances are primarily due to some minor differences in assumptions (e.g., Health
Canada did not forecast savings from reduced Medical Expense Tax credits, as the PBO did) and to the
treatment of administrative costs.
• Health Canada cost estimates include start up and close-out costs for the interim benefit, as well
as policy development, program oversight and compliance efforts, additional resources for the Canada
Revenue Agency contact centres who will help applicants and answer questions, and outreach and
communication costs.
• These investments take into account the need to raise awareness of this benefit among eligible
parents and to maintain the integrity of the program, given it relies on an attestation model for some
information.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has committed to improving access to dental care and, in Budget
2022, proposed funding of $5.3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $1.7 billion on-going for a
national dental care program for Canadians who earn under $90,000 a year.
• The cost of the interim Canada Dental Benefit will be fully covered within the funding
announced for dental care in Budget 2022.
• It is estimated thatover 500,000 Canadian children could benefit from this targeted investment
of over $900 million.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit, focusing on children under 12, is the first stage of the
government’s plan to deliver dental care for families with income under $90,000 who do not have
access to dental insurance.
IF PRESSED ON PBO REPORT …
• The Government of Canada welcomes and appreciates the cost estimates prepared by the PBO
regarding the interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• Health Canada officials havemet with the PBO’s office to discuss its costing and have
determined that the variances are primarily due to some minor differences in assumptions (e.g., Health
Canada did not forecast savings from reduced Medical Expense Tax credits, as the PBO did) and to the
treatment of administrative costs.
• Moreover, Health Canada costs estimates include funding to support activities related to both
the interim Canada Dental Benefit and the planned national dental care program.
93
DENTAL CARE
Impact of the interim Canada Dental Benefit on existing oral health human resources.
KEY FACTS
• There are an estimated 90,000 oral health professionals practicing in Canada, including
approximately 25,000 dentists, 30,000 dental hygienists, and 30,000 dentalassistants.
• Although the Canadian Dental Association reported that 36% of dental offices have vacant
positions for assistants, and the Canadian Dental Hygienists Association reported in 2021 that 28% of
dental hygienists planned to leave the profession within the next five years, dental care experts
consistently report that there is sufficient capacity among dentists except in some rural and remote
areas.
• Rural, remote, Northern, and inner-city regions are most likely to experience a shortage of
dentalservices currently. Specialist dentists, particularly those with expertise in the care of patients with
complex needs, are also in particular demand.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit, on its own, is unlikely to exacerbate these concerns in the
short-term. The benefit will provide sufficient funding, in most cases, for a single visit each year and not
all families will apply for or receive the benefit at once.
• In rural areas, the fact that the benefit could be used to access care by not just a dentistbut also
independently practising dental hygienists, will help facilitate access to care.
KEY MESSAGES
• The issue of health human resources, including for dental care professionals, is one that is being
closely monitored by the Government of Canada.
• We believe that, at this time, there are sufficient dental professionals to meet the additional
demand from children who will be able to care get because of this benefit.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with stakeholders from each of the oral health
care professions, including professional associations and independent experts, to promote awareness of
the Canada Dental Benefit and discuss health human resources issues that need to be considered as part
of the long term program.
94
DENTAL CARE
Measures undertaken to prevent fraudulent applications for interim Canada Dental Benefit payments
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada is undertaking a variety of measures to protect against fraudulent
applications for interim Canada Dental Benefit payments.
• The Canada Revenue Agency will utilize multi-factor authentication to verify applicants and has
a range of tools at its disposal to conduct compliance and enforcement activities.
• The Canada Revenue Agency will verify most eligibility information upfront drawing on its
existing tax and Canada Child Benefit systems (like income, age of children and the applicant’s
relationship to the child/ children), and when applying, an eligible parent will also be asked to provide
information on the following to help confirm eligibility:
- provide contact information for the dental professional who did or will provide the dental
services,
- provide contact information for their employer, if they have one, for purposes of verifying
access to an employer dentalcare plan; and
- provide any other information requested to verify their eligibility.
• In addition, the bill provides considerable scope for post-payment compliance activities to help
ensure this funding is spent as intended. Applicants will be aware they will need to be able to
demonstrate eligibility–for example by providing receipts showing they had the out of pocket expenses
they attested to having, if asked to by CRA.
• The Minister of Health can also decide that a person is ineligible for future benefits if they have
committed a violation or misrepresented their eligibility information. However, this remedy would only
relate to the period of moving from year one to year two benefits, given there would be no future
benefits to deny for those who were found fraudulent in year two. In those cases, other measures
described above could still be considered.
KEY MESSAGES
• This legislation will provide the Government with a number of tools to prevent fraudulent
applications for payment under the interimCanada Dental Benefit and to take action when fraud or
other criminal offenses related to the benefit occur.
• Applicants’ income eligibility, presence of children and their age will be verified at the time an
application is made, through CRA’sexisting information systems, before a payment is made.
• Applicants will be made aware that they will need to be able to demonstrate that they met the
remaining eligibility conditions. This includes demonstrating that they had out of pocket costs, which
they used the benefit to pay for, as intended (for example, by showing their receipts).
• In addition, the Canada Revenue Agency continues to enhance the security of its digital services
to protect Canadians from fraudulent activity. These include using security features such as multi-factor
authentication and making email addresses mandatory for those who use Canada Revenue Agency’s My
Account.
BACKGROUND
The Canada Revenue Agency will utilize multi-factor authentication to verify applicants’ eligibilityand
has a range of tools at its disposal to conduct compliance and enforcement activities.
95
The Canada Revenue Agency will verify information in its existing tax and Canada Child Benefit systems
(like income, age of children and the applicant’s relationship to the child/ children), and when applying,
an eligible parent will also be asked to provide information on the following to help confirm eligibility:
- provide contact information for the dental professional who did or will provide the dental
services,
- provide contact information for their employer, if they have one, for purposes of verifying
access to an employer dental care plan; and
- provide any other information requested to verify their eligibility.
In addition, after the fact verification and audit processes will be used, according to CRA’s standard
practices and using the powers set out in the Bill. Where concerns are identified, funding could be
recovered although this would be particularly difficult –based on past CRA experience–to do in the
lower income groups.
For particularly serious offenses, the bill also defines criminal offenses in relation to benefits provided
for under the Act, such as using false identity information, as well as punishment for offenses, including
fines and possible imprisonment. It states that a person commits a violation if they:
- give false or misleading information on their application; or
- apply for, and receive, a dental benefit for which they are not eligible.
Furthermore, the bill states that if the Minister of Health, or the Minister of National Revenue, as
delegated by the Minister of Health, is of the opinion that a person has committed a violation, the
Minister may impose a penalty:
- up to 50% of the benefit that was or would have been paid;
- toa maximum of $5,000;
- within three years of the day on which the violation was committed.
The Minister of Health can also decide that a person is ineligible for future benefits if they have
committed a violation or misrepresented their eligibility information, although this remedy would only
relate in the period of moving from year one to year two benefits, given there would be no year 3
benefits to deny for those who were found fraudulent in year two. In those cases, other measures
described above could still be considered.
96
DENTAL CARE
Marketing and Advertising for the Interim Canada Dental Benefit
KEY FACTS
• The Government of Canada will launch an advertising campaign for the interim Canada Dental
Benefit once Royal Assent is receive and the application process is open, with tailored messaging posted
to a Canada Dental Benefit website, a joint collaboration between Health Canada and the Canada
Revenue Agency.
• The focus of the campaign will be to raise awareness of the interim Canada Dental Benefit,
including eligibility and the application process.
• Stakeholders (e.g., provincial and territorial dental associations and other interested parties) will
be encouraged to promote the benefit website on their respective websites, and to share and like social
media content.
• A digital toolkit will be developed in 2022-23 for distribution to partners and stakeholders (e.g.
other federal departments, provinces and territories, dental associations and dentists, schools,
community-based organizations and intermediaries or ambassadors in relevant communities).
• Updates will be made to the toolkit on an as-needed basis, based on target audiences.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government is committed to improving access to oral health services.
• It will be important for us to work to make sure eligible parents of children under 12 hear about
and understand how thisbenefit will work so they can access the support we are providing.
• A comprehensive public education campaign is being planned.
• Early communications ahead of the advertising campaign will encourage key audiences to sign
up for both CRA My Account anddirect deposit in order to facilitate the quick processing of the interim
dental benefit payment.
• Content will also focus on ensuring that Canadians are aware of and capitalize on key dates,
events and announcements. Updates to the website will be madeon an as-needed basis, based on
target audiences and benefit eligibility.
97
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS
ISSUE
• The Government remains committed to supporting Canadians with their mental health and
substance use challenges as well as increasing access to services so that Canadians can get the help they
need, when they need it.
KEY FACTS
• The Federal Government iscurrently funding Kids Help Phone close to $15 million over 36
months, from 2020-23.
• We are investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction servicesfor children and youth.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
• The Government is currently investing $21M over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. This service provides 24/7 suicide
crisis support via the phone (1-833-456-4566) and via text (45645) in both English and French.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada provided $100 million over three years to
support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government provided $50 million to support projectsto address posttraumatic stress
disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19
pandemic.
KEYMESSAGES
• In response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create Wellness Together
Canada, providing 24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance-use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed in excess of $280 million for a suite of
measures to support the mental health needs of marginalized and disproportionately impacted
Canadians, while also investing in health systems improvements.
• Moving forward, our Government is committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of our universal health care system. This is reflected in B2022’s reaffirmation of
engaging provinces and territories on the development of a Canada Mental Health Transfer, which
would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE…
• The Government of Canada is working with the Standards Council of Canada–a Federal Crown
Corporation with demonstrated expertise in developing national standards–to develop an integrated
suite of national standards to support the delivery of mental health and substance use services,
leveraging significant work done to date in this field.
• Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and equitable
mental health and substance use services, and will helpto ensure a consistent level of care is provided.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR CHILDREN, YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The pandemic is particularly challenging for children, youth and families.
98
• Through Wellness Together Canada, children and youth (ages 5 to 29) are able to access mental
health and substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone which provides online, phone and text
based support to young people.
• The Federal Government is currently funding Kids Help Phone close to $15 million over 36
months, from 2020-23.
• We are also investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS …
• Health care and front line personnel are an important population for Wellness Together Canada.
That is why the Portal features a dedicated text line and targeted mental health andsubstance use
supports.
• Frontline workers can access free counselling, peer support groups, and a range of anonymous,
self-guided programming. This includes co-designed mindfulness sessions for health care workers to
reduce stress and support coping withwork/life demands.
• The Portal also features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers in accessing portal
resources appropriate for their needs.
• Through Budget 2018, the Government of Canada, through CIHR, in partnership with the
Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research and Treatment (CIPSRT), has committed $20 million over 5
years to establish research and coordination hubs, as well as a Crisis Line and App-based supports, to
build the evidence base around effective support models for public safety personnel experiencing Post-
Traumatic Stress Injury.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR DIVERSE POPULATIONS …
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal to ensure inclusivity.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in over 200 languages
and dialects, including 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness (for Indigenous peoples), and
supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolationor remote areas, facing stigma or
financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR INDIVIDUALS INRURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES …
• Our government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health and substance use services.
• Wellness Together Canada (WTC) has been providing rural and remote communities with free
mental health and substance use resources available 24/7, in both official languages. In addition, for
Canadians who do not have reliable internet access, many of the WTC supports can be accessed by
phone and text.
• The Government will explore pathways to increase the accessibility of services in rural areas,
including virtual options.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR SUICIDE …
• The Government is currently investing $21M over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. This service provides 24/7 suicide
crisis support via the phone (1-833-456-4566) and via text (45645) in both English and French.
99
• The Canadian Radio-televisionand Telecommunications Commission recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
• To prepare for the introduction of 9-8-8, the Government has announced that CAMH has been
selected to lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk
Suicide Canada.
• The Government of Canada is also leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention
Action Plan. This Plan is anticipated to be released in fall 2023.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR THE MENTAL HEALTH IMPACTS OF THE PANDEMIC …
• The Government is concerned about the impacts that the COVID-19pandemic has had on the
mental health of Canadians, and we know that these impacts have been particularly severe for certain
groups.
• This is why, through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada provided $100 million over three
years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• In addition, the Government provided $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.
• At the onset of the pandemic, research investments were rapidly deployed to the COVID-19 and
Mental Health initiative to proactively provide urgent knowledge and evidence to support decision-
making throughout the mental health responses to the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON THECANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER …
• The Government has made significant investments to improve access to mental health and
substance use services, and has committedto establish a Canada Mental Health Transfer.
• The Government has engaged in a cross-country series of consultations and roundtables to hear
from Canadians, and remains committed to ensuring that mental health is treated as a full and equal
part of the universal healthcare system.
• To this end, we will continue to engage with partners and stakeholders and Canadians of all
backgrounds, including individuals with lived and living experience.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA …
• Asof November 14, 2022, almost 3 million individuals have accessed the portal in over 8 million
web sessions.
• Approximately 39% are men.
• Approximately 45% are under the age of 30.
• For phone sessions, 87% felt better after speaking with a counsellor.For text sessions, 86% of
texters were highly satisfied.
• Users report visiting the site to seek help with a variety of issues, including anxiety or stress,
depression, relationships, and suicide.
• 39% of texters indicated that they would not have soughtother options for help.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the portal to ensure its value and impact to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA …
• The portal strictly adheres to all applicable privacy and health information standards to maintain
the security and confidentiality of personal information. Vendors are bound by the privacy protective
terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
100
• The Government of Canada does not collect or store any personal information through the WTC
portal or the PocketWell app.
• Personal information is kept private and confidential and is not sold or disclosed to other
parties.
• Users can choose whether or not to register with WTC to use certain features of the Website or
certain Services. Users can also delete their account and associated data at any time.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS …
• Many supports available through the Wellness Together Canada portal can be accessed without
internet access.
• For example, confidential chat sessions with social workers, psychologists and other
professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESSTOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF
…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling by phone and text. All counsellors are able to support individuals with the grief they
face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
IF PRESSED ON POCKETWELL…
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government. In
January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched a companion app called PocketWell, which will help
increase awareness and accessibility of available mental health and substance use resources.
• ThroughPocketWell, individuals can link to the portal to access resources ranging from self-
assessment to customized support based on their assessment. Via the app, individuals can connect
seamlessly to WTC for free and confidential virtual sessions with social workers, psychologists and other
professionals.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts of COVID-19 on Canadians’ Mental Health
2021 Mandate Commitments
101
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressinghealth inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address substance use in Canada; and problematic
substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mentalhealth services.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidentialonline mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada,individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
102
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada(SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP). The Government has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholdersand promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support to address the mental health needs of populations disproportionately
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projectsto address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
103
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to support interventions that promote
protective factors and address risk factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults
and their caregivers, with a focus on populations susceptible to mental health inequities (e.g., low-
income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, LGBTQ2+).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids HelpPhone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black CanadiansFund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada.
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data,and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
104
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020, and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of itsrelease (by February 2025).
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested approximately $180 million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research.
CIHR is leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH)in collaboration with PHAC
and Health Canada. This initiative supports 101 research projects, representing a total investment of
$13.7 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of
leading Canadian experts inmental health and substance use. New knowledge generated through these
projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested approximately $180 million to address various issues
related to substance use.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). In 2022, the Government of Canada renewed its
investment in CRISM with a totalinvestment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to
build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number of Regional
Nodes to enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for theAtlantic region)
while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity (including the creation of an
Indigenous Platform and a Coordinating Centre).
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR is supporting five grants to evaluate program
implementation and short-term impact of safer supply pilot projects (SSPPs), as well as supervised
consumption sites (SCS) across Canada. This represents a total investment of over $2.2 million (plus a
supplement of $900K).
CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in
response to the opioid crisis through the Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis
Funding Opportunity.
105
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (with a third cycle in development) to better
understand the wider impacts of the pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of
research articles based on the first cycle of data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Journal on September 27, 2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also
resumed in September 2020. The Canadian Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of
mental health indicators, and has been collected for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for
ongoing measurement of changes in mental health ofthe Canadian population as the pandemic
continues and as Canada recovers.
On a quarterly basis, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and Health Canada collaborate to
publish the most recent data available on opioid- and stimulant-related harms in Canada. This includes
apparent opioid- and stimulant-related acute toxicity deaths and hospitalizations, and Emergency
Medical Services responses to suspected opioid-related overdoses. Recognizing that harms related to
opioids, stimulants, and other substances extend beyond overdoses (poisonings) and deaths, PHAC and
Health Canada continue to work with federal, provincial and territorial partners to build a broad
understanding of harms and substances involved to better respond to this public health crisis.
Health Canada conducts the Canadian Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CADS), a general population survey of
alcohol and drug use among Canadians aged 15 years and older. Health Canada also conducts the
Canadian Student Tobacco Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) to collect information on tobacco use,
alcohol and drug use, as well as information on bullying, mental health, and school connectedness
among students in grades 7 to 12 (secondary I through V in Quebec) in ten Canadian provinces.
Understanding Canadian trendsin alcohol and drug use is vital to the effective development,
implementation and evaluation of national and provincial strategies, policies and programs.
Launched in 2019, Health Canada’s Canadian Postsecondary Education Alcohol and Drug Use Survey
(CPADS) collects data on the prevalence and patterns of substance use and associated harms among
postsecondary (college and university) students aged 17–25 across Canada. Surveys like the CPADS
provide governments and non-governmental organizations with valuable information that can inform
substance use policies and programs that support youth and young adults.
Additionally, with evidence showing that street-involved youth are among the most at risk for drug
harms, in 2021, Health Canada developed the People With Lived and Living Experience Survey (PWLLES)
to gain a better understanding of the situation of street-involved youth aged 14-24 years in Canada who
used substances such as alcohol, tobacco, cannabis or other drugs in the past 12 months.
106
Mental Illness Surveillance
As part of its mandate, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is pursuing ongoing surveillance of
mental illness in the Canadian community. It uses multiple data sources to provide the most up to date
evidence available, including the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System (CCDSS), the Canadian
Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) and the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS).
The CCDSS is a collaborative network of provincial and territorial chronic disease surveillance systems,
supported by PHAC. It identifies chronic disease cases among all residents who are eligible for provincial
or territorial health insurance, and contains aggregated data that can be stratified by age, sex and
geographical locations. The CCDSS enables to track and report on health services use for mental illness
and alcohol/drug induced disorders overall, for mood and anxiety disorders, as well as for schizophrenia
in the Canadian population.
The 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) is a national, cross-sectional survey
that provides health-related information on Canadian children and youth. The survey is representative
of the Canadian population aged 1 to 17 years as of January 31, 2019, living in private dwellings in
Canada's ten provinces and three territories.
As well, to help address data gaps around the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals, families,
and communities in terms of their mental health (including symptoms of anxiety and depression, and of
post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), PHAC partnered with Statistics Canada in the development of the
Survey on COVID-19 and mental health. The survey contains information on the proportion of Canadians
who screened positive for these conditions by age group and gender, and look at the more at-risk
groups. These surveys were conducted at various times during the COVID-19 pandemic and provide
timely information on the impact of the pandemic on the mental health and well-being of Canadians.
Mental Health and Substance Use Research (CSCB)
The Government of Canada recognizes the intersection between mental health and substance use.
Approximately 20% of Canadians with a mental illness have a co-occurring substance use disorder, and
50% of those engaged in treatment for substance use are also living with mental illness.approximately
50% of those engaged in treatment for substance use are also living with mental illness.
In October 2020, recognizing the intersection between mental health and substance use, Canadian
Centre for Substance use and Addiction (CCSA) and the Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC)
signed a Memorandum of Agreement to work on joint initiatives in this area.
Currently the two pan-Canadian Health Organizations are working on an evidence review on promising
practices, interventions and policy recommendations to screen and assess suicide risk among individuals
with higher risk substance use
Theyare also exploring the development of pan-Canadian operational guidelines for integrated mental
health and substance use service delivery, with the goal of providing concrete and actionable guidance
for the implementation of an integrated approach for mental health and substance use.
Public surveys from the CCSA and the MHCC found that mental health symptoms and substance use
have increased since March 2020.They also found that those with a history of mental healthor
substance use concerns were disproportionately impacted by stresses related to the COVID-19
pandemic.
107
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
ISSUE
• In Canada, suicide is the second leading cause of mortality among youth (aged 15-24 or 15-34).
Children and youth (aged 10-19) register highest rate of hospitilizations due to self-harm.
• COVID-19 has exacerbated the magnitude of this issue with a greater number of children and
youth reporting poorer mental health since the beginning of the pandemic.
KEY FACTS
• Almost two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25, and nearly half do
before 18. It is estimated over 800,000 Canadian children and youth use health care services for mental
illness of and alcohol/drug induced disorders annually.
• Individuals under 35 years old represent half of frequent Emergency Department users for
mental health and substance use.
• In 2020, suicide was the second leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had significantimpacts on the mental health of children and youth.
The percentage of youth reporting “excellent” or “very good” mental health fell from 73% in 2019 to
67% in 2020 and was even lower in fall 2021/winter 2022 (61%) Furthermore, the percentage of youth
reporting that their mental health was “somewhat worse” or “much worse” now compared to before
the pandemic rose from 14% in September 2020 to a high of 35% in March/April 2021.
• Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the prevalence of self-reported diagnosed mood and/or anxiety
disorders in youth aged 12-19 years increased from 4.5% in 2005 to 11.5% in 2017 (controlling for age).
In 2017, a greater percentage of girls than boys self-reported diagnosed mood and/or anxiety disorders
(14.4% among girls vs. 8.6 among boys).
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government is committed to supporting the mental health and substance use needs of
children and youth.
• We are working to increase access to mental health and addictions services, such as the Budget
2017 commitment of $5 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories, which included a priority to
expand access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth (age 10-
25).
• In April 2020 and in response to the pandemic, Health Canada launched Wellness Together
Canada, a portal that offers online mental health and substance use supports. Through the portal,
children and youth (ages 5 to 29) can have free access to a range of resources, including Kids Help
Phone. Budget 2022 provided $140 million over two years for the Portal to continue to provide supports
for Canadians.
• The Government will work across departments to ensure children and youth have access to
mental health supports as they recover from the pandemic and in the long-term.
IF PRESSEDONFUNDING FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
• In addition to Wellness Together Canada, which provides online, phone and text based support
to young people who are dealing with mental health issues, $15M is being invested in Kids Help Phone
from April 2020 to March 2023, so that it can continue to provide mental health support to youth in
need during the pandemic.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is also investing approximately $100M over 3 years to
support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in populations
disproportionately impacted by the pandemic, including youth.
108
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL INVESTMENTS TO SUPPORT THE MENTAL HEALTH OF CHILDREN AND
YOUTH
• The Government is investing $39M from 2019-2028 to support interventions that promote
protective factors and address multiple risk factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young
adults and their caregivers with a focus on populations experiencing mental health inequities.
• The Government is also providing funding to key stakeholders for various projects that support
the mental health needs of children and youth, including students and Indigenous children. This includes
projects that are helping to expand the use of integrated youth services models across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PREVENTCHILD-AND YOUTH-BASED VIOLENCE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) funds programming to prevent teen and youth
dating violence, including community and school-based initiatives that teach skills for healthy and safe
relationships based on respect and consent.
• In addition, PHAC funds initiatives to prevent and address family-and gender-based violence
and its health impacts including trauma-and violence-informed physical and mental health promotion
for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR INTEGRATED YOUTH SERVICES
• The Government continues to work with provinces, territories, and stakeholders to help spread
and scale Integrated Youth Services (IYS) models of care.
• This builds on work to increase access to mental health and addictions services for children and
youth, which includes the Budget 2017 commitment of $5 billion over 10 years to provinces and
territories through bilateral agreements.
• All 13 provinces and territories have developed or are developing an Integrated Youth Services
(IYS) network in their regions. Additionally, there is an Indigenous IYS network in progress.
• In total, there are approximately 50 operational integrated youth hubs across Canada and 60
under development.
IFPRESSED ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
• The Government remains committed to ensuring that mental health is treated as full and equal
part of the universal healthcare system.
• The Government will deliver on a broad range of mental health commitments, which includes
ensuring mental health supports are accessible to children and youth as they recover from the impact of
the pandemic.
• In addition, theGovernment will work with provinces, territories and other stakeholders to
establish a Canada Mental Health Transfer (CMHT) to help expand the delivery of high-quality and
accessible mental health services.
BACKGROUND
Mental health issues can impact anypopulation and children and youth are no exception. In fact, almost
two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that over 800,000
Canadian children and youth use health care services for mental illness of and alcohol/drug induced
disorders annually.
Youth disproportionately visit the Emergency Department (ED) seeking mental health/substance use
services. For example, between 2008-2009 and 2018-19 there was a 61% increase in visits made by
109
youth to the ED for such services. During this time, hospitalizations for mental health disorders also
increased by 60%.
This cohort is also affected by suicide. In 2020, suicide was the second leading cause of death among
individuals aged 15 to 34. In 2020, among individuals aged15 to 24 years, males accounted for 68% of
suicide deaths; and among individuals aged 25 to 34 years, males account for 75% of suicide deaths.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children and youth.
Concerns about the virus itself have been compounded by impacts on school and routines, social
activities, increased isolation, and decreased access to services and supports.
Results from late 2021/early 2022 showed that younger adults had the lowest levels of excellent or very
good mental health as compared to older Canadians. Most Canadians were less likely to report excellent
or very good mental health during the COVID-19 period, and the difference between 2019 and 2022 was
particularly evident for younger adults. Only 50.9% of those aged 18 to 34 reported excellent or very
good mental health in 2021-2022 during the pandemic, compared to 60.8% before the pandemic in
2019. In children aged 12-17 years, 61.2% reported that their mental health was very good or excellent
in 2021-2022, compared to 73.0% in 2019.
More recent survey results from early 2021 showed that younger Canadians persistently indicate the
highest anxiety and depression of all age groups. For example, almost 30% of 16 to 17 year olds
reported high levels of anxiety and depression, and one in three reported suicidal ideation in the past
year. Conversely, this group reported a lower incidence of diagnosis of a mental health issue, suggesting
they do not have access to diagnostic services and care.
Additionally, in a Statistics Canada survey of perceptions of personal safety, 11% of Youth aged 15 to 24
reported that harassment or attacks on the basis of race, ethnicity, or skin colour have increased in their
neighbourhood since the start of the pandemic.
Government Actions and Investments to Support the Mental Health Needs of Children and Youth
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments and Integrated Youth Services
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years toimprove Canadians’ access to mental
health services (2017-2027). The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateral agreements, informed by the 2017 Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health. In it, Ministers of Health agreed to prioritize
expanded access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth as
one of three priorities for the federal funding.
All 13 provinces and territories have developed or are developing an Integrated Youth Services (IYS)
network in their regions. Additionally, there is an Indigenous IYS network in progress. These hubs are
easily accessible community-based “one stop shops” that provide an integratedsuite of services, which
can include peer support, mental health and primary care support and employment counselling, as well
as support for navigating these systems of care.
There are approximately 50 operational integrated youth hubs across Canada and60 under
development. Three of the most developed networks are in British Columbia (Foundry), Ontario (Youth
110
Wellness Hubs Ontario), and Quebec (Aire Ouverte), with British Columbia and Ontario specifically
identifying the use of bilateral funding to support these networks. This demonstrates how the federal
government can work constructively with provinces and territories to spread and scale evidence-based
practices in the mental health and substance use space.
The development of an Indigenous IYS networkwas driven by the participation of Indigenous
communities across Canada. These First Nations and Inuit communities led efforts to shift youth mental
health towards culturally competent care through the Access Open Minds Indigenous Council. Several
Indigenous communities are currently participating in an emerging Indigenous IYS network.
2021 Mandate Commitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop nationalstandards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They willalso help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards formental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP), which includes Integrated Youth Services. The Government has emphasized the
111
importance of engagement with diverse stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which
have been incorporated into the development process.
Mental Health Promotion and Teen Dating Violence
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health PromotionInnovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC also funds programming to prevent teen and youth dating violence, including community and
school-based initiatives that teach skills for healthy and safe relationships based on respect and consent.
In addition, PHAC funds initiatives to support the health of survivors of family violence, including
trauma-informed physical and mental healthpromotion for youth.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
preventionsupport. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada. By 2023, this service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of
their choice (voice, text or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing anaction plan
that aligns with the Framework.
112
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Children and Youth
Under the Health Care Policy and Strategies Program (HCPSP) at Health Canada, the federal government
is providing funding to the following projects:
• $2M from 2021-2024 to the Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) to develop and pilot a
national specialized peer support certification program for use by post-secondary institutions to support
student mental health.
• $6.8M from 2019-2024 to Foundry tohelp organizations implement integrated models of youth
mental health care. This complements $9M in funding to Frayme from 2019-2024 to promote broader
implementation of integrated youth services in Canada.
• $2M from 2021-2026 to the Children’s Hospitalof Eastern Ontario (CHEO) to increase the
spread of the Aaniish Naa Gegii: the Children’s Health and Well‐being Measure (ACHWM), co-developed
with Indigenous partners to help measure the health and wellbeing of Indigenous children.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-2022 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years, beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential onlin0e mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access.
There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide immediate access to
support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that can assist with
finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial and territorial
services, and does not replace them. In January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched PocketWell,
which is a companion app to the online Portal.
Through the Portal and the app, children and youth (ages 5 to 29) are able to access mental health and
substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone, which provides online, phone and text based
support to young people who are in crisis or dealing withmental health issues.
Additional resources are being invested in Kids Help Phone ($14.8M over 36 months from April 2020 to
March 2023) provide mental health support to youth in need during the pandemic.
As of November 14, 2022, almost 3 million individuals across all provinces and territories have accessed
the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 8 million web sessions. The new PocketWell mobile app
has been downloaded a total of 30,792 times. Additionally, approximately 45% of registered clients of
the portal are under 30, an age group that tends to underutilize traditional mental health services.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
113
Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those most
affected by the pandemic, including youth. Funded projects began in spring 2022 and are reaching
diverse populations across Canada. Projects will support mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention interventions, in addition to initiatives that build the capacity of service providers to deliver
programming in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence to Underpin Initiatives
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $413
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research.
CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS Open Minds, a national
project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care by developing and
testing evidence-informed approaches into IYS. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7 provinces and
one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways based on local
context. For example, in Ulukhaktok, a remote community in the Northwest Territories where
professional service providers are not always available, the site is evaluating a model where lay health
workers are trained to provide support to youth in distress.
The IYS Network of Networks Initiative ($1M over 1 year), was also launched by CIHR in April 2022 to
create a Canada-wide network of provincial and territorial learning health systems for Integrated Youth
Services for mental health and substance use.
In addition, CIHR committed$6.25M over 5 years to the Mental Health in the Early Years funding
opportunity in March 2022, with a focus on mental health initiatives for young children (ages 0-5),
Indigenous Peoples, as well as transforming mental health with integrated care.
CIHR is also leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative supported 101 research projects, of $13.5 million from CIHR and
partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panelcomposed of leading Canadian experts in
mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to
ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (with a third cycle in development) to better
understand the wider impacts of the pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of
research articles based on the first cycle of data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic
Disease Prevention Journal on September 27, 2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also
resumed in September 2020. The Canadian Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of
mental health indicators, and has been collected for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for
ongoing measurement of changes in mental health of the Canadian population as the pandemic
continues and as Canada recovers.
Additionally, the 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth,with a second cycle planned for
2023, explores issues that have an impact on the physical and mental health of children and youth (aged
114
1-17 years). As well, the 2022 Mental Health and Access to Care Survey, focuses on the mental health
status of Canadiansaged 15+ years and their access to and need for services and supports. This survey
also intends to assess the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on population health as well as evaluate
changes in patterns of mental health, service use and functioning in the last ten years.
Mental Illness Surveillance
As part of its mandate, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is pursuing ongoing surveillance of
mental illness in the Canadian community. It uses multiple data sources to provide the most up to date
evidence available, including the Canadian ChronicDisease Surveillance System (CCDSS), the Canadian
Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) and the Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS).
The CCDSS is a collaborative network of provincial and territorial chronic disease surveillance systems,
supported by PHAC. It identifies chronic disease cases among all residents who are eligible for provincial
or territorial health insurance, and contains aggregated data that can be stratified by age, sex and
geographical locations. The CCDSS enables to track andreport on health services use for mental illness
overall and alcohol/drug induced disordersfor mood and anxiety disorders in the Canadian population,
as well as for schizophrenia.
The 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY) is a national, cross-sectional survey
that provides health-related information on Canadian children and youth. The survey is representative
of the Canadian population aged 1 to 17 years as of January 31, 2019, living in private dwellings in
Canada's ten provinces andthree territories.
As well, to help address data gaps around the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic on individuals, families,
and communities in terms of their mental health (including symptoms of anxiety and depression, and of
post-traumatic stress disorder [PTSD]), PHAC partnered with Statistics Canada in the development of the
Survey on COVID-19 and mental health. The survey contains information on the proportion of Canadians
who screened positive for these conditions by age group and gender, and look atthe more at-risk
groups. These surveys were conducted at various times during the COVID-19 pandemic and provide
timely information on the impact of the pandemic on the mental health and well-being of Canadians
115
NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICES
ISSUE
• The mental health and substance use health needs of Canadians have faced persistent systemic
barriers to care which have only worsened during the pandemic. Some of these barriers include
fragmented service delivery, inequitable access to high-quality and timely care, and a lack of culturally
appropriate services.
• National standards and guidelines are needed to help ensure that mental health and substance
use services meet a consistent level of care and address a wide rangeof needs. Standards will help to
advance quality and equity in the delivery of mental health and substance use services for Canadians
through consensus-building processes and engagement with diverse groups of stakeholders.
KEY FACTS
• Through Budget 2021,the government provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22,
to develop national standards for mental health.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has emphasized the need for increased access to high quality,
evidence-informed, and equitable mental healthand substance use services. Positive mental health
declined throughout the pandemic, with only 60% of adults and 54% of children and youth reporting
excellent or very good mental health in 2021, compared to 68% of adults and 63% of children and youth
in 2019. In fall 2020, one in five Canadians reported a need for mental health care in the past year. Of
those, 45% reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met. A delay in mental health
support is linked to decreased positive health outcomes, therefore timely support is particularly
important.
• Approximately one in five Canadians will experience a substance use disorder in their lifetime.
Substance use and mental illness are closely linked. People with a mental illness are twice as likely to
have a substance use disorder compared to the general population. At least 20% of people with a
mental illness have a co-occurring substance use disorder. For people with schizophrenia, this number
may be as high as 50%. Similarly, people with substance use disorders are up to three times more likely
to have a mental illness. More than 15% of people with a substance use disorder have a co-occurring
mental illness.
• Among other priority populations, Canadian youth, Indigenous and those identifying as
LGBTQIA2+ report greater need for mental health care than adults, non-Indigenous Canadians and those
not identifying as LGBTQIA2+. Of those who need care, these groups are also more likely to report that
their needs are unmet or partially met, highlighting the need to reduce barriers to care.
KEY MESSAGES
• Budget 2021 provided $45 million to develop national standards for mental health and
substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key
stakeholders.
• National standards will help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of
services, while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery that Canadians can rely on,
no matter where they live or access services.
• Standardsdevelopment will be informed by consultation and engagement processes, so that the
diverse perspectives of Canadians are incorporated, such as Indigenous and racialized populations,
gender-diverse people, and people with lived and living experience.
116
IF PRESSED ON WHY IT IS IMPORTANT FOR THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA TO SUPPORT THE
DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS
• Significant progress has been made to develop and advance wise practices in mental health and
substance use treatment, supported by significant federal, provincial and territorial investments.
• This has provided opportunities to build on and integrate wise practices in provinces and
territories to develop national standards, through consensus-based processes that address shared
mental health and substance use priorities.
• Standards help to provide a framework for mental health and substance use service delivery
across Canada, no matter where a person lives.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THESE NATIONAL STANDARDS WILL IMPACT THE MENTAL HEALTH AND
SUBSTANCE USESERVICES RECEIVED BY CANADIANS
• Mental health and substance use services can vary across the country and some people
experience barriers in accessing services. Where services are available, they may also not meet the
needs of diverse populations.
• Standards are tools for helping to ensure that mental health and substance use services,
including those who provide such services, meet a consistent level of care and are sensitive to a wide
range of needs.
• This work will help to ensure that when Canadians access services, they are of high quality,
evidence-based and equitable.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARTNERSHIP WITH STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA (SCC)
• On March 14, 2022, the Government of Canada announced plans to work with SCC and
stakeholders to develop national standards for mental health and substance use services.
• As Canada’s leading standardization body, SCC has extensive experience in leading national
standardization initiatives of this scale.
• SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental
health and substance use services, leveraging significant work completed to date in this field.
IF PRESSED ON THE STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT PROCESS
• Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is coordinating the development of standards that are
evidence-based and developed through consensus-based processes that engage experts, health
organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other key stakeholders.
• Standards will seek to achieve the highest level of consensus possible, while adhering to SCC’s
strict guidelines for standards development.
IF PRESSED ON THE PRIORITY AREAS FOR STANDARDS
• Standards Council of Canada (SCC) is currently leading the development of standards in priority
areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities (CSOP), developed
by federal, provincial and territorialgovernments in 2017.
• The integrated suite of standards will help address a range of mental health and substance use
needs and are tools for promoting consistency of service delivery across Canada.
• The Government of Canada and SCC will explore opportunities for standards development in
additional priority areas with input from stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDS WILL PROMOTE EQUITY
• We know that in order for standards to support all Canadians, they must be developed through
an equity lens thatconsiders the needs of diverse populations.
117
• The Government of Canada has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion of health equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process.
• It is the Government of Canada’s intention to use the standards development process to
advance equity in the delivery of high-quality mental health and substance use services for diverse
populations that face barriers to care.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDSCOUNCIL OF CANADA(SCC) WILL ENGAGE STAKEHOLDERS
• SCC is engaging a diverse range of key stakeholders to inform their work, such as provinces and
territories, Indigenous partners, health organizations, and people with lived and living experience.
• SCC has established a National Mental Health and Substance Use Standardization Collaborative
to facilitate stakeholder engagement as well as consensus-based processes, which includes a steering
committee and various working groups.
IF PRESSED ON THE STEERINGCOMMITTEE THAT WILL GUIDETHE STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA
(SCC) BODY OF WORK
• The Steering Committee includes a diverse range of key mental health and substance use
stakeholders that will provide advice and direction to the work of the Collaborative.
• Membership includes representatives from the federal government, Indigenous partners, pan-
Canadian health organizations, experts, professional associations, health organizations, Standards
Development Organizations, non-governmental organizations, and peoplewith lived and living
experience.
IF PRESSED ON HOW PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES WILL BE ENGAGED IN STANDARDS DEVELOPMENT
• Provinces and territories are key stakeholders that will be consulted throughout this process.
• A Government Advisory Table has been established to provide a dedicated forum for provinces
and territories that choose to participate in the standards development process.
• Representatives from the provinces and territories have also been invited to join the various
working groups withinthe Collaborative.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STAKEHOLDERS AND THE PUBLICCAN PARTICIPATE IN THE PROCESS
• Canadians have access to updates on this work through a dedicated webpage for the initiative
hosted by Standards Council of Canada (SCC).
• SCC will also launch a series of public consultations on the priority areas for standards to help
inform the development process.
• Stakeholders can also contact SCC for more information by accessing their dedicated webpage.
IF PRESSED ON HOW STANDARDS WILL BE IMPLEMENTED
• Standards will be available for voluntary implementation by provinces and territories, health
organizations and other service providers that have responsibility for the delivery of mental health and
substance use care.
• Standards Council of Canada will develop guidance and related resources to support the uptake
and implementation of standards.
118
BACKGROUND
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards foraccess to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government provided $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to develop national standards for mental health, in collaboration
with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access
timely care, treatment, and support. This language was interpreted broadly to include standards for
substance use due to its close relationship with mental health.
Of the $45 million, $37.5 million over two years was provided to Health Canada to develop the
standards, $4.5 million over two years was provided to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) for knowledge mobilizationactivities to inform standards development, and $3 million over two
years went to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to develop disaggregated population-based
and system level indicators to monitor the impact of national standards.
National standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based processes that
engage a range of experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other key
stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. The Government of Canada has emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse
stakeholders and promotion ofhealth equity principles, which have been incorporated into the
development process. National standards will be available for voluntary implementation in provinces,
territories and health organizations, and will help to support an evidence-based frameworkfor service
delivery in priority areas.
Standards Background
“Standardization” refers to the development and application (conformity assessment) of standards
publications that establish accepted practices, technical requirements and terminologies for product,
process and service, for management systems and for certification of persons.
Standards are documents, established by consensus and approved by a recognized body that provide,
for common and repeated use, rules, guidelines or characteristics for activities or their results, aimed at
the achievement of the optimum degree of order in a given context. They are based on the consolidated
results of science, technology and lived and living experience, and aimed at the promotion of optimum
community benefits.
While there are a breadth of clinical and professional guidelines, frameworks, and other resources
currently available with a national scope, these documents have a specific focus and intended purpose
separate from national standards for health services or have otherwise not been developed through a
formal standardization process.
Partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC)
Health Canada signed a Memorandum of Agreement with SCC on November 25, 2021 to develop
national standards for mental health and substance use services. This partnership was announced by the
Minister of Mental Health and Addictions on March 14, 2022.
119
Established in 1970 through the Standards Council of Canada Act, SCC is a non-agent Federal Crown
Corporation. Oversight forthe SCC is provided by its Governing Council, who are appointed by the
federal government and who report to Parliament through the Minister of Innovation, Science, and
Economic Development. As set out in the Act, SCC’s mandate is to promote efficient and effective
voluntary standardization in Canada, where standardization is not expressly provided for by law and, in
particular, to:
a. promote the participation of Canadians in voluntary standards activities,
b. promote public-private sector cooperation in relation to voluntary standardization in Canada,
c. coordinate and oversee the efforts of the persons and organizations involved in the National
Standards System,
d. foster quality, performance and technological innovation in Canadian goods and services
through standards-related activities, and,
e. develop standards-related strategies and long-term objectives in order to advance the national
economy, support sustainable development, benefit the health, safety and welfare of workers and the
public, assist andprotect consumers, facilitate domestic and international trade and further
international cooperation in relation to standardization.
SCC coordinates and provides leadership to the National Standards System, which refers to the network
of organizations and individuals who contribute to standardization in Canada. This includes SCC-
accredited organizations that develop standards (Standards Development Organizations or SDOs) as well
as SCC-accredited conformity assessment bodies that verify compliance to standards. SCC also facilitates
connections between the National Standards System and the international standardization system.
As Canada’s National Standards Body, SCC leads and provides a strategic approach to national
standardization, ensuring that national objectives and needs are served by the National Standards
System. SCC collaborates with SDOs to lead and facilitate the development of standards, and serves as a
convener and leader for the standards system, as well as the rules-setting body for standards
development in Canada.
Priority Areas for Standards Development
SCC will lead the development of an integrated suite of national standards products in six
priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared HealthPriorities (CSOP):
• Children and youth:
1. Integrated Youth Services: increase access to youth mental health and substance use supports
that are integrated with physical health, sexual health and social services
• Primary Health Services Integration:
2. Primary Care Integration: increase access to quality, integrated mental health and substance use
supports in primary care settings
3. Digital Mental Health and Substance Use Apps: improve access to high-quality, safe and
effective apps to help Canadiansmake better-informed app choices
• People with complex needs:
4. Substance Use Treatment Centres: improve access to high-quality, evidence-based care and
promote an integrated and coordinated treatment system
120
5. Substance Use Workforce: increase substanceuse workforce capacity to provide evidence-
based care and stepped-care approaches
6. Integrated Services for Complex Health Needs: improve integrated treatment approaches for
individuals with concurrent mental health and substance use disorders and complex health needs
SCC will develop standard products with the highest level of consensus possible within the short period
available for development.
Once published, all products can be implemented, applied, tested, and later revised or upgraded (if
applicable) to other standardized document types, such as NSCs.
SCC Governance Model for the Development of National Standards for Mental Health and Substance
Use Services
SCC is using a National Standardization Collaborative model to lead standards development through a
consensus-based process. This model includes in-depth stakeholder involvement, national
standardization strategy advancement processes, and subject matter expertise for each topic area, to
identify needs and gaps that will inform the scope andcontent of standards. The Collaborative’s
governance involves a tiered committee structure that includes a Steering Committee and working
groups with specific areas of focus.
The Collaborative will be composed of key stakeholders and implementation partners, including
representatives from: SCC, governments, Indigenous partners, Pan-Canadian Health Organizations,
experts, professional associations, service providers/organizations, Standards Development
Organizations, other non-governmental organizations, and persons with lived and living experience. The
selection of specific participants will be guided by GBA+ considerations, to ensure an inclusive, equity-
driven approach.
The Collaborative will also include a Government Advisory Table to provide a dedicated forum for PT
and Indigenous representatives to share their perspectives as the work progress. The Co-chairs of this
Table will be invited to join the Steering Committee of the Collaborative. Representatives can also join
the working groups of the Collaborative.
SCC has also established a dedicated webpage for this initiative to provide Canadians with more
information.
Complementary Role of the Canada Mental Health Transfer (CMHT)
Service standards are tools for promoting the delivery of high-quality and appropriate mental health and
substance use care in specific service areas. The focus of standards development is on how care is
delivered, where standards implementation lies within the jurisdiction of PTs that deliver care.
The suite of standards is not inclusive of all mental health and substance use services and will continue
to evolve over time with the emergence of new priority areas ready for standards development.
The newCMHT would serve as a permanent source of funding to PTs to expand their capacity to deliver
high-quality and accessible mental health services, for both prevention and treatment.
121
The government of Canada is committed to engaging with PTs on the development of a CMHT.
As a source of funds, the CMHT would play an important complementary role in supporting PTs to
implement standards by bolstering their capacity to deliver high-quality care.
Standards will be made available for voluntary implementation in PTs, health organizations and other
service providers responsible for the delivery of mental health and substance use care.
Progress in Other Areas of Standards Development
Existing standards work funded by the federal government is already contributing to the advancement
of this mandate commitment.
• Health Canada is funding Health Standards Organization’s (HSO) Improving Integrated Care for
Youth (IICY) Initiative, to develop an effective integrated care network to address gaps in access to child
& youth mental health services and continuity of care. This work includes standards development in the
areas of youth mental health and addictions services and suicide prevention.
• Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC) jointly developed with Canadian Standards
Association (CSA) and Bureau de normalisation du Québec (BNQ), the Psychological Health and Safety in
the Workplace NSC, which was published in 2018. The MHCC continues to promote and support
implementation of the standard through education, guidanceand training.
o This standard was adapted by the Paramedic Association of Canada to develop the Psychological
Health and Safety in the Paramedic Service Organization NSC, published in 2018.
• MHCC jointly developed with CSA, the Mental Health and Well-Being for Post-Secondary
Students NSC, which was published in 2020. MHCC continues to promote and support implementation
of the standard through education, guidance and training.
122
PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUE
• Perinatal mental illness is a significant complication of pregnancy and the postpartum period
and refers to mental health conditions experienced during this time, including major depressive disorder
and anxiety disorders.
• Addressing perinatal mental health includes more than identifying and treating mental illness
during the perinatal period. Mental health promotion and mental illness prevention activities, such as
improving the mental health literacy of pregnant and postpartum individuals, are a critical part of
addressing perinatal mental health needs.
KEY FACTS
• According to a 2018/2019 Government of Canada survey, almost one quarter (23%) of mothers
who recently gave birth reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety
disorder. These reports varied across provinces, ranging from 16% in Saskatchewan to 31% in Nova
Scotia. Studies conducted in Ontario and Quebec show that about one-fifth of pregnant and/or
postpartum women use mental health services.
• Covid-19 has exacerbated the problem; as the rates of perinatal mental health issues and the
need for services has increased, the availability of services has decreased due to shutdowns.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to promoting the mental health and wellbeing of mothers and
children.
• We have made significant investments in programs that support the mental health of pregnant
and postpartum individuals, including funding for improving community-level access to supports, and
$26.5 million annually for theCanada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP), which serves approximately
240 projects with over 45,000 participants.
• Through such investments and the development of health promotion resources, we are
ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, when and where needed.
IF PRESSED ON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS
• The mandate of the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions is to ensure that mental health
care is treated as a full and equal part of our universal health care system, working in closecollaboration
with provinces and territories, and to lead a whole-of-society approach to address problematic
substance use in Canada.
• Our Government is committed to ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, and
remains committed to establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE TOWARDS PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH COMMITMENT
• Health Canada has been working closely with Canada’s leading experts in the field to gain a
better understanding of wise practices, gaps and opportunities with respect to perinatal mental health
services in Canada.
• On March 9th, 2022, a roundtable was held with a range of different stakeholder groups, to
encompass multiple perspectives, including clinical experts and practitioners, individuals with lived and
living experience, policy-makers and researchers/academics.
123
• This session will help inform further policy development and stakeholder engagement by the
Health Portfolio as we considers approaches to make progress in this important policy area.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS CURRENTLY AVAILABLE TO ADDRESS PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH AND
SUBSTANCE USE CHALLENGES
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government.
• In April 2020, our Government launched an online mental health and substance use support
portal, Wellness Together Canada (WTC), which provides free, credible information and supports
available 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official languages to help address their mild to
moderate mental health and substance use issues.
• In addition, via PocketWell, the WTC companion app, individuals can access resources ranging
from self-assessment to customized support based on their assessment, and can link seamlessly to the
supports and services on the portal.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE TOWARDS PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH COMMITMENT
• Health Canada has been working closely with Canada’s leading experts in the field to gain a
better understanding of wise practices, gaps and opportunities with respect to perinatal mental health
services in Canada.
• On March 9th, 2022, a roundtable was held with a range of different stakeholder groups, to
encompass multiple perspectives, including clinical experts and practitioners, individuals with lived and
living experience, policy-makers and researchers/academics.
• This session will help inform further policy development and stakeholder engagement by the
Health Portfolio as we considers approaches to make progress in this important policy area.
BACKGROUND
The perinatal period includes both pregnancy and the postpartum period. Perinatal mental health is a
state of well-being in which a pregnant or postpartum person realizes their own abilities, can cope with
the normal stresses of life and work productively, care for themselves and their newborn, and is able to
makea contribution to their community and society.
Perinatal mental illness refers to mental health conditions experienced “around” pregnancy. This
includes pre-existing mental health conditions, but can also refer to new or different mental health
concernsarising around this period.
Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significant public health issues, increasing the risk of poor
mental and physical health outcomes for mothers along with potential impacts for children and families.
If untreated, consequences include prolonged maternal depression, paternal depression, partner
relationship dissatisfaction and conflict, impaired parent-infant interactions and attachment, risk for
impaired cognitive or psychosocial development for the child (and increased risk of later child
psychopathology) and, in extreme situations, maternal suicide or infanticide. Maternal deaths with a
mental health component, by suicide or drug toxicity, are increasingly recognized as making up a
significant proportion of all maternal deaths.
Current national data collection surrounding mental health does not allow identification of individuals in
the perinatal period. However, it is possible to identify currently pregnant females.
124
Among pregnant females overall, self-rated mental health was higher than the self-rated mental health
of non-pregnant females (2019-2021). This holds for all age groups with the exception of teen
pregnancies (15-19), where the self-rated mental health among those who were pregnant was slightly
lower than for those who were not. Pregnant teens were also significantly more likely to report anxiety
than their non-pregnant peers.
Pregnant females 20 to 44 were significantly less likely to report anxiety or depression than their non-
pregnant peers. In contrast, pregnant women 45-54 were significantly more likely to report anxiety or
depression than their non-pregnant peers.
The 2018/2019 Survey on Maternal Health provided a snapshot of the mental health of new mothers (5
to 13 months after giving birth) in Canada. The survey found that almost one-quarter (23%) of new
mothers reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety disorder. A
higher proportion (30%) of mothers under the age of 25 reported feelings consistent with depression or
an anxiety disorder compared to mothers aged 25 and older (23%). The survey also found that nearly
one-third (31%) of mothers who reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an
anxiety disorder had previously been told by a health professional that they had depression or a mood
disorder prior to being pregnant.
The literature suggests that additional research is needed to determine the long-term mental health
experiences of teenage parents, particularly studies controlling for confounding effects of demographic,
socioeconomic, environmental, and health related variables. One Canadian study identified that among
Indigenous mothers, social and health factors were more important for predicting long-term mental
health outcomes than experiencing teen pregnancy.
In recent years, some stakeholders have called for greater federal action in the area of perinatal mental
health. On May 13, 2020, a petition was brought forward to create a national perinatal mental health
strategy that would provide direction, policy, and funding to develop specialized, comprehensive
perinatal mental health care services. This includes universal screening and timely access to treatment
for all people during pregnancy and the postpartum period.
On May 5,2021 (World Maternal Mental Health Day), various MP’s offices sent a request to the former
Minister of Health’s Office on behalf of their constituents regarding a National Perinatal Mental Health
Strategy. It was brought forward by MP Heather McPherson (Edmonton-Strathcona).
On June 3, 2021, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-306, which calls for a National
Perinatal Mental Health Strategy that includes mental health screening and treatment services during
the full perinatalperiod. This Bill died on the order paper when Parliament was dissolved in August
2021.
On March 31, 2022, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-265, which again called for
a National Perinatal Mental Health Strategy Act that includes measures to provide perinatal mental
health screening and services and reduce barriers to care, as well as measures to increase perinatal
mental health awareness, training and research.
2021 Mandate Commitments
125
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new and ongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality and accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention of engaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
Wellness Together Canada
In response to the global public health challenge of COVID-19, in April 2020 the Government of Canada
launched an online mental health and substance use support portal, Wellness Together Canada (WTC).
The portal provides free, credible information and supports available 24/7 to individuals across Canada
in both official languages to help address their mild to moderate mentalhealth and substance use
issues.
WTC offers a variety of resources to support the mental health of pregnant and postpartum individuals.
A few examples of relevant resources include general information and healthy coping mechanisms for
common mental healthconcerns, such as depression, anxiety, stress and eating disorders.
WTC offers information and support on sexual and family abuse and information on self-harm and
suicide.
WTC offers peer to peer support communities and counseling services for pregnant and postpartum
individuals who want to exchange with other individuals or with a counsellor.
WTC users have access to more in-depth materials when they create an account, including a 2-week
session course on choosing a major or occupation, a 5-week program on anxiety and stress, and a 65-
minute course on handling disappointments.
Perinatal Surveillance
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System monitors and
reports on maternal, fetal and infant healthoutcomes while conducting targeted epidemiological
research to address emerging issues. This program has focused largely on indicators of physical health,
some of which can be associated with maternal mental health (e.g., fetal/infant mortality, maternal
chronic diseases, smoking,). However, formal indicators concerning risk and protective factors for
maternal mental health have yet to be established, as there are presently no routinely used national
sources of data on maternal mental health or maternal access to/use of mental health services.
126
Budget 2022 will bring significant investments towards developing the evidence around the perinatal
period, including perinatal mental health. PHAC will be investing approximately $4.5 million over three
years to support the development and collection of a national parental experiences survey, with a focus
on mental health during the perinatal period as well as other key issues such as breastfeeding,
substance use, etc. This survey will address a critical data gap, particularly around parental mental
health and access to mental health services.
Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care’s guideline on screening for depression during
pregnancy and the postpartum period
The Canadian Task Force on Preventive Healthcare (Task Force) is an independent arms-length body of
up to 15 clinicians and methodologists established and funded by PHAC. In 2022, the Task Force
published “Recommendation on instrument-based screening for depression during pregnancy and the
postpartumperiod” in the Canadian Medical Association Journal.
The Task Force’s guideline on screening for depression during pregnancy and the postpartum period is
based on the best available scientific evidence. The guideline considered the benefits and harms of
screening for Canadian individuals who are pregnant and up to one year postpartum. The Task Force
recommends against screening using a questionnaire with a cut-off score and advises clinicians to
inquire about the mental health and well-being of pregnant and postpartum patients as part of usual
care during visits.
PHAC Policy and Program Activities
The Health Portfolio undertakes a number of activities to promote maternal and child health, which
includes supporting positive maternal mental health during the perinatal periods. PHAC makes
significant investments to support perinatal mental health through programs aimed at improving
community-level access to supports for prenatal and recently postpartum people, new parents and
young children facing barriers to health equity. In particular, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program
provides $26.5 million annually to improve the health of at-risk pregnant individuals, with a focus on
mental health, nutrition, and the promotion of positive health behaviours during pregnancy. Through
approximately 240 funded projects, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program serves more than 45,000
participants across Canada each year.
PHAC also supports the development of several resources promoting the positive mental health of
pregnant/postpartum individuals. These resources provide guidance and advice for both healthcare
professionals and individuals that may face poor mental health during the perinatal period, including
Family-Centred Maternity and Newborn Care National Guidelines; the Mothers’ Mental Health Toolkit;
and ‘Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy’.
To provide rapid support for new parents during the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada and PHAC have
recently developed resources to support the mental health of those who are pregnant or have recently
had a baby.
127
SUICIDE PREVENTION
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance for all Canadians to have access to
critical mental health resources and suicide prevention services, particularly in regions like our North
that are facing high suicide rates and mental health challenges.
• The federal government is leading the development of the National Suicide Prevention Action
Plan, formerly M-174, aimed at reducing suicide rates and improving mental well-beingbased on best
practices and innovations in suicide prevention and life promotion.
• The federal government is investing $21 million to develop Talk Suicide Canada and $57.5
million to support crisis services during the pandemic, including $2 million to develop resources for
distress centres that are tailored to meet the needs of diverse populations such as Inuit, First Nations
and Métis communities.
If pressed on progress on 9-8-8 implementation
• The Government of Canada welcomes the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications
Commission’s decision to adopt a 9-8-8 phone and text service for Canadians in need of immediate
mental health crisis and suicide prevention support. This service will be launched across Canada on
November 30, 2023.
• To prepare for this launch, the Government of Canada has announced that the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) will lead the coordination of 9 8 8 service delivery, building on its
experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada.
If pressed on Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention Activities
• As part of our work to address stigma, the Government of Canada has developed a resource for
Safe Messaging about suicide to help people in Canada talk safely about suicide. This resource is
available in both English and French on theCanada.cawebsite.
• We have also helped to connect people, including those in the North, to crisis resources by
supporting Talk Suicide Canada and we are accelerating researchby working with suicide experts to
identify key knowledge gaps that would benefit from further research.
If pressed on the review of the federal framework for suicide prevention
• The Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology launched a study of
the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention on September 29, 2022.
• We welcome the recommendations of the Committee to help inform our plans to evolve the
Framework and implement a National Action Plan based on the best available evidence.
If pressed on progress on the national suicide prevention action plan
• Engagement on the priorities for the National Suicide Prevention Action Plan is expected to
proceed over the coming months with federal departments, provincial and territorial governments,
Indigenous organizations, stakeholders and People with Lived and Living Experience.
If pressed on COVID-19 mental health crisis supports
• The Government is providing over $14.8 million over 36 months to Kids Help Phone to deliver
mental healthcrisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres across the country.
128
• This includes new investments such as $2.0 million to TalkSuicide Canada to support resources
for the increased demand on distress centres, and approximately $1.8 million towards 14 distress
centres in Canada.
If pressed on the continued need for COVID-19 mental health crisis supports
• Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement investment, PHAC provided grant funding to 71 local
distress centres across Canada in 2020-21 and 2021-22, however the demand for crisis lines continues to
increase.
• Local-level crisis supports are struggling to meet the demand and needs of their communities,
and may not be aware that there is support available to them. The Government is working with national
organizations, such as Kids Help Phone and Talk Suicide Canada, to leverage administrative capacity to
hire new responders in localdistress centres across the country.
• This work will also allow expansion of the Talk Suicide Canada network of local distress centres
to better meet demand as well as support Kids Help Phone to bolster its capacity to address the
heightened demand for their crisis services for children and youth across Canada.
Background
According to preliminary data, there were 3,839 deaths by suicide reported in 2020. The 2020 data is
provisional and incomplete, and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the next year. This delay is
due to the length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes require to complete their
investigations. At this time, caution should be used in drawing any conclusions regarding suicide trends
during the pandemic. There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a combination of
factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal issues and loss,
childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
Three-Digit Numberfor Mental Health Crisis and Suicide Prevention: The Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it will adopt 9 8 8 for Canadians to call
or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide prevention support. This will be
launched across Canada on November 30, 2023. In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
is preparing for implementation of a three-digit number for suicide prevention from a service delivery
perspective. On August31, 2022, PHAC announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
(CAMH) was selected to lead coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering
Talk Suicide Canada.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in CAMH to implement and sustain a
fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada
currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via phone (1-833-456-4566) in English and French, 24
hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645) in English and French in the evenings to people in
Canada. This investment includes $2 million to develop resources for distress centres that are tailored to
meet the needs of diverse populations, including Inuit, First Nations and Métis communities.
When a person reaches out to Talk Suicide Canada, their call or text is routed to the closest available
distress centre that is a member of the network. If a responder is not available in that centre, the call is
automatically routed to the next available responder, with the back-up hub responding to interactions
when responders in a member distress centre are not available. This approach allows for support from a
129
local centre where responders have a better understandingof resources available locally. All calls to Talk
Suicide Canada are answered by a trained suicide prevention responder.
In 2021-22, almost 89,000 interactions took place, representing approximately 65% of incoming calls,
and 76% of incoming texts (i.e. over this period, approximately 35% of incoming calls and 24% of
incoming texts were unanswered). The service continues to struggle to meet demand. Incoming
interactions continue a steady increase: there were 12,081 incoming interactions in June 2022,
compared to 10,378 for June 2021. The voice answer rate for the service has declined over the past
year. This is a challenge for all crisis services through the pandemic. PHAC is working with crisis services
to help address these issues. There is potential for this volume to increase further as announcements in
Canada and the USA create awareness of the existing service and prompt additional people to reach out.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports: Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of
Canada announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC
administered an initial round of funding grants to 57 distress centres in 2021-22, and is currently
distributing grants to 14 other distress centres in 2022-23 (following a second solicitation reaching
organizations not included in the first round of funding). In addition, $2 million of this funding is
supporting CAMH as it curates resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of priority
populations.
PHAC is also administering time-limited funding of $150 million, provided in Budget 2021 to support the
mental health of those most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic. $1 million of this $150 million in
funding is being reprofiled in 2022-23 to allow PHAC to support additional projects and activities, and
ensure equitable reach to priority populations.
Motion 174–A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-
James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the Government to establish a National Suicide
Prevention Action Plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174,
though it is non-binding. The proposed actions in the plan are aligned with the Federal Framework for
Suicide Prevention. Activities in progress across the Government of Canada include the development of
resources and tools to reduce stigma and raise public awareness about suicide and its prevention,
research and knowledge translation (i.e. the synthesis, dissemination, and exchange of evidence-based
information to improve the health of Canadians), and the implementation of a Pan-Canadian suicide
service prevention service (Talk Suicide) and 3-digit number (988). An update on M-174 was included in
the December 2020 Progress Report on the Framework. Efforts to develop the Action Plan will be
included in the December 2022 Progress Report as part of legislated reporting on the Framework. PHAC
is starting to facilitate coordination and collaboration on elements of the Action Plan with relevant
federal departments, provinces and territories, agencies and key stakeholders, including those from First
Nations, Inuit and Metis organizations, through its convening role on this Action Plan.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events: PHAC is
currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and mental health.
The Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health showed that 2.4% of adults in Canada reported suicidal
ideation sincethe pandemic began in 2020, which is not significantly different from the 2.7% before the
pandemic in 2019; however, the percentage increased significantly in spring 2021 to 4.2%. Risk factors
of reporting suicide ideation during the pandemic included being under 65, Canadian-born, a frontline
worker, reporting pandemic-related income/job loss or loneliness/isolation, experiencing a highly
stressful/traumatic event during one's lifetime, and having lower household income and educational
attainment. Continued surveillance of suicide and risk/protective factors is needed to inform suicide
prevention efforts.
130
DISPARITIES IN RURAL HEALTH–CHILDREN MENTAL AND PHYSICAL ASPECTS
ISSUE
• Family health services form the foundation of high-performing health systems.Situated at the
nexus of individual and population health, family health providers and teams play a meaningful role in
children’s physical and mental health and social needs.
• Canadians living in rural communities, including children, have a harder time accessing high-
quality family health services and mental health care in a timely manner.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on access to family health services and the
mental health of children and youth. Concerns about the virus itself have been compounded by impacts
on school, routines, and social activities, isolation, and decreased access to services and supports,
particularly in rural areas.
KEY FACTS
• Remoteness is an important determinant of socioeconomic and health outcomes. In 2020-2021,
children living in rural and remote communities were more likely to visit the emergency department and
to be hospitalized for mental health concerns (1,780 and 482 per 100,000, respectively), than their
urban counterparts (1,135 and 401 per 100,000, respectively).
• However, there are fewer health human resources available in those communities. For example,
there are three psychiatrists per 100,000 population in rural areas, compared to 17 in urban areas, and
there are 37 nurses practicing in mental health and addiction per 100,000 population, compared to 76 in
urban areas (2017).
• While just under 1 in 5 Canadians live in rural communities (17.8%), only 8% of physicians and
3% of psychiatrists practising in Canada serve these areas.
• Indigenouscommunities tend to live in some of the most remote areas of Canada, and tend to
be younger than their non-Indigenous counterparts. Access to health care challenges in rural and
remote areas are expected to disproportionately affect Indigenous children.
o In 2016, 19.2% of Indigenous people reported that they did not have a primary family health
care services provider compared to 15.8% of the non-Indigenous population.
o In 2018, more than 25% of all First Nations children between the ages of 0-11years have been
diagnosed with one or more chronic health conditions.
• Recent budgets have included a focus on access to family health and mental health services in
rural communities.
o Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those
most affected by the pandemic, including youth
o Budget 2022 announced an increase to the maximum amount of Canada Student Loans by 50%,
as a means of addressing the shortage of doctors and nurses in rural communities.
• In March 2022,the Minister of Health outlined five pillars for health system transformation to
address systemic challenges and enhance access to high-quality, integrated care, which again speak to
the priorities of access to family health services and mental health services. These include:
o Better access to family doctors and teams;
o Reducing backlogs and growing our health workforce;
o Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
o Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
o Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
131
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that Canadians living in rural communities, including
children, have a harder time accessing timely high-quality family health services and mental health care
and that rural communities face unique challenges in delivering these services.
• We are committed to addressing these barriers and ensuring that children across Canada have
equitable access to care. To that end, we are making targeted investments to increase the number of
doctors and nurses in rural communities.
• These include increasing the maximum amount of Canada Student Loans for rurally-based
doctors and nurses by 50%, and investing $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of
those most affected by the pandemic, including youth.
IF PRESSEDON ADDITIONAL BARRIERS TO ACCESS CARE INRURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES…
• Budget 2022 commits to provide $26.2 million over four years and $7 million ongoing to
increase the maximum amount of forgivable Canada Student Loans for doctors and nurses who work in
underserved rural and remote communities.
• This will mean up to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses and up to $60,000 for doctors
working in underserved or remote communities.
• Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada has announced a $2.75 billion Universal
broadband fund to support high-speed internet projects in rural and remote communities throughout
Canada.
• Increased broadband access can have an incredibly positive impact in these parts of Canada,
particularly for Indigenous communities, where digital health technologies that rely on stable internet
connections, such as virtual care, can make a significant difference in people’s lives.
• Going forward, the Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces and territories,
providing targeted support as they bolster their own family health services and mental health systems,
particularly those for children in rural communities, following the disruption caused by the COVID-19
pandemic.
IF PRESSEDSPECIFICALLY ON MENTAL HEALTH…
• In response to the global public health challenge of COVID-19, in April 2020 the Government of
Canada launched an online mental health and substance use support portal, Wellness Together Canada.
• As a virtual tool, the portal provides access to all individuals living in Canada regardless of their
location.
• Recognizing that many Canadians do not have reliable internet access, confidential chat sessions
with social workers, psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text,including
for children aged 5 and older
• The Government of Canada is also providing funding to Integrated Youth Services Networks
(IYS-Net), a pan-Canadian initiative that builds health implementation tools to improve the integration
of youth mental health services.
BACKGROUND
Family health services form the backbone of high-performing health care systems. They serve a dual
function in the health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination
function to ensure continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians, including children,
continue to struggle to access family health services. In 2021, 14.5% of Canadians 12 years and over
lacked a regular health care provider. These disparities are felt more acutely by rural Canadians, with the
132
distribution of family physicians to rural communities decreasing over time (13.1% in 2016; 12.8% in
2020), while it increases slightly in urban environments (86.7% in 2016; 86.9% in 2020). Additionally,
Indigenous people living in both rural/remote and urban communities, on and off reserve, have been
shown to be less likely to be attached to a family health services provider. In Canada, Jordan’s Principle
commits that all First Nations children living in Canada should have accessthe services and supports
they need, including health services, when they need them.
Mental health issues can impact any population and children and youth are no exception. In fact, two
thirds or more of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that mental
health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually. The COVID-19 pandemic has
had significant impacts of this population. For example, the percentage of Canadians aged 12-17 who
reported their mental health as “very good” or “excellent” decreased from 74.1% in 2018, to 61.2% in
September 2021/February 2022. Moreover, rural populations are in a particularly vulnerable position
due to the lack of availability and accessibility of mental health services and supports, and family health
services within their communities.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance family health
services and mental health priorities, with a particular focus on rural communities.
Health Canadahas been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify ways in
which the family health service system could be strengthened to:
• Ensure every Canadian has timely access to a family doctor or family health team, and
• Leveragevirtual care to support access to and delivery of high-quality health care, including
within the context of family health services.
Timely access to family health services for all Canadians, including children, is a Government of Canada
priority:
• The2021 Liberal platform promised $3.2B to provinces and territories (PTs) for hiring 7,500 new
family doctors and nurse practitioners, and $400M for virtual care.
The fall 2021 Mandate Letter to the Minister of Health included directives to:
• Support provinces and territories to hire new family doctors, nurses and nurse practitioners;
• Expand virtual care, helping to cover digital infrastructure and other system improvements so
that Canadians can access virtual medical consultations or remote monitoring;
• Expand the number of family doctors and family health services teams in rural communities and
work to give rural communities greater access to a full suite of health and social service professionals;
and
• Invest in the study of the long-term health impacts of COVID-19, including the effects of long
COVID on different groups, including children.
Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those most
affected by the pandemic, including youth. Funded projects are expected to begin in spring 2022 and to
reach diverse populations across Canada. Projects will support mental health promotion and mental
133
illness prevention interventions, in addition to initiatives that build the capacity of service providers to
deliver programming in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
Budget 2022 committed to strengthening the health care system and ensuring it delivers the care that
Canadians deserve by:
• Increasing the number of doctors and nurses; and,
• Building on the success of increased virtual care;
In March 2022, Minister Duclos outlined five pillars for health to address systemic challenges to
enhancing access to high-quality, integrated care. These include:
• Better access to family doctors and teams;
• Reducing backlogs and growing our health workforce;
• Using modern health data and digital health effectively;
• Improving mental health and substance use services; and,
• Helping Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
134
SUPPORT FOR VIRTUAL AND RURAL MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
ISSUE
• Rural Canadians experience additional barriers in terms of access to care, particularly within the
context of the Covid-19 pandemic.
• Boosting access to family physicians and the availability of virtual care options are key to
addressing these disparities.
KEY FACTS
• In 2021, 17.8% of the population of Canada lives in rural areas. In the year prior (2020), only
88.3% of individuals living in rural areas had access to internet at home, compared to95.3% of those
living in urban areas.
- In 2022, the Government of Canada announced $2.75 billion for the Universal Broadband Fund,
which aims to better support high-speed Internet projects in rural, remote, and Indigenous communities
and help address access disparities.
• Individuals living in rural areas reported higher positive self-rated mental health (63.1%)
compared to their urban counterparts (58.3%), though reported rates of mood and/or anxiety disorders,
perceived need for mental health care, and unmet needs were similar across these populations.
• In very remote areas, suicide and self-inflicted injuries were the second major cause of
preventable deaths, and the rate was more than three times higher in very remote areas than in easily
accessible areas.
• Access to mental health services in Canada is not equitably dispersed. In 2017, there were only 3
psychiatrists per 100,000 population in rural areas, compared to 17 in urban areas. In rural areas, there
were 37nurses practicing in mental health and addiction per 100,000 population, compared to 76 in
urban areas.
• More recently, (2021-22), rural survey respondents were less likely to report accessing mental
health support (17% of rural compared to 23% of urbanrespondents).
- Rural individuals were most likely to receive mental health care from a family doctor (43.9%),
whereas urban individuals were more likely to go online for mental health support (35.3%). As well,
20.2% of rural individuals reported receiving online support, compared to 24.1% of urban individuals.
- Reasons for not accessing mental health care amongst rural respondents included preference
for self-management (41%), service affordability (29%), barriers in access to care (24.2%), and lack of
trust in the health system and social services (17.5%).
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health services.
• With COVID-19 creating stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians, our Government is
investing in virtual mental health care available to all Canadians through the Wellness Together Canada
portal and companion smartphone app Pocketwell, which has more than 30,000 downloads.
• Moving forward, the federal government has committed to developing a permanent, ongoing
Canada Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health
services.
IF PRESSED ONMINISTERIAL MANDATE COMMITMENTS
• The government committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a full and equal part
of our universal health care system. As an integral part of this commitment, the government will be
exploring pathways to increase the accessibility of mental health services in rural areas.
135
• In an effort to expand access to mental health services for Canadians, particularly for individuals
who experience marginalization and/or face barriers to accessing care, our government is committed to
establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR VIRTUAL CARE
• Over the last two years, our Government has worked with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by over $240M in funding.
• Expanding virtual care in Canada provides Canadians with new ways to access the primary care
services on which they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health services.
• As noted in Budget 2022, in future conversations with provinces and territories, the federal
government will remain focused on delivering better health care outcomes, including increased access
to primary care.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO CARE IN RURAL AND REMOTE SETTINGS
• Canadians living in rural communities havea harder time accessing timely high-quality primary
and mental health care, and rural communities face unique challenges in delivering these services.
• We are committed to addressing barriers and ensuring equitable access to care. We are making
investments to increase the number of doctors and nurses in rural communities.
• These include increasing the Canada Student Loan maximums for rural-based doctors and
nurses, and investing $100M over three years to promote the mental health of those most affected by
the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR INDIVIDUALSIN RURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES
• Our government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health and substanceuse services.
• Wellness Together Canada (WTC) provides rural and remote communities with free mental
health and substance use resources available 24/7, in both official languages. In addition, for Canadians
who do not have reliable internet access, many WTC supports can be accessed by phone and text.
• We will explore pathways to increase the accessibility of mental health services in rural areas.
IF PRESSED ON WTC/POCKETWELL
• In April 2020, the Government of Canada launched Wellness Together Canada (WTC), an online
mental health and substance use support portal, which provides Canadians with a broad range of free
psycho-social supports. In January 2022, the Government launched PocketWell, a free companion app
that links seamlessly to WTC.
• WTC and Pocketwell are tailored to meet the needs of diverse populations, providing access to
free, credible information and supports, including confidential counselling sessions, available 24/7 to all
individuals living in Canada regardless of their location.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICES
• On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada
(SCC) to develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil
commitments made in Budget 2021.
• Standards help to provide a framework for mental health and substance use service delivery
across Canada, no matter where a person lives.
• They are tools for helping to ensure that mental health andsubstance use services, including
those who provide such services, meet a consistent level of care and are sensitive to a wide range of
needs.
136
BACKGROUND
Primary care is the backbone of high-performing health care systems. It serves a dual function in the
health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination function to ensure
continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians, including children, continue to struggle to
access primary care. In 2021, 14.5% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care
provider. These disparities are felt more acutely by rural Canadians, with the distribution of family
physicians to rural communities decreasing over time (13.1% in 2016; 12.8% in 2020), while it increases
slightly in urban environments (86.7% in 2016; 86.9% in 2020).
Mental health issues can impact any population and children and youth are no exception. In fact, two
thirds or more of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that mental
health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually. The COVID-19 pandemic has
had significant impacts of this population. For example, the percentage of Canadians aged 12-17 who
reported their mental health as “very good” or“excellent” decreased from 74.1% in 2018, to 61.2% in
September 2021/February 2022. Moreover, rural populations are in a particularly vulnerable position
due to the lack of availability and accessibility of mental health services and supports, and primary care
within their communities.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance primary care and
mental health priorities, with a particular focus on rural communities.
Health Canada has been collaborating with provinces,territories and other partners to identify ways in
which the primary care system could be strengthened to:
• Ensure every Canadian has timely access to a family doctor or family health team, and
• Leverage virtual care to support access to and delivery ofhigh-quality health care, including
within the context of primary care.
2021 Mandate Commitments
The Government of Canada is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to
promote access to high-quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians with a range of
needs.
In support of this aim, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated with:
• Ensuring mental health care is treated as a full and equal part of the universal health care
system;
• Understanding and addressing health inequities, including for Indigenous people, Black
Canadians and vulnerable Canadians;
• Leading a whole-of-society approach to address problematic substance use in Canada; and
• Working in collaboration with provinces/territories
137
• With the support of the Minister of Rural Economic Development, explore pathways to increase
the accessibility of mental health services in rural areas.
To realize these objectives, the Minister will deliver on a comprehensive set of new andongoing
commitments, including establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help
expand the delivery of high quality, accessible mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
Budget 2022 reaffirmed the intention ofengaging provinces and territories on the development of a
CMHT, which would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canadais investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. $150M of this funding is being provided to provinces and territories through bilateral
agreements to enhance virtual services. Health Canada has also been collaborating with provinces,
territories and other partners to identify ways in which virtual care can be leveraged to support access
to and delivery of high-quality care,including within the context of primary care.
138
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 tosupport the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicatedtext lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
As of November 7, 2022, almost 3 million individuals have accessed the WTC portal and the PocketWell
app has been downloaded a total of 30,974 times.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use Services
Budget 2021 provided $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, the Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to help develop national
mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders.
On March 14, 2022, Health Canada announced a partnership with Standards Council of Canada (SCC) to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services, to help fulfil commitments
made in Budget 2021. Standards will be evidence-based and developed through consensus-based
processes that engage experts, health organizations, people with lived and living experience, and other
key stakeholders. Standards are tools for supporting health providers in the delivery of high-quality and
equitable mental health and substance use services, and will help to ensure a consistent level of care is
provided. They will also help to formalize what Canadians can expect in terms of the quality of services,
while providing an evidence-based framework for service delivery in priority areas.
SCC is coordinating the development of an integrated suite of national standards for mental health and
substance use services in priority areas that align with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities (CSOP), including Digital Mental Health and Substance Use Apps. The Government has
139
emphasized the importance of engagement with diverse stakeholders and promotion of health equity
principles, which have been incorporated into the development process.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million overthree years to support projects that promote mental health and prevent
mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, including health
care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other
racialized Canadians.
• $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in
frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Suicide Prevention
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) recently announced that it
will adopt 9-8-8 for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate mental health crisis and suicide
prevention support. This will be launched across Canada on November 30, 2023.
In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is preparing for implementation of a three-digit
number for suicide prevention from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC
announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead coordination
of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. As a first step, CAMH
will develop collaborations with key organizations to start building capacity, and engage with
stakeholders to inform the scope and requirements of a timely, quality service. In addition, PHAC is
engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous partners,
public safety officials, People with Lived Experience, on the scope and service delivery elements,
including working to understand anticipated demand for 9-8-8. Finally, PHAC is learning from
international experience, including the United States, which recently introduced 988 in July 2022.
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. Talk Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via the phone
(1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645), in
English and French, in the evenings, to people in Canada. 2023, this service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of
their choice (voice, text or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focuses on raising public
awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and
evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next
report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously
supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan
that aligns with the Framework.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
140
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors topromote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
141
SAFER SUPPLY
ISSUE
• The overdose crisis continues to have devastating impacts on individuals, families, and
communities.
• Drug overdose deaths are being driven by a highly unpredictable and toxic illegal drug supply
that is contaminated with a range of substances,including fentanyl and benzodiazepines.
• Many stakeholders are calling for greater access to pharmaceutical-grade drugs (often called
“safer supply”) as an alternative to the illegal drug supply, with the goal of helping to reduce overdoses
and save lives.
KEY FACTS
• According to the latest national data, a total of 1,883 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred
so far in 2022 (January–March).
• Safer supply involves the use of prescribed, regulated pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to thehighly toxic and unpredictable illegal drug supply.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is taking a number of actions to address the overdose crisis, including
supporting safer supply pilot projects to build evidence around this promising practice.
• Safer supply involves the use of prescribed, regulated pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to the highly toxic and unpredictable illegal drug supply.
• Safer supply aims to prevent overdoses and save lives by providing prescribed, regulated drugs,
as part of a range of prevention, treatment and harm reduction services.
• We are working with partners and stakeholders, to help expand safer supply to help save lives.
IF PRESSEDON WHY SUPPORT SAFER SUPPLY …
• People with lived and living experience with drug use and community organizations have
explained the importance of access to safer supply as one additional tool to help save lives.
• Safer supply services involve the use of prescribed, regulated pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to the toxic and unpredictable illegal drug supply. These services are overseen by an
authorized health professional.
• These services can help improve health outcomes for people who use drugs, reduce reliance on
the illegal drug supply, and connectthem to other health and social services, including treatment for
those who are ready.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA’S SUPPORT FOR SAFER SUPPLY…
• Enhancing access to safer supply is one part of the Government of Canada’s public health
responseto the overdose crisis among a wide continuum of care options that includes prevention,
treatment and harm reduction.
• The Government has made significant investments in safer supply pilot projects including
supporting assessments, evaluation and knowledge transfer projects to help build the evidence and
share knowledge around effective models.
• Changes have been made to federal drug control regulations to help improve access to
medications used in the treatment of substance use disorder and by safer supply services.
142
IF PRESSED ON THE REQUEST FOR EXEMPTION FROM DRUG USER LIBERATION FRONT (DULF) ET
VANCOUVER AREANETWORK OF DRUG USERS (VANDU)…
• On August 31, 2021, Health Canada received a request from DULF in coordination with VANDU
for a subsection 56(1) exemption to operate a Safe Supply Fulfillment Centre and Cocaine, Heroin and
Methamphetamine Compassion Clubs. This model would involve the sale of tested illegal drugs
purchased from illegal vendors on the dark web.
• Supplying drugs from illegal vendors is not a viable option for advancing the objectives of the
CDSA, namely the protection of public health and the maintenance of public safety. For this reason,
Health Canada issued a letter of refusal on July 29 2022.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL PROCUREMENT OF DRUGS USED IN SAFER SUPPLY PROGRAMS …
• The provision of health care services is, with a few exceptions, a provincial and territorial
responsibility.
• There are a number of prescription drugs approved by Health Canada that provinces, territories,
and authorized health practitioners can access for substance use disorder treatment and safer supply
programs.
• Provinces, territories, and individual medical prescribers are best placed to determine the
demand for and use of these medications.
IF PRESSEDON EVIDENCE FOR SAFER SUPPLY …
• Safer supply builds on the evidence from medication-assisted approaches to the treatment of
substance use disorder.
• Safer supply services are being assessed and evaluated by a number of experts across Canada.
• Our Government is supporting third-party assessment of safer supply projects, and is also
funding a long-term evaluation.
• Promising early outcomes include reductions in overdose rates and in the use of illegal drugs
and criminal activity.
• We will continue tomonitor the public health and public safety outcomes of safer supply, so
that our response to the overdose crisis is evidence-based and focussed on saving lives.
BACKGROUND
The overdose crisis continues to have devastating impacts onindividuals, families, and communities.
According to the latest national data, there was a total of 30,843 apparent opioid toxicity deaths
between January 2016 and March 2022. A total of 1,883 apparent opioid toxicity deaths have occurred
so far in 2022 (January–March). This is approximately 21 deaths per day. The COVID-19 pandemic has
also contributed to the worsening overdose crisis, with some communities reporting record high
numbers of overdose deaths, hospitalizations, and emergency medical service calls.
The illegal drug supply contains strong opioids, such as fentanyl, and other toxic substances such as
benzodiazepines, which are causing high rates of overdoses and deaths. Many stakeholders are calling
for greater access to pharmaceutical-grade medications as an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply
to help save lives–a practice often referred to as safer supply.
Current safer supply programs in Canada provide prescriber-led access to medications for people at risk
of overdose, primarily as a harm reduction measure, as part of a continuum of care that may include
other treatment and harm reduction services. Currently, these services must operate within the
143
legislative and regulatory framework for controlled substances in Canada (i.e., the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act (CDSA) and Food and Drugs Act).
At this time, a number of safer supply programs exist in Canada, mainly in British Columbia (BC) and
Ontario. Existing programs range from more medicalized models (e.g., requiring multiple daily site visits
to a clinic) to lower-barrier models (e.g., “MySafe” model in which prescribed medications are dispensed
directly to program clients through a secure machine).
Health Canada has funded 27 safer supply pilot projects through the Substance Use and Addictions
Program (SUAP). This includes supporting a range of service delivery projects in British Columbia,
Ontario, Quebec and New Brunswick, research/knowledge transfer and exchange projects, and a
National Safer Supply Community of Practice to help share knowledge amongst stakeholders. There are
also a number of safer supply services operating without SUAP funding, mostly in BC.
Health Canada is supporting two assessment and evaluation projects related to federally-funded safer
supply projects. This includes an independently-conducted preliminary assessment of ten safer supply
projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New Brunswick. Health Canada is also supporting an arms-
length evaluation of eleven safer supply pilot projects funded through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR).
Health Canada has taken a number of actions to reduce regulatory barriers to accessing medications
used in both safer supply programs and medication-assisted drug treatment programs. In 2019,
diacetylmorphine was added to the List of Drugs for an Urgent Public Health Need, and Health Canada
approved a new indication for injectable hydromorphone as a treatment option for adults with severe
opioid use disorder. In 2020, Health Canada issued a temporary exemption to the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to facilitate prescribing with flexible treatment options (e.g. allowing prescribers to use
verbal prescriptions for narcotics and allowing pharmacists to extend and renew prescriptions). In 2022,
HealthCanada approved diacetylmorphine as a new treatment option for adult patients with severe
opioid use disorder.
144
SECTION 56(1) REQUESTS TO ALLOW FOR PERSONAL POSSESSION
ISSUE
• In response to the ongoing overdose crisis, the Government of Canada is receiving increasing
interest from stakeholders and multiple jurisdictions across Canada to use section 56 of the Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act as the fastest mechanism to allow for the possession of small amounts of
controlled substances for personal use.
• Three jurisdictions–the Province of British Columbia, the City of Vancouver, and Toronto Public
Health–have formally requested exemptions from federal drug laws to allow for the personal
possession of small amounts of controlled substances in those jurisdictions.
• On May 31, 2022, Minister Bennett announced that she granted British Columbia’s request for
an exemption under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). This
exemption means that people aged 18 and older in B.C. will not be subject to criminal charges under s.
4(1) of the CDSA for possessing small amounts of certain illegal drugs for personal use.
KEY FACTS
• On May 31, 2022, the Government announced the granting of BC’s exemption request. This
time-limited exemption is the first of its kind in Canada. It will apply to adults (18 and older) in the
province.
• The City of Vancouver submitted a request on May 28, 2021. On June 20, 2022 Vancouver asked
that consideration of their request be suspended. As a result, Health Canada has paused its review of
this request.
• On January 4, 2022, Toronto Public Health submitted a preliminary request for an exemption to
Health Canada. Their request is currently under review.
KEY MESSAGES
• The opioid and toxic drug supply crisis is heartbreaking and has taken a tragic toll on the
families, loved ones and communities of all those we have lost to opioid overdoses across Canada.
• We recognize that substance use is a health issue and are working to divert people who use
drugs away from the criminal justice system and towards supportive and trusted relationships in health
and social services.
• Subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) gives the Minister of
Mental Health and Addictions and the Associate Minister of Health discretionary authority to grant an
exemption from the CDSA or its regulation to allow activities involving controlled substances, if the
Minister is of the opinion that it is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or if otherwise in the
public interest.
IF PRESSED ON THE RATIONALE FOR THE DECISION …
• British Columbia requested an exemption related to the personal possession of small amounts
of certain illegal drugs as one part of the province’s comprehensive approach to address the overdose
crisis.
• Canada is treating substance use as a health issue, not as a criminal one. Stigma related to
substance use can lead people to hide their drug use, use in riskier ways, and prevent them from
accessing services and supports.
• Throughout the exemption period, the federal government will be monitoring and evaluating
the implementation of BC’s exemption very closely to help ensure it is contributing to the
comprehensive approach to reduce stigma and harms related to substance use and increase access to
health and social services for people who use drugs.
145
IF PRESSED ON THRESHOLDS …
• In assessing this exemption request, the dual objectives of the CDSA-to protect public health
and maintain public safety–needed to be considered.
• This is a novel approach in Canada and data and evidence on the impact of effective threshold
amounts is limited, especially in the context of the increasingly toxic drug supply in Canada and
internationally.
• In making the decision to grant an exemption in BC with a 2.5 grams cumulative threshold of the
listeddrugs, several sources of data were carefully considered, including purchasing and use patterns,
public health data, and law enforcement data including drug seizures.
• As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, its implementation will be rigorously monitored and
evaluated to measure progress toward objectives and intended outcomes, and to identify unintended
consequences and other potential risks.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONCERNS ABOUT THE THRESHOLD AND FENTANYL …
• This exemption is one tool within a comprehensive response to the public health crisis that must
also include evidence-based prevention efforts, a focus on disrupting drug trafficking, and improved
access to treatment and harm reduction services including pharmaceutical-grade alternatives (safer
supply) for those at risk of overdose.
• Rigorous monitoring and evaluation of this exemption will be critical, particularly in the face of
an increasingly toxic drug supply. The composition and purity of the drug supply varies, including the
presence of strong opioids such as fentanyl. Further, the amount of a drug a person may possess does
not necessarily equate to the amount they will use at one time.
• Should concerns arise, there are various tools available to address them, up to and including
revocation of the exemption.
• Anyone who uses illegal drugs should continue to engage in harm reduction measures to reduce
the risk of overdose and death.
IF PRESSED ON NEW REQUESTS FOR EXEMPTIONS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS …
• Health Canada will carefully andthoroughly review any request for an exemption to allow for
the personal possession of controlled substances on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential
benefits and risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
• The Department will continueto work with provincial and municipal officials on options to
address the overdose crisis that respond to local and regional needs and help people who use
substances get the support they need.
• While it is not Health Canada’s practice to comment on requests that are currently under
review, I can confirm that Health Canada has received a request from Toronto Public Health for a
subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA so that individuals would not be subject to criminal
penalties for the personal possession of drugs. Health Canada is engaged in an iterative review of
Toronto’s request.
BACKGROUND
The overdose crisis is one of the most significant public health crises in Canada in decades. More than
29,052 people in Canada died fromopioid-related overdoses between January 2016 and December
2021. This situation has led to increased calls from a range of stakeholders, including chiefs of police,
medical officers of health, health organizations, and municipalities, for a comprehensive approach that
includes:
146
• Decriminalizing the personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances;
• Increasing access to pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply;
• Investing in a robust system of care for people with substance use disorders; and,
• Monitoring and evaluating to inform an evidence base and identify best practices.
In response to the current context, and a number of calls to take this health-focused approach to
substance use further, the Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on Substance Use in
2021. The Task Force had a mandate to provide independent, expert advice and recommendations on:
• The federal government's drug policy; and,
• Potential alternatives to criminal penalties for the simple possession of controlled substances.
In May 2021, the Task Force published its report on alternatives to criminal penalties, unanimously
recommending an end to criminal penalties for the personal possession of controlled substances. Most
members alsorecommended an end to coercive measures such as drug treatment courts.
The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) is one of Canada's federal drug control laws. It provides
the legislative framework for the control of drugs that can result in harm when misused or diverted to
an illegal market. Under the Act, activities with controlled substances are generally prohibited, unless
specifically authorized through the Act’s regulations or an exemption granted under the Act. Section 4(1)
of the CDSA makes ita criminal offence to possess most controlled substances.
Given the urgency of the crisis, some stakeholders are seeking an exemption from the CDSA as the
fastest mechanism to remove criminal penalties for the personal possession of small amounts of
controlled substances and demonstrate action to reduce stigma and increase the likelihood that
individuals will seek help without fear of a criminal penalty.
Subsection 56(1) of the CDSA provides the Minister with the authority to exempt persons or substances
from the application of any provision of the CDSA or its regulations, if, in the opinion of the Minister, the
exemption is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest. Each
exemption request received is consideredon a case-by-case basis, based on the dual public health and
public safety objectives of the CDSA.
Factors considered in assessing requests include:
• Scope of the exemption, including definition of personal possession and possession by minors
• Consultations with key populations, including indigenous communities, people who use drugs,
partners, law enforcement and stakeholders
• Measures to redirect people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system and towards
health and social services
• Readiness and capacity of health and social systems
• Public education and communications plan
• Law enforcement readiness, including the development of training and guidelines
• Operational considerations, such as how key risks will be mitigated
• Monitoring and evaluation plan, including a focus on the impact on populations at increased
risks of substance use harms
147
On May 31, 2022, the Federal Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
granted the province of BC’s request for a subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA. To date, Health
Canada is in receipt of two other similar exemption requests from the City of Vancouver and Toronto
Public Health.
Background on British Columbia’s (BC) Exemption Request
On February 3, 2021, Minister Malcolmson sent a letter to the Minister of Health asking whether the
Minister would consider a section 56 exemption for BC to decriminalize the possession of small amounts
of controlled substances for personal use. Marking five years since the declaration of the overdose
public health crisis, BC publicly announced their intent to submit an official request for a federal
exemption to decriminalize personal possession, on April 14, 2021. Consultations were planned with
Indigenous partners, peers,law enforcement, municipalities, and public health officials. On November 1,
2021, BC submitted an official subsection 56(1) exemption request to Health Canada. An exemption was
granted on May 31, 2022.
Background on the City of Vancouver’s Exemption Request
On December 8, 2020, Kennedy Stewart, Mayor of the City of Vancouver, wrote to the Federal Minister
of Health to request an exemption from federal drug control laws to decriminalize personal possession
of small amounts of controlled substances in Vancouver. On January 27, 2021, Mayor Stewart
announced that the city had begun “formal negotiations” with Health Canada around a possible
exemption. On March 1, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted a preliminary request to Health Canada
outlining a “Vancouver Model” to substance use that embraces a health-focused approach to save lives.
On April 12, 2021, the City of Vancouver provided its second request to Health Canada with an outline
proposing threshold limits on what would constitute personal possession. The submission details
specific amounts for personal possession amounts of cocaine, opioids, crack cocaine, amphetamines,
and other controlled substances. On May 28, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted its final request to
Health Canada. On June 20, 2022, Vancouver asked that consideration of their request be suspended for
the time being. As a result, Health Canada has paused its review of this request.
Background on Toronto Public Health’s Exemption Request
In August 2021, Toronto Public Health (TPH)launched an online consultation on Toronto’s Submission to
Health Canada for an Exemption from the CDSA. The preamble states that “Toronto Public Health has
initiated a process to request an exemption from the CDSA for the possession of all drugs for personal
use (also referred to as decriminalization).” On December 6, 2021, the Toronto Board of Health
reiterated its call to request the Federal Minister of Health to use their authority under the CDSA to
develop a national framework to permit the possessionof certain amounts of controlled substances for
personal use; and support the immediate scale up of prevention, harm reduction and treatment
services. On January 4, 2022, TPH submitted its preliminary request for a subsection 56(1) exemption
under the CDSA related to the personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances within the
city’s boundaries. This request remains under review.
148
BC’S OPIOID DAMAGES AND HEALTH CARE COSTS RECOVERY ACT
ISSUE
• Modifications proposées à la Loi sur le recouvrement des coûts des soins de santé et la
réparation des dommages liés aux opioïdes de la Colombie-Britannique afin d'ajouter le Canada à la
législation visant à recouvrer les coûts des soins de santé auprès de l'industrie pharmaceutique.
KEY FACTS
• B.C. filed a class action lawsuit in August 2018 related to the alleged inappropriate marketing
and dispensing of opioids by pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors to recover their health care
costs.
• On October 17, 2022, B.C. announcedproposed amendments to its Opioid Damages and Health
Care Costs Recovery Act. One of the proposed amendments is to add Canada to that legislation.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada is pleased with B.C.’s proposed amendment to add Canada to the Opioid Damages and
Health Care Costs Recovery Act.
• If Canada is added to B.C.’s legislation, Canada would, in addition to B.C., have a statutory basis
for claiming damages from the pharmaceutical industry with respect to the opioid crisis.
• This proposed amendment is anexample of the significant cooperation that exists between
Provinces and Territories and the Government of Canada as they work together to address the overdose
crisis.
BACKGROUND
The current overdose crisis in Canada continues to be one of the most serious public health crises in
recent history.
In collaboration with all levels of government, partners, stakeholders, people with lived and living
experience with substance use, and organizations in communities across the country, the Government
of Canadais addressing substance use and addiction.
Provinces and territories, which primarily deliver healthcare in Canada, are best placed to bring civil
action against the pharmaceutical industry due to the costs they have incurred.
B.C. filed a class action lawsuit in August 2018 related to the alleged inappropriate marketing and
dispensing of opioids by pharmaceutical manufacturers and distributors to recover their health care
costs.
Provincial and territorial governments, along with the Government of Canada, are part of B.C.’s
proposed class action against opioid companies that allegedly acted inappropriately in the marketing
and distribution of opioids.
In October 2018, B.C. passed the Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act to support its
legal action. This legislation creates a statutory cause of action and right for B.C. to recover from opioid
manufacturers and distributors opioid related health care costs incurred by the B.C. government.
149
On October 17, 2022, B.C. announced proposed amendments to its Opioid Damages and Health Care
Costs Recovery Act. One of the proposed amendments is to add Canada to that legislation.
Since 2018, the Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with all provincial and territorial
governments as part of B.C.’s litigation against opioid manufacturers, distributors and marketing
agencies.
The Government of Canada is providing technical assistance and support to the B.C. litigation.
The proposed amendment to add Canada to this legislation is one example of the significant
cooperation that exists in B.C.’s litigation between all Canadian governments and the Government of
Canada, as they work together to address the overdose crisis.
The Purdue settlement was another example of the collaboration amongst Governments as we work
together to address this crisis.
150
CANNABIS
ISSUE
• Since its coming into force on October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act has created a strict legal
framework for controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada.
• The legislation is designed to keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and profits out of the
pockets of organized crime by fostering a robust legal and regulated industry.
KEY FACTS
• The legal cannabis market continues to displace the illicit market. According to Statistics Canada
data, the legal share of the value of cannabis consumed has steadily increased to 69% in the second
quarter of 2022, compared to just 9% prior to legalization.
KEY MESSAGES
• Since 2018, the Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping
cannabis out of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and regulated
supply, while reducing the illicit market.
• Since legalization, youth consumption patterns have not changed significantly, and more and
more Canadians who consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
• Health Canada has launched an independent review of the legislation to examine the progress
made towards achieving the Act's objectives, and identify priority areas for improvement. An Expert
Panel will lead this credible and inclusive review.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT …
• The Act requires a legislative review to start three years after coming into force, and a report to
be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 18 months after the review begins.
• On September 22 Minister Bennet and I launched an independent legislativereview, which will
assess the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives.
• The review will focus particularly on the health and cannabis consumption habits of young
persons, the impact of cannabis on Indigenous persons and communities, and the impact of the
cultivation of cannabis plants in a housing context.
IF PRESSED ON INCLUDING THE MEDICALACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW …
• The Government actively monitors the medical access program and has committed to evaluate
the framework within 5 years of the coming into force of the Cannabis Act.
• There has been significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for medical purposes
framework and this legislative review presents an opportunity to hear the views and perspectives of
these stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE MEDICAL ACCESSFRAMEWORK …
• Our Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis for medical purposes
for individuals who have the support of their health care practitioner.
• Health Canada iscommitted to actively monitoring and evaluating patients’ reasonable access
to cannabis for medical purposes.
• Health Canada is working to reduce the potential for abuse of the medical access framework
together with the provincial and territorial regulators of health care professionals, law enforcement and
municipalities.
151
IF PRESSED ON LIMITED NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED HEALTHPRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIS …
• Prescription drugs containing cannabis, such as Sativex, remain subject to appropriate
requirements of the Cannabis Act and the Food and Drugs Act, and require oversight by a health care
practitioner to ensure appropriate use.
• In July 2022, a Science Advisory Committee provided a final report to the government that
outlined their independent scientific advice on safety, efficacy and quality standards for potential health
products containing cannabidiol (CBD).
• The Committee’s report is one of many sources of input that will inform a potential pathway for
health products containing cannabis that would not require physician oversight.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITH A HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION …
• Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse.
• Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
health or public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
• As of September 30, 2022, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 1,400 registrations,
including over 700 for reasons of public health and public safety.
• The Department continues to work with partners to inform them of the actions being taken and
to achieve joint goals of reducing misuse of the program.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES GRANTED TO INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS …
• Our Government remains committed to ensuring patients have access to cannabis for medical
purposes, while providing safeguards to reduce the risk of abuse of the system.
• Health Canada actively supports law enforcement by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a
day and seven days a week to assist with active investigations.
• When law enforcement has been taken against individuals, Health Canada reviews the
information todetermine if compliance and enforcement actions are warranted, and registrations for
cannabis production could be revoked.
IFPRESSED ON CANNABIS RESEARCH …
• Our Government understands that ongoing research is fundamental to understand the health
and safety effects of cannabis use. That is why we have made investments to support research on
cannabis use and increase knowledge of the harms associated with cannabis and how to reduce and/or
mitigate them.
• Since 2017, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research has also invested almost $30M in
research on cannabis, including through its Integrated Cannabis Research Strategy.
• The Government also made investments of $20 million over five years for the Canadian Centre
on Substance Use and Addiction and MentalHealth Commission of Canada to support research and
assess the impacts of cannabis use on mental health of Canadians.
• To further support cannabis research, Health Canada is also proposing to create a new
framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate non-therapeutic research on cannabis.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE INPEDIATRIC CANNABIS POISONINGS …
• Health Canada continues to have concerns about the potential harms to children who
accidentally consume cannabis.
152
• This is why, in December 2022, thedepartment issued a public advisory to help raise awareness
of this ongoing issue. The advisory, which was updated in April 2022, provided guidance on how to
properly store cannabis and tips for recognising legally sourced cannabis.
• Health Canadacontinues to educate Canadians through public education campaigns, to
encourage adults to store all cannabis securely and out of reach of children and youth. The department
also continuously monitors public awareness and reports of adverse reactions to cannabis and cannabis
products.
• The department will continue to monitor this issue closely and will continue to educate the
public and Canadian parents about ways to help avoid pediatric cannabis poisonings.
BACKGROUND
Cannabis
On October 17, 2018, theCannabis Act came into force, legalizing, strictly regulating and restricting
access to cannabis in Canada. The Act implements a new comprehensive public health approach that
will be more effective in protecting youth and keeping profits out of the pockets of criminals and
organized crime.
The Cannabis Act creates a legal and regulatory framework for controlling the production, distribution,
sale and possession of cannabis in Canada. This framework was informed by the recommendations of
the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation.
The Act restricts youth access to cannabis; prohibits promotions that are designed to encourage youth
to use cannabis; imposes serious criminal penalties on people who break the law, especially those who
import or export cannabis illegally, or provide cannabis to youth; establishes strict product safety and
quality requirements; reduces the burden on the criminal justice system; provides for the legal
production of cannabis; allows adults to possess and access regulated, quality-controlled, legal cannabis;
and, enhances public awareness of the health risks associated with cannabis.
Implementation is a shared responsibility between the federal, provincial and territorial governments.
Subject to provincial or territorialrestrictions, adults may legally: purchase limited amounts of fresh
cannabis, dried cannabis, cannabis oil, cannabis seeds, or cannabis plants from retailers authorized by
the provinces and territories; possess up to 30 grams of dried legal cannabis or equivalent in non-dried
form in public; consume cannabis in locations authorized by local jurisdictions; grow up to four cannabis
plants per household (not per person) for personal use, from licensed seeds or seedlings from licensed
suppliers; share up to 30grams of dried cannabis or equivalent with other adults; and, make legal
cannabis-containing products at home, such as food and drinks, provided that dangerous organic
solvents are not used in making them.
Possession, production, distribution and sale outside the legal system remains illegal and subject to
criminal penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the offence, ranging from ticketing up to a
maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment.
To further protect youth, the Cannabis Act prohibits anyone from selling or providing cannabis to any
person under the age of 18 years. The Cannabis Act creates two new criminal offences, with maximum
153
penalties of 14 years in jail for: giving or selling cannabis to youth; and, using a youth to commit a
cannabis-related offence.
To prevent youth from using cannabis, the Cannabis Act also prohibits: products, promotions, packaging
and labelling that are appealing to youth; the sale of cannabis through self-service displays or vending
machines; promotion of cannabis,except in narrow circumstances where the promotion could not be
seen by a young person; and, false, misleading or deceptive advertising, sponsorships, testimonials and
endorsements or other forms of promotion that could entice young people to use cannabis.
Driving while impaired by cannabis, or any other drug, is illegal. Law enforcement officers are trained to
detect and deter drug-impaired drivers using Standardized Field Sobriety Testing and Drug Recognition
Experts.
Border rules have not changed. Taking cannabis, or any product containing cannabis, across Canada’s
international borders, whether you are leaving or entering Canada, remains illegal and can result in
serious criminal penalties both at home and abroad. Cannabis is illegal in most countries. Previous use of
cannabis, or any substance prohibited by local law, could result in a traveller being denied entry to his or
her destination country.
Legislative Review
The Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its administration three
years following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and that a report of the
review’s findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of the start of the
review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of the
Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young
persons in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of
cannabis plants in a dwelling-house.
On September 22, 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
launched the legislative review of the Act. An Expert Panel, chaired by Morris Rosenberg, will lead the
review, and a report including findings or recommendations resulting from the review will be tabled in
both Houses of Parliament within 18 months.
On September 22, 2022,an online engagement process to gather perspectives from the public,
stakeholders and Indigenous groups on the cannabis framework was launched. The results will inform
the Panel’s work.
The Government of Canada has made progress toward the implementation of the cannabis framework
by putting in place measures aimed at protecting children and youth from accessing cannabis;
establishing a strictly regulated, legal supply chain for cannabis, and by making significant investments in
public education, awareness, research, monitoring and surveillance efforts.
The review provides an initial and early opportunity to assess progress towards achieving the objectives
of the Act, and to help ensure that the legislation is meeting the needs and expectations of Canadians
through a credible, evidence-driven review process.
154
Medical Access Framework
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers the medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
As of August 31, 2022, there were more than 233,000 patients registered with federally licensed sellers
(Note: these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than one
licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of September 2022, there were more than 21,000 individuals registered with Health Canada for
personal and designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabisproducts,
including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties on
cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Canadians who have been authorized by their health care practitioner can access cannabis for medical
purposes by producing cannabis or by designating someone to produce it for them.
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements, which are designed to
ensure that cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized
health care practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in excess
of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate, and may not sell cannabis to any person.
Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized to
produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for them, can
tend to the plants.
Health Canadaappreciates that, as in any regulatory framework, there will be instances where
individuals choose to operate outside of the law. Health Canada supports law enforcement
representatives on a daily basis by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a day and seven days a week
to confirm, when necessary, that specific individuals are authorized to produce cannabis for medical
purposes.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure it is
abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
155
Health Products Containing Cannabis
Within this cannabis legislative framework, two prescription drugs containing cannabis and one
synthetic cannabinoid have been approved for sale. Sativex contains tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD), and Marinol contains THC. Sativex is available to Canadian patients, but Marinol was
voluntarily withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer in 2012.
Health Canada currently has a submission under review for a drug containing THC (dronabinol).
Drugs containing the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone have also been approved. Nabilone, a synthetic
cannabinoid which does not exist in nature, is not captured by the definition of cannabis in the Cannabis
Act,and remains scheduled under the CDSA as a narcotic.
There are currently no authorized veterinary drugs containing cannabis.
Non-Therapeutic Research with Cannabis
Since the Cannabis Act and its regulations first came into force, stakeholders have indicated that the
clinical trial framework has resulted in challenges in conducting non-therapeutic research on cannabis.
Currently, most non-therapeutic research on cannabis involving human participants is considered a
“clinical trial” under the Food and Drug Regulations. Many researchers have had difficulty securing
authorization under the Food and Drug Regulations using legal, regulated cannabis products available
for purchase by adult consumers. These difficulties have led to missed opportunities to advance the
knowledge and evidence base about cannabis, including its effects and uses in a non-therapeutic
context.
Health Canada is proposing to create a new framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate
research on cannabis in humans for non-medical purposes to increase the knowledge about cannabis
and the risks of using cannabis products and to reduce the regulatory burden on stakeholders. The
proposed amendments would facilitate such research by solely regulating them under a cannabis
research licenceissued under the Cannabis Regulations.
Research with cannabis for therapeutic purposes will continue to be regulated under the clinical trial
framework under the Food and Drugs Regulations will continue to be conducted with the same level of
rigour and concern for patient safety.
President Biden Pardoning all Federal Offenses of Simple Cannabis Possession
On October 6, 2022, U.S. President Biden announced that he is pardoning all prior federal offenses of
simple cannabis possession, and called on stateGovernors to do the same at the state level. This does
not apply to charges for trafficking.
The White House estimates that 6,500 people with prior federal convictions and thousands of such
convictions under Washington, DC law could benefit from this relief.
This decision does not legalize or decriminalize cannabis in the US, but it does represent a shift away
from the War on Drugs approach to cannabis at the federal level.
In the U.S., cannabis is currently a Schedule 1 drug, the same schedule asheroin, fentanyl and other
dangerous narcotics. The review by the FDA could take years and reclassification of cannabis is not
guaranteed.
On August 1, 2019, Bill C-93, An Act to provide a no-cost expedited record suspension process for simple
possessionof cannabis, which received royal assent on June 21, 2019, came into force. The Act modifies
156
the Criminal Records Act to waive record suspension application wait periods and application fees for
those convicted only of simple possession of cannabis. The Act creates an administrative review process
where the application is considered by a Parole Board of Canada (PBC) staff member as opposed to a
discretionary review by PBC Board Members. The record suspension will be ordered so long as the
individual can show that their only convictions are for simple possession of cannabis.
157
STATUS OF DOMESTIC BIOMANUFACTURING CAPACITY
ISSUE
• Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, which aims to grow a
strong, competitive, and resilient domestic life sciences ecosystem, with cutting-edge biomanufacturing
capabilities, and to ensure Canada is prepared for future pandemics and health priorities.
• The Strategy’s funding opportunities are underway through the Strategic Innovation Fund, the
integrated Canada Biomedical Research Fund/Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund, and the Clinical
Trials Fund, which intend to stimulate growth and innovation and strengthen talent in Canada’s life
sciences and biomanufacturing ecosystem.
KEY FACTS
• Canada announced the creation of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy on July 28,
2021 to re-build a strong and resilient domestic biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
- Investments in biomanufacturing capacity can reduce our reliance on imported products and
strengthen our domestic industrial capacity.
- The Government will work with provinces, territories, and other partners to deliver real results
for Canadians.
- The strategy is supported by existing resources and Budget 2021 investments,including support
of $2.2 billion for the revitalization of Canada's biomanufacturing and life science sector.
- Health Portfolio explicit work includes:
-$250 million, over three years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to establish a new
Clinical Trials Fund.
-Advancing regulatory modernization efforts, including: modernized clinical trial regulations, a new
pathway for advanced therapeutic products; agile regulations for the licensing of drugs and medical
devices
• The objective of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy is to grow the domestic life
sciences ecosystem, and prepare Canada for future pandemics and health priorities. In order to improve
Canada’s pandemic vaccine preparedness, the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy proposes
increasing domestic biomanufacturing capacity across multiple platforms, including those that represent
the latest in vaccine technology, such as mRNA.
KEY MESSAGES
• The government continues work to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19.
• Canada is investing to establish world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity–
from research and development to fill and finish.
• Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy is focusing on growing our domestic life
science ecosystem to prepare Canada for future pandemics and other health priorities.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
IF PRESSED ON THE DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic reinforced the importance of domestic capacity to develop and
produce vaccines, and has highlighted significant breakthroughs in health science andtechnology.
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and
they represent an alternative to conventional vaccines, particularly in relation to their potential for rapid
development and scaling of production.
158
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development and production, and preparedness for future pandemics, outside of
the COVID-19 context.
• In April 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna will build a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. The facility will be capable of producing
up to 100 million doses of mRNA vaccine annually for Canadians.
• Moderna’s new facility inCanada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a global
mRNA research and development hub.
IF PRESSED ON THE MODERNA FACILITY…
• Moderna isa leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events.
• In April 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna will build a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. The facility will be capable of producing
up to 100 million doses of mRNA vaccine annually for Canadians.
• Establishing a domestic large-scale mRNA production facility is an important part of our health
security and preparedness for future pandemics, outside of the COVID-19 context.
• Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness but will also help position Canada asan mRNA centre of excellence and a global
mRNA research and development hub.
• Moderna’s establishment of this facility will create hundreds of good jobs in the life science
industry, and will contribute to growing the Canadian economy.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working to re-establish domestic capacity, across key vaccine platforms, including
mRNA, to be better prepared and to manage key supply and other risks (including those encountered
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic).
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre which has
partnered with Novavax to produce its COVID-19 vaccine.
• Canada has also taken steps to secure non-mRNA vaccine options with global leaders such as
GlaxoSmithKline to help make sure Canadians have enough vaccine in the event of an influenza
pandemic.
• In April 2022, the Government of Canada announced that Moderna would build a state-of-the-
art manufacturing facility in Quebec to deliver made-in-Canada vaccines. When completed, this new
facility can produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine doses per year in non-pandemic times and up to 100
million doses per year during a pandemic.
• With the new Moderna facility, Canada has the opportunity to leverage innovation in vaccine
development and research and be better prepared for future pandemics and health priorities through
timely and secure access to domestically produced vaccines for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON PANDEMIC VACCINE PREPAREDNESS …
• The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the importance of strengthening and maintaining
domestic capacity to rapidly develop and produce vaccines at a sufficient scale to protect all people in
Canada against pandemics and other health emergencies.
• Through strategic investments and partnerships, the Government of Canada is working to grow
Canada’s domestic life sciences sector and biomanufacturing capacity. This includes upstream
159
investments to strengthen areas of strategic importance to the sector, as well as contractual
agreements with domestic manufacturers to bolster pandemic vaccine readiness.
• With support from the Government of Canada, the domestic biomanufacturing landscape is
actively evolving. For example, Moderna is in the process of building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
production facility in Quebec and Sanofi Pasteur is establishing an influenza vaccine manufacturing
facility in Ontario.
BACKGROUND
Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took early and decisive action to
strengthen Canada's biomanufacturing capacity to protect Canadians, and to provide investment to
support domestic biomanufacturing capabilities. A key element is the implementation of the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy) announced in June 2021.
Ministers of Health and Innovation, Science, and Industry have joint accountability for the Strategy
which outlines actions to take a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic capacity to rapidly
develop and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for
future pandemics or other health emergencies and sector growth. This included Budget 2021
investments of $2.2B.
The five pillars of the Strategy are:
• Coordinating Governance;
• Strengthening Research Systems and the Talent Pipeline;
• Growing Canada’s Life Sciences and Biomanufacturing Sector;
• Operationalizing National Research Council’s Biologics Manufacturing Centre (BMC) and
Considering a National Centre; and,
• Ensuring Best-in-Class Regulation & World-Class Clinical Trials Systems.
Increasing domestic capacity and building a robust life sciences sector will require dedicated efforts to
connect and mobilize federal investments and assets in collaboration with academia and industry to the
broader life sciences ecosystem.
The emergency regulatory measures put in place during COVID-19 aim to make the system more agile,
and enable prompt access within Canada to health products needed to diagnose, treat and slow the
spread of the virus without compromising safety, efficacy and quality. Going forward, it will be
important to maintain this level of agility (especially during non-pandemic times) toensure Canadians
receive access to needed health products.
Investments under the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy
Budget 2021 committed $1B over seven years through the Strategic Innovation Fund support life science
firms to innovate and expand in Canada. Thus far, one (1) project, Biovectra in Charlottetown, Prince
Edward Island, has been funded while the remaining projects are moving through the evaluation
process.
160
Supported through Budget 2021 commitments, the Government of Canada has launched two (2) funds
to help strengthen Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, including the Canada Biomedical
Research Fund ($250M over four years) which supports transitional and applied research, training and
talent development, to drive downstream manufacturing capacity, and the Bioscience Research
Infrastructure Fund ($500M over seven years), which will support the bioscience capital and
infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research hospitals.
• These funds are administered through Canada's three federal research agencies, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada along with the Canadian Foundation for
Innovation.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research has launched three funding opportunities under the Clinical
Trials Fund (pan-Canadian clinical trials consortium, clinical trials training platforms, clinical trials
projects) in May 2022 and areunder peer review, with funding set to begin this Fall.
Canadian Biomanufacturing Capacity Since 2020
In addition to Budget 2021 funding, the government has announced a number of investments to bolster
domestic production capacity through theStrategic Innovation Fund, Next Generation Manufacturing
Canada Supercluster, the National Research Council, Regional Development Agencies, and other
government partners, including in:
• National Research Council (NRC) (Montréal, QC)-$126 million to establish the new Biologics
Manufacturing Centre;
• Medicago (Quebec City, QC)- $173 million to develop a plant-based virus-like-particle vaccine
and for the construction of a Good Manufacturing Practice facility. .
• AbCellera (Vancouver, BC)-$175.6 million in government support of antibody discovery for
clinical testing and for the construction of a GMP antibody production facility;
• Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO) (Saskatoon, SK)–$59.2M, over three years,
starting in 2021-22, to support the development of its vaccine candidates and expand its Saskatoon
facility;
• Precision Nanosystems (Vancouver, BC)-$25.1 million in government support to build a
biomanufacturing centre for production of RNA vaccines;
• KABS Laboratories (St-Hubert and Val des Sources, QC)-$54.25 million toward a biologics
production facility with a focus on antibody therapies and new fill-finish capabilities;
• Novocol (Cambridge, ON)-$32.7 million contribution for expanded fill-finish capacity;
• Providence Therapeutics and Northern RNA Inc.-$5 million through the Next Generation
Manufacturing Supercluster to expand their operations in Calgary to design and manufacture COVID-19
vaccines and build a pipeline of mRNA vaccines;
• Sanofi Pasteur (Toronto campus)–up to $415 million support towards building an end-to-end
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility; and,
• Resilience Biotechnologies (Mississauga, ON)-$199 million to increase manufacturing and
fill/finish capacity for a number of vaccines and therapeutics including mRNA technologies.
Moderna’s Canadian Facility
In April 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna will build a state-of-
the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. When completed, this new facility would be
able to produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine doses per year in non-pandemic times and up to 100
million doses per year during a pandemic.
161
Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events—not only by rapidly
developing a successful COVID-19 vaccine, but also by producing and distributing it at commercial scale.
Having an mRNA developer producing vaccines at scale in Canada represents one important piece in
Canada’s plan to rebuild the life sciences sector, and will better protect Canadians for whatever the
future holds.
Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness, but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a
global mRNA research and development hub. Moderna is committed to partnering with Canada’s
leading research universities and institutions to help advance research anddevelopment here at home.
For example, Moderna has already partnered with McGill University through Moderna’s mRNA Access
program to accelerate vaccine innovation, as well as with the University of Toronto to do research
across a range of scientific disciplines to develop new ways to treat infectious diseases.
The facility will boost the Canadian economy through the creation of hundreds of jobs during
construction and operation of the facility, including direct and indirect biomanufacturing and research
jobs. Moderna’s facility will also mean domestic opportunities for the brightest young minds in the field
through internships, co-op positions, and other Moderna-supported training and development
opportunities. In this way, the facility will enhance Canada’s talent pipeline by attracting, developing and
retaining a highly skilled workforce. The facility will also offer the potential for Canadian companies to
work with Moderna, and, where possible, opportunities to comprise part of Moderna’s supply chain.
The facility is expected to be operational in 2024 at the earliest, subject to planning and regulatory
approvals. In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, the facility is expected to be able to produce vaccines for
other respiratory diseases, such as influenza–pending their ongoing development by Moderna and
approval by Health Canada.
Inspection and Licensing–Oversightof Drug Manufacturing in Canada
Health Canada’s role in regulating drugs is to evaluate and approve products, set requirements, monitor
safetyand enforce compliance and communicate health risks. Further, Health Canada approves
establishments involved in the manufacturing of drugs marketed for use in Canada.
To ensure drugs are safe, effective and of high quality, all drug producing facilitiesin Canada, including
those supporting domestic biomanufacturing efforts, must hold a Drug Establishment License and be
inspected by Health Canada to demonstrate it meets Good Manufacturing Practices, known as “GMPs”.
Health Canada continues toremain supportive in strengthening Canada’s drug manufacturing capacity
and prioritizing new and continued COVID-19 drug manufacturing, enabling industry to mobilize and
support current needs of the domestic market.
Health Canada is committed in providing advice and guidance in the planning and development of
operations to support domestic biomanufacturing in Canada.
As part of Health Canada’s role in ensuring a safe and effective drug supply, inspection and other
regulatory experts will continue to promote and enforce Canada’s high standards for drug
manufacturing.
162
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices, which pose
significant challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of
public and private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, as well as Budget 2021, this includes working with provinces, territories and stakeholders to
establish a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases for launch in 2022-2023.
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases to be launched in 2022-2023.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON COLLABORATION WITH STAKEHOLDERS…
• We held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on March
26th, 2021. Canadians-especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers-were
invited to provide their views on the national strategy by participating in a public town hall or
completing the online questionnaire. A “What We Heard” report summarizing key themes and feedback
that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement has been published on the engagement
webpage.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, a second phase of targeted engagement comprising stakeholder
roundtables took place over April and May 2022 to seek feedback on a draft framework for the strategy
and further inform thedevelopment of the national strategy.
• Productive discussions are also ongoing with provincial and territorial counterparts.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy for launch in 2022-2023.
• Based on input to date, Health Canada developed a draft framework for the national strategy for
drugs for rare diseases.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, Health Canada hosted targetedroundtables with stakeholders
throughout April and May 2022 to help finalize the national strategy.
• The Government of Canada is working to launch the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in 2022-2023 with the support of all those involved.
163
IF PRESSED ON MORE DETAILS ON THE DRAFT FRAMEWORK FOR THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• Based on what we have heard from stakeholders and partners to date through previous
engagement, Health Canada developed a draft framework for the national strategy in spring 2022.
• The draft framework was comprised of four pillars and eight principles, as well as potential
activities that could be part of each pillar.
• Health Canada then held targeted consultations to seek feedback on the draft framework,
explore how stakeholderscould contribute to achieving the strategy objectives, discuss implementation
considerations, and understand stakeholder preferences for involvement and engagement in the
implementation.
• The implementation of a strategy will provide people across Canadawith access to drugs for
rare diseases, while enabling federal, provincial, and territorial governments, stakeholders, and experts
to work together to enhance coordination across Canada’s drugs for rare diseases landscape.
IF PRESSED ON MORE DETAIL RELATED TO THE CANADIAN ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDERS’
(CORD) RESPONSE …
• The Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders (CORD) is a key stakeholder supporting Health
Canada’s development of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
• CORD has been very engaged with Health Canada on the development of the national strategy.
They participated in the initial broad public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, follow-up
meetings in the summer of 2021 after the publication of the What We Heard Report, and the second
phase of targeted engagement to provide feedback on the draft framework in spring of 2022.
• Health Canada is appreciative of CORD’s feedback and perspectives and looks forward to
continuing to work with CORD throughout the development and implementation of the national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH….
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engagedin E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON TRIKAFTA…
• Health Canada understands that patients with Cystic Fibrosis (CF) want faster access to new and
promising drugs, particularlywhen limited treatment options are available.
• Recognizing the importance of this new treatment option for patients, following a priority
review, on June 18, 2021, Health Canada authorized Trikafta for CF patients aged 12 years and older,
with a gene mutation found in 90% of patients. It was approved in an aligned review with the Canadian
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), which expedited the review and reimbursement
recommendation process. Furthermore, on April 20, 2022, Health Canadaapproved Trikafta for children
ages six to 11 with the same gene mutation.
164
• The pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) undertook negotiations to reach a mutual
agreement with Vertex Pharmaceuticals regarding Trikafta pricing for publicly funded drug programs.
Individual jurisdictions have begun to make decisions as to whether they will cover the drug under their
drug plans.
IF PRESSED ON AMX-0035…
• Health Canada recognizes the tragic consequences of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), the
extreme burden it places on patients and their families, and the urgency for patients to have timely
access to potential treatments, particularly when limited treatment options are available.
• In June 2022, Health Canada approved AMX-0035 (Albrioza) from Amylyx Pharmaceuticals, with
conditions, for the treatment of ALS.
• As of August 9, 2022, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) has begun active
negotiations to reach a mutual agreement with Amylyx Pharmaceuticals for Albrioza.
• Health Canadacontinues to advance numerous policy and regulatory initiatives, which will
facilitate earlier access to drugs when the data is promising.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they eachaffect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
public health care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
165
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadianshave been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment
of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Despite the pandemic, attentioncontinues to be focused on drugs for rare diseases, including on new
drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national strategy.
To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partnersfor federal funding for drugs for rare diseases.
Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy–and the balance of access vs. affordability
vs. appropriate use–will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also help manage
expectations around the limits of federal funding.
In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials to
establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national strategy.
A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and continued through early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
Over the summer, as a follow up to the What We Heard Report, Health Canada continued discussions
with patients and caregivers,and other stakeholders and partners to build a strategy that will work for
all Canadians. Based on input received to date, a draft framework for the national strategy was
developed in spring of 2022. Further targeted consultations to seek feedback on thisdraft framework
and further inform a comprehensive model for the national strategy took place throughout April and
May 2022. With the support of all those involved, the Government of Canada will work towards
launching the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases in 2022-2023.
THE CANADIAN ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDER’S (CORD) RESPONSE TO THE DRAFT FRAMEWORK
FOR THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
In spring 2022, CORD published a public response to the draft framework. They validated the
stakeholder views presented in the What We Heard Report, but they feel the draft framework uses
166
vague language and lacks meaningful commitment to actions or timelines. CORD was underwhelmed by
the strategy’s vision and principles presented in the draft framework. They also wantedmore clarity
around what the advisory structures could look like and how they would function as part of the strategy.
CORD also proposed providing drug coverage for new transformative life-saving therapies, rather than
focusing on an initial list of drugs of common concern.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries. As of 2017, this
international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for rare diseases.
Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting in 2021-2022, for the CIHR
to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-2022, in
support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over five
years, starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada tokick-start
the new Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation
programming.
Budget 2021 proposed to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This supportwould provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for drugs for rare diseases.
167
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• The Government has committed to implement national universal pharmacare, including a
Canadian Drug Agency, anational formulary, a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and a
Canada Pharmacare bill.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. EricHoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to provide Prince
Edward Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s
efforts to provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs. On October 19, 2022,
the PEI government is expected to launch targeted consultations with stakeholders on the future of its
drug program and formulary changes.
• Budget 2022 announced that the federal government will continue its ongoing worktowards a
universal national pharmacare program. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023, and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national
formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We have signed a first agreement with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve
access to medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal
pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TOIMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continueengaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
168
IF PRESSED ON STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy for launch in 2022.
• Based on input to date, Health Canada developed a draft framework for the national strategy for
drugs for rare diseases.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importanceof ongoing engagement, Health Canada hosted targeted roundtables with stakeholders
throughout April and May 2022 to help finalize the national strategy.
• The Government of Canada is working to launch the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in 2022 with the support of all those involved.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS…
• We have already taken action to improve accessibility and affordability of prescription drugs. For
example, we modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will help
Canadians afford the prescription medicines they need, improve the health of Canadians and better
meet health care system needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADIANDRUG AGENCY TRANSITION OFFICE…
• The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office is working closely with provinces and territories,
partner organizations, patients, care providers, and stakeholders to establish an agency that will provide
the structure and national coordination required to support efforts to make our drug system more
accessible, sustainable and prepared for the future.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULKPURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following broad consultations this
past winter, a multidisciplinary national panel established to develop a draft formulary framework
released its final report in June 2022. The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs
and Technologies in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSEDON PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
• Drug coverage and the health system should respond to the needs of Canadians.
• As part of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs initiative supported by the
Government of Canada, the Government of PEI is launching consultations on the future of its drug
program and formulary changes.
• The consultations will help inform efforts to make it easier for people living in PEI to access and
afford medications by making improvements to PEI drug programs.
• Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
• As a result of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs initiative, residents of PEI
with opioid or alcohol use disorders can access the support they need without having to worry about the
ability to afford it.
• PEI is also improving access by removing special authorization authority on 23 medications and
adding drugs to its Community Mental Health program.
• We look forward to more such improvements over the courseof the initiative.
169
BACKGROUND
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
OnFebruary 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. OnFebruary 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intentionto introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urgethe government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of theAdvisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
170
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
PrinceEdward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs
to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans
for Island residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons fromPEI’s efforts to inform its
ongoing work to advancenational universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement under this program was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI
has increased formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide residents
with no cost access to these addiction treatments throughits Substance Use Harm Reduction Program.
In addition, PEI is strengthening community mental health services with the addition of first generation
long acting antipsychotic medications as requested by local care providers, to the Community Mental
Health program. Other improvements include changes to special authorization requirements for 23
medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking to
provide medications to Islanders.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
On August 21, 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’)
to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its
mandate to protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry, and some patient groups, have expressed concerns that the amendments
could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
The Government has delayed the coming into force of the amendments four times due to
considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The most recently delay of the coming into
force date to July 1, 2022, also allows the Government to further engage stakeholders on the application
of these amendments within the changing pharmaceutical landscape.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec by
Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC) and sixteen subsidiaries of brand-name companies. On June 29,
2020, in the ruling of the case IMC v Canada, the Federal Court upheld most of the regulatory
amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information. On December 18, 2020,
a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the Attorney General of
Canada to uphold the constitutionality of the existing regime and regulatory amendments. Following
this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing
regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator countries, but found that the three new
price regulatory factors in addition to the collection of confidential rebate information to be invalid.
171
REGULATING PEDIATRIC MEDICINES
ISSUE
• Access to medicines for children in Canada has been a long-standing issue, and is a global
challenge. Health Canada is working with national and international partners to improve both access to
and the regulation of medicines for children.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is responsible for regulating all therapeutic products, including medicines for
children.
• Health Canada has mechanisms in place to prioritize the review of medicines addressing unmet
needs for children.
• During the pandemic, Health Canada expedited the review of several vaccines and treatments
for COVID-19, some of them for use in children.
• Providing access to drugs for children remains a priority for Health Canada. Currently, the
majority of drugs prescribed to children are used off-label, meaning outside of the approved use of the
drug.
• Health Canada has an action plan in place to increase access to needed drugs, including
appropriate formulations that were specifically developed and studied in children.
KEY MESSAGES
Access to Drugsfor Children
• Health Canada prioritizes the review of drugs addressing unmet needs, including drugs for
children, with a target review time of 180 days compared to the regular timeframe of 300 days.
• In 2020 and 2021, Health Canada authorized 17 new drugs for use in children in 2020 and 10
additional new drugs in 2021. Health Canada recognizes that more needs to be done to increase access
to safe and effective medicines for children, and is working with key stakeholders to make this happen.
• In June 2021, Health Canada launched a Pediatric Drug Action Plan, with the ultimate vision that
children in Canada have access to the medicines they need in age-appropriate formulations. A number
of policy and regulatory actions are currently being implemented.
Rare Diseases and Children
• Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature.
Approximately 50% of people affected by rare diseases are children, and 70% of rare diseases with a
genetic basis start in childhood.
• Canada’s national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, led by Health Canada, which will be
launched later this year, would help to ensure patients have improved access to effective rare disease
drugs, leading to better health outcomes.
IF PRESSED ONACCESS TO MEDICINES FOR CHILDREN …
• Health Canada is committed to increasing access to drugs for children by implementing
regulatory measures similar to those that exist in other jurisdictions. For example, Health Canada is
looking to compel pharmaceutical companies to conduct pediatric studies on medicines that are
expected to be used in pediatric populations, and to submit those data to Health Canada for approval. A
pilot to implement the pediatric regulation in late 2023 is currently under development.
• Health Canada is also working closely with the Canadian pediatric medical community to
develop a draft list of priority medicines to include in Canada’s first National Priority List of Pediatric
Drugs. , Once finalized, this list will help to notify industry stakeholders of the areas of urgent need for
pediatric patients in Canada and will help to encourage increased drug submissions and development.
172
BACKGROUND
Health Canada Initiatives to Increase Overall Access to Drugs for Children:
Access to medicines for children in Canada has been a long-standing challenge. Up to 80% of drugs
prescribed to children in Canada is done off-label (i.e. without safety or efficacy data in the pediatric
population) because pharmaceutical developers tend not to focus their research on children.
To address this gap, the Department has developed a Pediatric Drug Action Plan (PDAP) with the
ultimate vision that children and youth (0-17 years) in Canada have access to the medicines they need in
age appropriate formulations. There are a number of specific actions within the plan that are tied to the
its 3 main goals:
• Increasing the development of pediatric medicines and formulations;
• Improving access to pediatric medicines and formulations; and
• Providing more information to Canadians.
Pediatric stakeholders across the country (i.e., academics, clinicians, patient organizations, Health
Technology Assessment organizations and industry) were consulted regularly throughout the
development of the PDAP, and continue to be engaged through early implementation. The pediatric
stakeholder community are broadly supportive of the goals and focus areas of the PDAP.
Implementation of various activities within the PDAP has begun, and will continue over the next 5 or
more years. Current priorities include:
• Developing a “pediatric regulation” (pediatric provisions within the Food and Drug Regulations)
that will bring Health Canada into alignment with other jurisdictions in requiring pediatric studies to be
completed and submitted whenit is expected that a drug will be used in the pediatric population;
• Assessing the impact of our current pediatric incentive (see below), and exploring other
incentive models to bring more pediatric products to Canada; and
• Working with pediatricians across Canada to develop a National Priority List of Pediatric Drugs
that are needed for the pediatric population. Health Canada will identify the regulatory pathways and
flexibilities that can be offered to bring these products to Canada.
Health Canada islooking to include the new “pediatric regulation” in the Food and Drug Regulations as
part of its Agile Licensing Framework expected to move forward in 2024-2025. These new pediatric
provisions will be tested via a policy pilot scheduled for launch in 2023.
Current Pediatric Incentive: Under the current regulations, all manufacturers of innovative drugs are
provided with a guaranteed minimum period of eight years of market exclusivity. If a sponsor provides
clinical trial data that increases the knowledge about the use of the drug in pediatric populations,
regardless of whether the data results in a pediatric indication, an additional six months may be added
to this period of market exclusivity if the data is found to be acceptable by Health Canada. Thesponsor
may submit this information at any point during the first five years of the eight year period of market
exclusivity in order to obtain the six month extension.
National Priority List of Pediatric Drugs (NPLPD): The purpose of the list will be tohighlight the pediatric
therapies most urgently needed in Canada, and to work with industry stakeholders to support the
173
submission and approval of these products. The NPLPD will be developed by Health Canada based on
the expert advice from the pediatric medical community.
Because improving access to medicines for pediatric populations is a global and multi-faceted issue, in
order to address the challenges and barriers, Health Canada will work across the health and other
government departments, and withour external national and global partners, on key initiatives. This
collaborative approach will take time, but is already underway through, for example:
• Regulatory Cooperation Forum: the European Medicines Agency and Health Canada are working
together ona pediatric workplan that aims to align regulatory approaches to pediatric medicines in both
jurisdictions
• World Health Organization–Paediatric Regulatory Network: brings together regulators from
across the world to address global issues of access tomedicines for children. Health Canada is the co-
chair of this network.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up to $500
million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. We are
working with provinces, territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases to be launched in 2022.
SPECIFIC CHALLENGES FOR CHILDREN WITH RARE DISEASES
The four main challenges that are exacerbated for Canadian children with rare diseases and their
families are: (1) the inadequate receipt of pediatric data, particularly in comparison to counterparts in
the US and Europe; (2) barriers to pediatric clinical trials; (3) economic challenges associated with
developing, marketing, and maintaining a stable pediatric drug supply; and (4) current widespread use
of off-label medications in children.
Economic, ethical, regulatory, and infrastructure considerations associated with the conduct of child
health research have limited the numbers of clinical trials conducted with children. There are several
challenges specific to conducting clinical trials with a pediatric population with rare conditions that have
contributed to current gaps in the evidence base on medicines for children. These challenges include the
difficulty to obtain a sufficient sample size to design and execute a well-powered clinical trial, and the
lack of special methodological and analytic expertise required to conduct innovative and adaptive study
types.
174
Despite these challenges, there is growing recognition of the undesired consequences of the vast gap in
knowledge, such as a lack of information to guide dosing, inappropriate formulations, less than optimal
clinical and patient-oriented outcomes, and issues related to transitioning into adulthood.
175
ACCESS TO DRUGS, INCLUDING PSYCHEDLIC DRUGS, THROUGH HEALTH CANADA’S SPECIAL ACCESS
PROGRAM
ISSUE
• On January 5, Health Canada reversed regulatory changes made in 2013 that prohibited access
to restricted drugs through Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP). These new amended
regulations allow health care practitioners to request access to restricted drugs, such as psilocybin (the
active ingredient of magic mushrooms) and MDMA (Ecstasy), for emergency treatment of patients with
serious or life-threatening conditions.
• Psilocybin advocacy groups and the psychedelic investment sector are leveragingthe regulatory
changes to promote psilocybin as a therapeutic treatment for a broad range of mental health and
substance use conditions. There is a high volume of media coverage from national, industry and
psychedelic-oriented media outlets and much of itfocuses on patient access to restricted psychedelic
drugs for therapeutic purposes.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) provides health care professionals with the ability
to request access to drugs that are not currently authorizedfor sale in Canada to treat patients with
serious or life-threatening conditions. Access is only considered when conventional therapies have
failed, are unsuitable or are unavailable and when there is sufficient evidence to support the use of that
drug for the patient’s condition.
• The SAP is designed for exceptional circumstances and not intended to circumvent clinical trial
testing or drug review processes.
• Clinical trials remain the best method to protect patients and advance our knowledge about
products with a possible medical benefit that have not undergone the rigorous, science-based review
process to be approved as marketed drugs. Clinical trials can be conducted for as few as a single patient
or for a larger group.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need. That is why we have a robust regulatory system that includes a rigorous, science-based review
process that ensures the safety, efficacy and quality of drugs marketed in Canada.
• For exceptional cases, Health Canada's Special Access Program (SAP) offers practitioners the
opportunity to gain access to drugs that are not approved for sale in Canada
• The SAP considers requests from practitioners treating patients with serious or life-threatening
conditions when conventional treatments have failed, are unsuitable or unavailable, and where there is
sufficient evidence to support the use of that drug for the patient’s condition.
• Although the SAP has been instrumental in saving Canadian lives, clinical trials remain the best
method to access experimental therapies. Trials are designed to protect patients and to advance
knowledge about experimental products with a possible medical benefit.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TOPSYCHEDELICS VIA SAP …
• Health Canada is committed to providing health care practitioners with ways to support patients
with serious or life-threatening conditions.
• To this end, on January 5, 2022, we updated the SAP regulations to allow practitioners to
request access to restricted drugs, such as psilocybin and MDMA, on behalf of patients with serious or
life-threatening conditions, where other therapies have failed, are unsuitable, or are not available in
176
Canada, and where there is sufficient evidenceto support the use of that drug for the patient’s
condition.
• In addition, the drug manufacturer must also agree to provide their drug for the proposed
purpose and may impose conditions. The SAP cannot compel a manufacturer to provide a drug.
• This regulatory change is not intended to promote or encourage the use of restricted drugs, or
to circumvent the well-established clinical trial or drug review and approval processes.
• Several physicians have already accessed psilocybin for the treatment of patients with serious
medical conditions.
BACKGROUND
Through Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP), health care professionals may request access to
drugs that are not currently authorized for sale in Canada to treat patients with serious or life-
threatening conditions. Access to these drugs is only considered when conventional therapies have
failed, are unsuitable or are unavailable and where there is sufficient evidence to support the use, safety
and efficacy of the drug for the patient’s specific condition.
A SAP authorization allows a manufacturer to sell a drug that has not been authorized for sale in
Canada. Requests through the Special Access Program must provide sufficient evidence to support the
use of the drug for the patient’s condition. Manufacturers who provide drugs through the Special Access
Program are requested to confirm that their product is manufactured according to Good Manufacturing
Practices, to ensure that patients are administered a known dosage of the drug and with known
composition (i.e. ingredients) from a dealer licensed under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
However, the manufacturer must be willing to provide the product for the proposed use. They can also
impose conditions. There have been occasions when manufacturers have refused to provide the product
via SAP for a variety of reasons, including financial considerations, limited supply and potential negative
impacts on their marketing application if not used appropriately, resulting in poor outcomes.
Only regulated health care practitioners who are authorized to treat patients with prescription drugs
may file requests on behalf of their patients through the Special Access Program
Drugs considered for release under SAP include pharmaceutical, biologic and radiopharmaceutical
products.
Regulatory Amendment for Restricted Drugs
On January 5, 2022, Health Canada published final regulations in the Canada Gazette, Part II that
reversed regulatory changes made in 2013 to the Food and Drug Regulations (FDR) that prohibited
access to restricted drugs through SAP. The regulatory changes came into force immediately.
These new amended regulations allow health care practitioners to request access to restricted drugs,
such as psilocybin and MDMA, for emergency treatment of patients with serious or life-threatening
conditions. Health Canada has published onCanada.caa Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (section
56) class exemption, which will enable health care practitioners and certain other professionals to
conduct activities with MDMA and psilocybin that have been authorized for sale through the SAP.
177
Psilocybin advocacy groups and the psychedelic investment sector are leveraging the regulatory changes
to promote psilocybin as a therapeutic treatment for a broad range of mental health and substance use
conditions. Some stakeholders see the regulatory change as a business opportunity to provide wide
access through the SAP. As a result, significant efforts have been invested in educating stakeholders on
the role of the SAP through information onCanada.ca, numerous meetings, and correspondence. There
remains a high volume of media coverage from national, industry and psychedelic-oriented media
outlets and much of it focuses on patient access to restricted psychedelic drugs for therapeutic
purposes.
Clinical trials remain the best method to advance our knowledge about products with a possible medical
benefit, but have not undergone the rigorous, science-based review process to be approved as
marketed drugs. A clinical trial protects participants by providing a framework so that potential
treatments are administered in accordance with national and international ethical, medical and
scientific standards. These trials can also help to build the evidence related to the safety and efficacy of
drugs.
As of November 4, 2022, Health Canada has authorized, though SAP, the use of psilocybin for 50
patients. Health Canada has also approved 16 clinical trials involving use of psilocybin, 13 of them since
the beginning of 2022.
Cost
Patients receiving access to drugs through the SAP are responsible to pay for the drug, or may have the
cost covered by their own private health insurance plans. In some cases, public drug plans cover the cost
or the manufacturer provides the drug through the SAP at no cost.
178
HEALTH PRODUCT SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Health product shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic
further exposed vulnerabilities in the health product supply chain that impacted supplies of products
required to treat patients with COVID-19 and other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national health product supply continues. Health
Canada is continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with provinces and territories, and key
supply chain players tomitigate impacts and move towards prevention of shortages where possible.
KEY FACTS
• Canada is a small market that relies heavily on imported products, making it vulnerable to
shortages. During the pandemic, global supply challenges and unprecedented demand further
contributed to shortages in Canada.
• Lessons learned from the pandemic informed the development of new regulations that provide
new tools to address health product shortages.
• As of November 24, 2022, 65 drug shortages were de-escalated from critical status, out of a
total of 92 that were deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
• As of November 1, 2022, 321 of the 439 medical device shortages reported through the
mandatory framework are now resolved.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed health products is a top priority for our
Government.
• Significant efforts were made throughout the pandemic to respond to health product supply
disruptions; the need for vigilance continues.
• In 2021, new regulations came into force that provide new tools to help prevent and alleviate
health product shortages and to safeguard the supply.
• We continue to work with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient groups and
international partners toclosely monitor the supply of health products and take necessary action to help
minimize the impact of shortages, and prevent them where possible.
BACKGROUND
Shortages in Canada
Health product shortages are an increasingly common, global issue. Canada is particularly vulnerable to
shortages due to its small market share and reliance on imported products. 68% of Canadian drugs are
imported from outside of Canada and 83% of activities related to drug production (e.g., manufacturing,
packaging, labeling) are performed outside of Canada. Similarly, the majority of medical devices on the
Canadian market are imported. Further, Canada holds only 2% of the global market share for drug sales
and 1.8% of the global market share for medical devices.
Health Canada’s Role
Health product shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of health product shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
federal leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
179
and practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and territories
and stakeholders across the supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory
measures, and to explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Several factors are taken into account to determine both the potential impact of a shortage of health
products and the actions required by Health Canada. Factors such as whether the shortage is national in
scope, whether alternative supplies are available and whether the product is considered medically
necessary are all considered in determining the potential impact.
New tools to address shortages
The pandemic has had major impacts on drugs and medical devices in Canada and globally. The number
of national/critical shortages increased significantly throughout the pandemic. As well,secondary effects
from the pandemic are expected to persist in the medium to long term, such as fluctuating demand,
supply chain challenges and healthcare system recovery.
The department built on time-limited regulatory instruments introduced early in the pandemic to
develop permanent regulatory tools to help address these challenges. New authorities were added in
the Food and Drug Regulations and the Medical Devices Regulations, which allow the Minister to:
• Permit the exceptional importation of drugsand medical devices to address a shortage or an
anticipated shortage. Imported products in this case do not need to fully meet Canadian regulatory
requirements but must be manufactured to comparable quality standards.
• Require manufacturers and importersof specified medical devices to report shortages and
discontinuances that could lead to a shortage.
• If required, request that drug establishment licence holders and medical device manufacturers,
importers, and distributors provide information needed to assess, prevent, or alleviate a shortage.
The regulations also respond to risks posed by bulk importation frameworks, such as the one established
by the United States. A prohibition was put in place on drug establishment licence holders from
distributing certain drugs intended for the Canadian market for use outside of Canada if that distribution
could cause or exacerbate a shortage. This serves to ensure that bulk importation frameworks do not
cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
With these toolsin place, Health Canada is now better equipped to help address shortages of health
products.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Health Product Shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage health product shortages, and has
leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify
shortage signals earlier, especially for critical products required for COVID-19. For example, through FPT
collaboration, a process for the allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the
distribution of critical products. The process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health
Canada and provincial and territorial governments in allocating supply where it is needed most. This has
also been effective in managing limited supplies of therapies being used to treat COVID-19 (e.g.,
Tocilizumab, Remdesivir) as well as drugs that are in high global demand upon authorization by Health
Canada (e.g., Paxlovid).
180
Working with provinces and territories, Health Canada established a COVID-19 Critical DrugReserve in
2020 that complemented other drug shortage mitigation efforts. It included 12 drugs used to support
patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives, pain
relievers, antibiotics, muscle relaxants, and inhalers. The Critical Drug Reserve served as a backstop for
Canada’s existing supply, complemented the existing drug shortage management systems, and
mitigated critical drug shortages, which relieved pressures on provincial and territorial health care
systemsthrough several pandemic waves. This pandemic initiative ended on June 30, 2022.
During the pandemic and beyond, Health Canada has worked with FPT partners to address medical
device shortages. Work continues to formalize FPT collaboration and strengthenrelationships in the
medical devices sector.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s health product supply so that timely
action canbe taken to ensure Canadians have access to the health products they need.
181
INFANT FORMULA SHORTAGE
ISSUE
• The Abbott manufacturing facility in Sturgis, Michigan was closed on February 17 due to possible
bacterial contamination and has been gradually resuming production since July 1. The supply of
specialized formulas, including dietary products for people with rare metabolic diseases and formulas
for infants with food allergies, will remain limited until this facility returns to its full production capacity.
In addition, the supply of regular infant formula seems increasingly affected as the situation persists.
KEY FACTS
• The Abbott manufacturing plant in Sturgis, Michigan is an important supplier and its closure in
February affected the availabilityof infant formula in Canada and elsewhere.
• In Canada, this resulted in a shortage of specialized products for people with rare metabolic
diseases and for infants with food allergies.
• Health Canada published an interim policy on March 10 to facilitatethe importation of
equivalent products from other countries. To date, the importation of 46 specialized products has been
authorized pursuant to the interim policy and the list is updated regularly. The interim policy is in effect
until December 30, 2022and will be extended until December 31, 2023.
• Health Canada has mitigated the impact of the shortage by permitting the importation of
products from countries with similar regulatory requirements, convening regular stakeholder (provinces,
territories, manufacturers, distributors, health professionals, non-governmental organizations)
meetings, developing communication materials for the public and for the healthcare community,
monitoring supply, and assisting with equitable distribution.
• The supply of formulas for infants with allergies reached a low point in June. Since that time the
shortage has largely subsided and is now replaced by a limited but stable supply.
• Since the spring, formulas for infants with allergies could only be accessed at the pharmacy
counter to help manage the supply. Certain manufacturers have decided to return some of their
products to shelves at pharmacies and retailers as of late October. It is anticipated that the current
supply will continue meeting the needs of Canadian families for the coming months.
• Metabolic products are not available to the general public. Their supply is very limited and is
managed by specialized distributors in close collaboration with healthcare professionals caring for
patients with metabolic disorders.
• Abbott’s Sturgis plant reopened on July 1. Production will gradually increase over the coming
months, initially prioritizing specialized products.
• Health Canada has been receiving signals in October that the supply of regular infant formula is
now more sensitive than it was earlier in the year. The extension of the interim policy will help bolster
the supply of regular infant formula to help mitigate a potential shortage of these types of formulas in
early 2023.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our governmenthas taken necessary actions to address the shortage.
• Health Canada published an interim policy to facilitate the temporary importation of products to
mitigate the shortage.
• Health Canada has issued a range of relevant information to the public, healthcare professionals
and pharmacists to help them navigate the shortage.
• Health Canada engaged with manufacturers on an ongoing basis. Although limited, the supply
should remain stable for the coming months.
182
• Health Canada will continue collaborating with various stakeholders to manage the limited
supply until the situation has fully stabilized.
IF PRESSED ON THE DURATION OF THE SHORTAGE…
• Abbott’s Sturgis plant had resumed production on June 4. However, operations were halted
again on June 15 after severe thunderstorms caused flooding in the plant. The plant reopened on July 1.
It is estimated that it will take several months before the plant is back to its regular production capacity.
• The Department is working with manufacturers to maintain a continued supply of specialized
products for Canadian families over the coming months. Health Canada will continue coordinating the
supply with manufacturers and our provincial and territorial counterparts until the situation has fully
stabilized.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL ACTIONS THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD TAKE…
• Given the serious nature of this situation, we have been working closely with stakeholders to
proactively resolve barriers that could compromise access to products as the situation evolves.
BACKGROUND
Recall of Abbott products and plant closure
A recall of certain Abbott brand powdered infant formula was issued on February 17, 2022, after cases
of infant illness caused by Cronobacter and Salmonella bacteria were reported to the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) between September 2021 and January 2022, including one fatal case
associate with Cronobacter sakazakii. Another fatal case linked to this bacterium was reported about a
week after the recall. No cases of illness linked to the recalled formulas were reported in Canada.
• Cronobacter is not commonly linked to human disease. In rare instances, it is associated with
severe intestinal infection (necrotizing enterocolitis) and blood poisoning (septicemia), especially in
newborns.
• Salmonella usually causes short-term symptoms such as fever, headache, vomiting, nausea,
abdominal pain and diarrhea. However, young children, pregnant women, the elderly and people with
weakened immune systems can develop more severe and sometimes fatalsymptoms.
Recalled products were from the Abbott manufacturing facility in Sturgis, Michigan. Although five strains
of Cronobacter were found in the production plant, none of them was an exact match for the patient
samples.
The recall includes regular and specialized infant formulas including metabolic and hypoallergenic
products. Only powdered formulas were affected by the recall. Liquid ready-to-feed formulas and liquid
concentrate have not been recalled and are safe.
The Sturgis facility in Michiganis a key supplier for many countries including the United States (US) and
Canada. Most of its production was destined for the US market and the rest to more than 30 countries.
Its closure is creating a global shortage of these products, although the NorthAmerican market appears
to be most affected. Other manufacturers have increased their production capacity, but it is not possible
to fully compensate the volume usually produced at the Abbott Sturgis facility. There are currently no
facilities manufacturing infant formula in Canada.
183
Abbott’s Sturgis plant had reopened on June 4 but closed again on June 16 due to flooding from a severe
storm. The plant resumed production again on July 1. Production will gradually increase, focusing
initially on specializedformulations. It is anticipated that it will take several more months for this plant
to return to its full production capacity.
Specialized formula
The shortage of specialized formula is concerning because it affects a more vulnerable population who
depend on them. Specialized products include metabolic products for people with rare metabolic
disorders and hypoallergenic formula for babies with allergies.
Metabolic products:
• Metabolic products are used for the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism that result in the
inability to metabolize specific amino acids, carbohydrates or fatty acids.
• Approximately 2000 Canadian patients (infants, children and adults) currently require metabolic
products; while the incidence of metabolic disorders is relatively low (1 in 30,000 to 1 in 200,000
newborn babies, depending on the disorder), these products are essential to the survival of affected
individuals.
• Metabolic products are used only under medical supervision and are not available at retail. In
Canada, they are obtained through the National Food Distribution Centre, a non-profit organization
solely dedicated to the distribution of metabolic products. They work in close collaboration with
registered dietitians and health care professionals and apply just-in-time inventory management for the
whole country.
• Patients using metabolic products are particularly affected by the shortage, because there are
few or no equivalent products, and switching metabolic formulas can cause problems with palatability
and gastrointestinal intolerance.
Hypoallergenic products:
• Regular infant formula will typically contain intact proteins, although some products may also
contain partially hydrolyzed proteins for babies with intolerances and gastrointestinal discomfort.
Hypoallergenic formulas contain extensively hydrolyzed proteins (for mild allergies) or are amino acid
based (for severe or multiple allergies). Symptoms of allergy include digestive disturbances that may
affect infant growth. Cases of severe allergy can result in an anaphylactic shock.
• Up to 2-2.5% of infants have food allergies, with an estimated 1.2% suffering from allergies to
milk protein. Considering the birth rate and the breastfeeding rate in Canada, it is estimated that this
represents between 3,000 and 6,000 Canadian infants potentially using hypoallergenic formula.
• However, product usage is believed to be much higher for a variety of reasons. For instance,
extensively hydrolyzed products are readily accessible and may be preferred over regular formulas by
parents of infants with colic or other mild digestive problems. Other factors include the reimbursement
of some extensively hydrolyzed formula in some provinces, noting that an allergy diagnosis may be
challenging (there may be self-diagnosis supported by a subsequent medical opinion based on reported
symptoms).
• With the closure of the Abbott Sturgis plant, a popular Abbott formulation (Similac Alimentum)
has been sold out since April 20, which has significantly increased the demand for hypoallergenic
formulas from other manufacturers.
• The supply of hypoallergenic formula reached a low point in June. Since that time the shortage
has largely subsided and is now replaced by a limited but stable supply.
184
• Health Canada has recommended that hypoallergenic formula be accessed only at the pharmacy
counter during the shortage to help manage the supply and to facilitate the distribution of products
imported under the Interim Policy.
• Certain manufacturers informed us of their intention to return some of their products to shelves
in pharmacy and retailers starting in late October. Only formulas that have bilingual labelling may return
on store shelves, at the discretion ofthe manufacturer. Some products imported during the shortage
under the Health Canada Interim Policy do not meet bilingual labelling requirements; these will continue
to be available for order at the pharmacy counter while supplies last, even after the policy expires at the
end of December 2022. Bilingual labels are available on Health Canada’s website and from the
pharmacist.
Regular formula
• Regular infant formula continued to be available on shelves during the shortage. While
individual products may sometimes be out of stock, alternate formats or comparable products from
other brands are usually available.
• Health Canada has been receiving signals in October that the supply of regular infant formula is
now more sensitive than it was earlier in the year. Some manufacturers are indicating that they are
having difficulty meeting the current demand. The extension of the interim policy will help bolster the
supply of regular infant formula to help mitigate a potential shortage of these types of formulas in early
2023.
Additional pressures
The closure of the Abbott Sturgis facility has occurred in a context where manufacturers were already
facing supply issues for certain ingredients due to the pandemic, including a shortage for some of the
materials needed to make the plastic components of their packaging.
More recently, sunflower oil (a key ingredient in many infant formulas) is in short supply due to the
conflict between the Russia and Ukraine, which are the largest exporters for this commodity. One
manufacturer producing infant formula for the Canadian market indicates that the supply of sunflower
oil cannot be guaranteed beyond this summer and the oil blends in their products must be modified as a
result. An ingredient substitution is considered a major change and it must undergo pre-market
assessment as per Division 25 of the Food and Drug Regulations. Health Canada is currently working
with manufacturers to accelerate the pre-market assessments for more than thirty (30) products.
Health Canada actions to mitigate the shortage:
Health Canada has been taking strong action in two key areas: supply and distribution as well as
communications.
Supply and distribution
• Health Canada implemented an interim policy on March 10 to facilitate theimportation of
equivalent infant formula from countries with similar regulatory standards to Canada. The list of
products suitable for importation is included in the interim policy and is updated regularly. Our experts
conduct a safety assessment of each product before adding them to the list. These products are safe to
use, even if they differ from products available on the Canadian market in terms of labelling or
composition. Bilingual labelling provisions continue to apply.
• The Department is monitoring the situation very closely, for both metabolic products and
hypoallergenic formulas to understand the status in terms of product availability across the country. We
185
are gathering information from distributors (for hypoallergenic and regular formula) and from the
National Food Distribution Centre (for metabolic products).
Communication
• The Department has proactively taken on a facilitator role to promote information sharing since
the beginning of the shortage. This includes sending targeted informationto the healthcare community
and caregivers as well as the development of several communication products for the public, healthcare
professionals and pharmacists to help them navigate the shortage. In addition, we have contacted
various associations to raise awareness and explore ways to reduce or eliminate barriers to providing
rapid and fair access to product.
• Many communication materials were developed by Health Canada:
o Information for the public include a public advisory and a detailed fact sheet for families, with
two separate social media campaigns to further emphasize key messages and reach a broader audience.
In addition, information about the shortage was posted on Service Canada screens across the country
between July 1 and August 31.
o Information for healthcare professionals include a clinical decision tree jointly developed by a
broad community of healthcare stakeholders to guide treatment decisions and help families make
appropriate choices while rationing the use of specialized infant formulas.
o Information for pharmacists were developed to help them order hypoallergenic formula during
the shortage and answer questions from the public.
The situation in the United States
On May 12, President Biden directed his administration to work urgently to ensure that infant formula
continues to be safe and available during the Abbott recall. He recommended the simplification of
product offerings to increase the speed and scale of production, the cracking down on any price gouging
or unfair market practices related to sales of infant formula, and increased supply through importation.
The United States Congress also investigated the shortage.
On May 18, President Biden invoked the Defense Production Act (DPA). On June 2, Health Canada met
with officials from the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Preparedness and Response (ASPR), U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, which is responsible for administering the DPA. ASPR
confirmed that the DPA was being used to prioritize the acquisition of additional raw material to infant
formula manufacturers to bolster capacity. ASPR is not directing where the infant formula is going and
there were no indications that the measures under the DPA would result in a cessation of U.S. infant
formula exports to Canada. Both Health Canada and ASPR have committed to keeping each other
abreast of developments as the shortage evolves.
Media presence
The shortage has been receiving media attention in the United States since early May. In Canada,
coverage has been sporadic. Media focused initially on understanding measures taken domestically to
alleviate the effects of the shortage, including efforts to import products to Canada, and questioning the
absence of domestic production of infant formula (see section on CanadaRoyal Milk, below). This
summer, Canadian news stories were around the challenges faced by families when trying to access
specialized formula. Some media reports were positive and reiterated key information published by
Health Canada. More recently, stories have focused on the frustrations experienced by parents who
must often switch regular formula as more popular products are out of stock.
186
Canada Royal Milk
Canada Royal Milk (CRM) owns a production plant in Kingston, Ontario, that manufactures fortified cow
milk powder, whole goat milk powder and skim goat milk powder that may be used in fortified milk
products for adults and for infant formula production. These products are not for the Canadian market
and are exported to other countries including China. Contrary to certain media reports, CRM does not
produce infant formula.
CRM cannot sell infant formula on the Canadian market until the company receives pre-market approval
from Health Canada. The company met with Health Canada to discuss information requirements to
support a pre-market submission to produce and sell infant formula in Canada.
187
THERAPEUTIC PRODUCTS PROCURED TO TREAT COVID-19
Issue
• The Government of Canada is taking steps so that safe and effective COVID-19treatments are
available to everyone in Canada who needs them, which along with vaccines and public health
measures, save lives, reduce illness and alleviate the burden on health systems.
Key Facts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), with the support of Public Services and
Procurement Canada (PSPC), is continuing to secure safe and effective therapeutics to treat COVID-19.
• Guided by the needs and concerns of provinces and territories, we have selected products
approved by Health Canada and allocated them to the jurisdictions on the basis of need and equity.
• Over 2.6 million treatment courses of ten different COVID-19 therapeutics have been made
available to provincial and territorial health systems, so people across Canada who need them have
access to safe and effective treatments in both inpatient and outpatient settings.
• PHAC’s therapeutics procurement strategy is evolving. As some products are found to be less
effective against new variants of concern, the approach is to shift away fromthem and towards more
effective ones, in accordance with the expressed needs of provinces and territories.
• PHAC continues to monitor emerging therapeutics research to identify promising treatments for
the future. All therapeutics must be authorized by Health Canada before they can be procured for use in
Canada.
• PHAC is also taking steps to study patient outcomes during and after treatment. We are working
in close collaboration with provinces and territories to learn from their experiences.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is taking steps so that everyone in Canada who needs them has
access to safe and effective COVID-19 treatments. Together with vaccines and public health measures,
these treatments save lives, reduce suffering and alleviate the burden on health systems.
• Access to effective treatments that can be easily taken at home, such as PAXLOVID™, could be
critical to reducing the severity of COVID-19 in people at risk of severe outcomes from infection.
• These treatments are needed tokeep people out of hospitals, shorten hospital stays, and
prevent hospitalized patients from progressing into critical care.
• Ten COVID-19 therapeutic treatments have been purchased, distributed, and administered to
patients across the country.
• The Government of Canada continues to monitor the emerging science for potentially promising
therapeutics to combat COVID-19.
If pressed-PAXLOVIDTM
• PAXLOVID™is an antiviral pill to treat mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults who are at high risk
of progressing to serious illness. PAXLOVID is the first Health Canada-approved COVID-19 drug that can
be taken by patients at home.
• The Government of Canada signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure 1.5 million treatment
courses of PAXLOVID™in 2022.
• To date, over 700,000 treatment courses of PAXLOVID™have been distributed to provinces and
territories, with the remaining supply tofollow through the fall.
188
If pressed-Evusheld
• Healthcare professionals are advised to consider local epidemiology and individual exposure to
circulating SARS-CoV-2 viral variants when making decisions regarding the use of Evusheld™.
If pressed
• Agency officials are working with colleagues at Health Canada and Public Services and
Procurement Canada, and with provinces and territories, to get these therapeutics into the hands of
healthcare providers as quickly as possible.
• Information about costsand pricing cannot be released publicly due to commercial
confidentiality concerns; however, the Government has identified over two billion dollars for the
purchase of COVID-19-related treatments.
Background
In response to the public health crisisarising from the COVID-19 pandemic, the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) was tasked with procuring therapeutics for the treatment of COVID-19 patients on
behalf of provinces and territories.
In July 2020, Health Canada authorized the antiviral remdesivir as the first drug for the treatment of
COVID-19 in hospitalized patients, and the first shipment arrived in September 2020.
Remdesivir continues to be available to provinces and territories and has recently been authorized by
Health Canada for thetreatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in an outpatient setting. When
administered within 7 days of symptoms appearing, remdesivir was demonstrated to reduce the need to
hospitalize patients who are at high risk of developing severe COVID-19.
Canada is also procuring monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) to treat COVID-19. Monoclonal antibodies are a
type of protein that attaches to the spike protein of the coronavirus (SARS-CoV-2) that causes COVID-19
and prevents the virus from entering and infecting healthy cells within the body.
Health Canada has authorized several mAb treatments. These drugs may be used for the treatment of
mild to moderate COVID-19 in patients who are at high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19, including
hospitalization or death.
Canadais also continuing to procure therapeutics to treat patients with severe COVID-19, such as
tocilizumab and sarilumab.
Health Canada authorized the combination of two antiviral drugs, nirmatrelvir and ritonavir (brand
name PAXLOVIDTM) on January 17,2022. The first shipment of PAXLOVIDTM was received and
distributed in January 2022, with additional shipments continuing throughout the year. PHAC has
procured 1.5 million treatment courses for delivery during the 2022 calendar year.
This antiviral treatment is in pill form, taken orally, under prescription from a healthcare provider. This is
an important step forward in ensuring timely access to COVID-19 treatments and reducing the burden
on health care systems.
189
PAXLOVID™is intended for use as soon aspossible after a diagnosis of COVID-19; within five days of the
start of symptoms.
Canada has also procured Evusheld™(tixagevimab co-packaged with cilgavimab), by AstraZeneca, used
for pre-exposure prophylaxis for the prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada authorized Evusheld™for use in immunocompromised individuals who may not have an
adequate immune response to an authorized COVID-19 vaccine, and for those for whom vaccination is
not recommended due to approved medical reasons.
Evusheld™is Canada’s first non-vaccine drug authorized for the prevention of COVID-19. However, it is
not a substitute for vaccination in individuals for whom COVID-19 vaccination is recommended.
AstraZeneca submitted an application to Health Canada for authorization for Evusheld™to be used as a
treatment for COVID-19. The authorization was granted on October 18, 2022.
On October 26, 2022, Health Canada issued a health professional risk communication stating Evusheld™
may not be effective against certain SARS-CoV-2 Omicronsub-variants when used as a prophylaxis or
treatment for COVID-19.
The Government of Canada has also signed an advance purchase agreement with Merck to procure an
initial quantity of 500,000 treatment courses of their oral antiviral, molnupiravir, if it is authorized by
Health Canada.
Health Canada is monitoring the safety and effectiveness of authorized treatments as they are in use, as
well as requesting manufacturers to submit evidence on the efficacy of those under review against
variants of concern, including Omicron and its sub-variants.
Health Canada will take prompt action if new data suggest that the benefit-risk profile of the authorized
treatments is affected by variants of concern, and to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
190
OAGAudit Report on the Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General tabled the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing
Orders report on December 9, 2021.
Key Facts
• The Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, which covered the
period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021, focused on whether the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) improved its administration of mandatory quarantine orders to limit the introduction of the
COVID-19 virus and its variants in Canada.
• It also focused on whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures
introduced in early 2021 (such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and quarantine of air
travellersat government-authorized hotels pending the results of their on-arrival COVID-19 tests.)
• This audit follows the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures which was tabled on March 25, 2021.
Key Messages
• The Governmentof Canada lifted all border measures effective October 1, 2022.
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the two recommendations from the Office of the
AuditorGeneral from this audit. Work is underway to address them.
• The Agency will continue to consider findings and recommendations from this audit report—
along with other audits, evaluations and further lessons learned from the response to COVID-19—to
inform planning and better position Canada to respond to future global health events.
• The Agency’s approach to border measures, like its guidance and advice, evolved during the
pandemic. Public health advice will continue to be informed by the latest availablescientific evidence,
epidemiology and expert opinion, which can change as new information becomes available.
If pressed on data
• The Agency is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better
follow up with travellers who are subject to border measures, if it is necessary to implement border
measures again in the future.
If pressed on GBA
• The Agency is implementing GBA+ considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of
existing and future programs on diverse andvulnerable groups.
If pressed on contacting positive travellers
• The Public Health Agency of Canada attempted to contact all positive travellers. There are many
potential reasons the Agency was unable to successfully reach them, including travellers not answering
phones.
• These travellers would have been contacted by the Agency as part of the regular compliance
verification activities through calls on days 5, 10 and 14. They would also have been subject to in-person
compliance verification visits and police referrals, if required.
• All positive travellers were contacted directly by the labs.
• This was the layered approach that was been used throughout the pandemic: using multiple
channels during the 14-day quarantine and coordinating with Provinces and Territories.
191
If pressed on ticketing
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the Auditor General's recommendation that it
improve its capability to achieve a more consistent enforcement approach.
• The Agency worked closely with local law enforcement agencies and received data on most
enforcement actions taken under the Quarantine Act (e.g., quarantine tickets issued, outcomes of high
priority referrals). Law enforcement agencies acted independently and were not required to send
information to the Public Health Agency of Canada on the outcomes of their activities. As such, there
may be enforcement actions that are not reflected in the data that the Agency has on file.
If pressed on Government-Authorized Accommodations
• The government-authorized accommodations were privately-owned and operated hotels that
had applied and demonstrated they met the Public Health Agency of Canada’s requirements to be a
GAA. The Government of Canada did not collect any revenue from the GAA program as travellers were
paying the accommodation costs directly to the hotel, which was to deliver all services to their clients.
• These hotels were responsible for providing and ensuring secured accommodations, three meals
per day based on Canada’s Food Guide and food restrictions, safe transportation for travellers from the
airport to the hotel, controlled and monitored entry and exit points, and overall traveller safety based
on federal, provincial and local public health guidance. They were also required to provide travellers
with necessities in a safe and accessible manner.
If pressed on Designated Quarantine Facilities
• The Public Health Agency of Canada managed the operations of its designated quarantine
facilities with a combination of its own employees, hotels, and contracted services providers, who
provided a range of services such as transportation to the quarantine site, lodging, security, traveller
registration, delivery of three meals per day, and delivery of essential items.
• The Agencytook complaints from travellers at designated quarantine facilities seriously and
worked with its service providers to ensure that standard services were provided for travellers.
Background
From the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) directed the
implementation of border restrictions and border control measures to help prevent travellers from
spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 in Canada.
On March 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory quarantine
under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
This audit follows up on some of the findings of the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and
Border Control Measures, which covered the period from January 1, 2020 to June 30, 2020, and which
was tabled on March 25, 2021.
The objective of this audit was to determine whether PHAC implemented testing and quarantine
requirements for incoming travellers to limit the introduction and spread of the COVID‑19 virus and its
variants in Canada.
The Office of the Auditor General made two recommendations to the Agency:
• That the Agency improve its enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit the spread of
COVID-19 by:
• improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better follow up with travellers who
are subject to border measures
192
• implementing GBA+ considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and
future programs on diverse and vulnerable groups.
• That the Agency should:
• better use information on the outcomes of its referral for follow-up, to assess whether its
enforcement approach is working to limit the introduction of COVID-19 and its variants.
• Improve its capability to achieve a consistent enforcement approach to border measures
nationwide, including exploring other tools that could be used in all Canadian jurisdictions.
Work is underway to address these recommendations.
The agency plans to implement the following actions to address the recommendations from this audit:
• It will review its IT systems and broad requirements to improve data and address issues related
to the consistency and quality of data used for matching test results to traveller records.
• It will improve and streamline methods for assessing data qualityinternally.
• It will identify requirements for an automated tracking process based on lessons learned while
COVID-19 border measures were in place.
• It will continue to provide specialized training on gender and diversity considerations to
frontline staff at the border and at designated quarantine facilities, including training on bias (launched
in September 2021), security awareness and de escalation.
• It will update its GBA+ analysis and incorporate results in the implementation of future border
measures.
• It will continue to engage with law enforcement partners.
• It will assess additional mechanisms to enforce the Quarantine Act more consistently nationally.
• It will continue to engage with its provincial and territorial counterparts to ensure maximum
collaboration.
193
COVID-19 SCREENING AND TESTING
ISSUE
• Health Canada (HC) and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) have worked closely with
the provinces and territories (PTs), federal organizations, as well as non-profit organizations, such as the
Canadian chambers of commerce, Canadian Red Cross, and pharmacies, to distribute rapid tests and
self-tests.
KEY FACTS
• On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it would provide $4.28 billion, as part
of the Safe Restart Agreement, to further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the
associated data management and information sharing systems, of which over $3 billion went directly to
PTs.
• The adoption of Bill C-8 and Bill C-10 provided Health Canada andthe Public Health Agency of
Canada an additional $4.22 billion to support the procurement and distribution of rapid tests in order to
help limit the spread of COVID-19 and keep Canadians safe.
• As of September 6, 2022, the Government of Canada has approved 41 point-of-care rapid tests,
as well as 23 self-tests.
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 811M rapid
tests, at a total cost of $5B.
• The government shipped over 650M rapid tests to PTs, over 8.2M to largebusinesses, ~5.3M to
pharmacies, and ~6M to the Canadian Red Cross.
• In 2022 alone, the federal government has shipped over 530.4M rapid tests to PTs.
• The Government of Canada is continuing to supply rapid tests to PTs on a per capita basis. Given
significant provincial holdings and federal reserves, distribution is currently scheduled until December
2022.
• To support small and medium-sized enterprises into the fall and the winter, HC has provided
additional tests to pharmacy distributors. Distributionto pharmacies was completed in September 2022
and until the end of September 2022; rapid test distribution will continue until the supply is exhausted.
KEY MESSAGES
• Testing remains an important tool of a layered approach to empower Canadians to take
personal responsibility and manage individual risk.
• Our Government is providing self-tests and point-of-care tests to support PTs into the fall and
winter, and will continue to provide free tests until at least December 2022.
• Our priority is to continue supporting jurisdictions in their efforts to manage COVID-19, ensuring
widespread distribution of tests across the country. The Government has established a strategic reserve
with 50M tests set aside for PTs in case of surge requirements.
IFPRESSED ON THE EFFICIENCY OF RAPID TESTS WITH NEW VARIANTS
• The Government is closely monitoring variants and is working with PTs, manufacturers,
international regulators, and the World Health Organization (WHO) to assess the potential impact of any
new variants on the effectiveness of approved tests.
• Current evidence indicates that authorized tests continue to be effective in diagnosing COVID-
19. Companies with authorized tests have provided HC evidence demonstrating that their products’
effectiveness is not impacted by Omicron.
194
IF PRESSED ON TEST EXPIRY
• HC aims to procure tests with longer shelf-life. Tests are shipped out of the federal warehouses
based on their shelf-life. Those that are in first are typically those that are out first.
• The inventory life cycle of the rapid testing devices procured under the federal testing initiatives
is closely monitored to ensure that tests are not wasted and that value for money is maximized. To date,
there have been no expired tests in the HC inventory.
IF PRESSED AS TO WHY CANADA CONTINUES TO PROVIDE FREE RAPID TEST
• By providing frequent and timely information, rapid tests remain an important tool to enable
Canadians to take responsibility and to manage their individual risks.
• International partnersincluding the US, Germany, Australia, and Japan have ended or are
planning to end free distribution of rapid tests. Canada is also planning to transition to a more
sustainable management of COVID-19.
• The government will continue to supply rapid tests to PTs until at least December 2022.
• The government will continue to support the free distribution of rapid tests to vulnerable
populations via the Canadian Red Cross.
BACKGROUND
Testing remains an important tool to empower people in Canada to take personal responsibility and
manage individual risk by providing them with frequent, timely information.
Procurement and Distribution of Tests to Provinces and Territories
The Government of Canada has been a leader in funding, procuring, and distributingrapid tests through
multiple channels across Canada, and has been providing rapid tests to provinces and territories since
October 2020. In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered
over 811M rapid tests, at a total cost of $5B.
In total since the beginning of the pandemic, the federal government has shipped over 650M rapid tests
to provinces and territories. These rapid antigen tests have supported the broader testing strategies that
provinces and territories have implemented including for screening in hospitals and other health care
settings, as well as for expanded school based testing, workplace screening, as well as community and
general population testing.
A key priority of the Government of Canada is supporting domestic bio-manufacturing capacity for rapid
tests. The government’s commitment to the bio-manufacturing sector is outlined in Budget 2021, which
includes a $2.2 billion investment over the next seven years. The government also continues to
authorize rapid tests from domestic manufacturers in order to enable domestic procurement for rapid
antigen diagnostic capacity for future healthcare needs and pandemic preparedness.
The Government of Canada is increasing access to COVID-19 rapid antigen tests for people in Canada’s
North. The Government of Canada is working with the Governments of Northwest Territories and
Nunavut to distribute COVID-19 rapid tests free of charge at NorthMart and Arctic Co-Operative stores
across the two territories. Tests became available to local residents starting February 25, 2022.
Workplace Screening
195
Health Canada will continue to provide tests to SMEs through pharmacy distributors until September 30,
2022, allowing rapid test distribution by pharmacies to SMEs to continue for the following months.
Given significant reserves, availability of tests for SMEs is expected to last until Spring 2023. Charities,
non-profits and Indigenous community organizations can acquire rapid tests through the Canadian Red
Cross free of charge across Canada.
July 29, 2022 was the last date for final rapid test orders for direct distribution to large organizations
employing 200 people or more.
196
GLOBALCOVID-19EFFORTS
Issue
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to
global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
Key Facts
• Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss
COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S.
• Canada participated in PAHO’s 30th Pan American Sanitary Conference (PASC) from September
26-30, with Dr. Theresa Tam as head of Canada’s delegation. At PASC, Dr. Tam participated as a panelist
in a PAHO-led side-event related to mental health and lessons learned from COVID-19. Canada also
contributed to the regional discussion, and adoption, of policies on various health issues, including
strengthening national regulatory systems and a strategy for regional genomic surveillance for epidemic
and pandemic preparedness and response.
Key Messages
• Canada has committed more than $2.9 billion to the global fight against the virus.
• The Prime Minister announced at the 2021 G20 Summit an investment of up to $15 million CAD
to COVAX Manufacturing Task Force partners in support of establishing the South Africa Technology
Transfer Hub. This initiative will help build capacity to enable the development and production of mRNA
vaccines and technologies in the region.
• On May 12, 2022, during the Second Global COVID-19 Summit, the Prime Minister announced
new funding of $732 million CAD for the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, which will bring
Canada’s total contribution to the ACT-Accelerator to more than $2 billion CAD since the start of the
pandemic.
• The Prime Minister announced that Canada will donate the equivalent of at least 200 million
doses by the end of 2022. To date, Canada has donated the equivalent of more than 140 million doses.
• This includes both financial commitments to COVAX and surplus dose donations.
• As of October 30, 2022, over 23.3 million of the 50 million surplus doses Canada has donated to
COVAX have been delivered to countries. Canada has also shared more than 3.76 million vaccine doses
through direct, bilateral agreements with recipient countries.
• Canada has provided $50 million CAD to the Pan American Health Organization to support
efforts to facilitate access to COVID-19 vaccines for those living in situations of vulnerabilityacross the
Caribbean and Latin America. Portions of this grant are being used to procure vaccine doses for
countries through the Organization, which are in addition to Canada’s commitment to COVAX.
• Canadian messaging related to the importance of global collective efforts to complete the fight
against COVID-19 were highlighted at meetings in Washington, D.C, in April, 2022.
• Canada highlighted its support for equitable access to vaccines through COVAX at the 75th
World Health Assembly in May 2022.
• Canada continues to work with international partners to address barriers to equitable access to
vaccines and to improve global capacity to manufacture them.
• On June 22, 2022, Canada announced $200 million CAD in funding for Canada's new Global
Initiative for Vaccine Equity (CanGIVE), which is designed to increase vaccine confidence, enhance
vaccine delivery and distribution, and support local vaccine production in 13 countries, most of them in
Africa.
197
If Pressed–Donation of Surplus Vaccines
• Canada’s commitment to donating the equivalent of at least 200 million doses by the end of
2022 includes doses procured by Canada that were determined by Health Canada to be in excess of our
domestic needs, financial support to COVAX for the procurement and delivery of doses, as well as
potential future contributions and donations.
If Pressed–Findings from the International Pandemic Preparedness and Response Panel
• The Government of Canada welcomes the frank assessment and bold recommendations from
the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response.
• We thank the Panel members for their efforts to understand how a localized outbreak became a
global pandemic, and to assess how the international system responded.
• One of the Panel’s important conclusions is that the world was not prepared for the pandemic
on a number of fronts. We know there are many lessons from this pandemic, which we are learning
from to adjust our approach.
• Canada is working with our international partners to improve globalcooperation so that we
remain well-positioned and prepared to respond to future global health events.
Background
Canada has participated in various multilateral and bilateral discussions at the WHO, G7, G20, and other
tables on ways to finish the fight against COVID-19 and strengthen our collective capacities to prevent,
prepare and respond to future health emergencies.
Canadian messages related to the importance of global collective efforts to complete the fight against
COVID-19, including learninglessons from the pandemic, as well as sustainable financing for future
pandemic preparedness and response, were highlighted by the Minister in meetings in Washington D.C,
including with U.S. Secretary for Health and Human Services, senior officials at the World Bank, and the
Director of the Pan-American Health Organization, during the Minister’s first international visit.
On November 18, 2021, the Prime Minister attended the North American Leaders Summit in
Washington D.C. along with U.S. President Joseph Biden and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López
Obrador. The three leaders agreed to several commitments, including re-envisioning and updating the
North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza; shoring-up critical medical supply chains;
supporting the Global Health Security Agenda; and continuing trilateral engagement under the North
American Drug Dialogue to address the ongoing opioid overdose crisis. The Prime Minister also held his
first in-person bilateral meeting with President Biden, and reaffirmed the commitments in the February
2021 Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership. The Prime Minister and President agreed to
launch a Canada-U.S. Working Group on Supply Chains, tasked with producing a progress report in the
next 120 days; and to develop a renewed vision for joint management of the border, applying lessons
learned from the pandemic.
On September 22, 2021, Prime Minister Trudeau provided remarks at the Global COVID-19 Summit
convened by U.S. President Biden on the margins of theUnited Nations General Assembly. Following the
Summit, Canada has participated in a series of U.S.-convened COVID-19 international Ministerial
meetings, including most recently a Foreign Ministers’ meeting on February 14, 2022, and a COVID-19
Health Ministers’ “Virtual Dialogue” on March 3, 2022. The U.S. co-hosted a second virtual Leader level
Global Summit on May 12, 2022, along with Germany, Indonesia, Belize and Senegal with the main
198
objectives being ambitious, timely and new commitments for 2022, along the themes of the summit,
which include financing for vaccine coverage; delivery of tests and treatments; and global health
security/pandemic prevention and preparedness.
Ministerial-level discussions have also contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key partners
such as the U.S. and the EU. Germany has assumed the Presidency of the G7 for 2022. Germany has
identified three key areas for the health track: 1) ending the COVID-19 pandemic and implementing the
lessons learned; 2) tackling thenexus of climate change and health; and 3) combatting antimicrobial
resistance. Under its Presidency, Germany will seek to ensure continuity of G7 work from previous
years, as well as the implementation of measures previously adopted by the group. Overcoming the
pandemic around the world is the most pressing objective, and the “G7 Pact for Pandemic Readiness”,
focused on preparing for future health threats. Ministers met in person on May 19-20, 2022, in Berlin for
the G7 Health Ministers’ Meeting. The remainder of the G7 Presidency will focus on implementing the
commitments from the Ministerial Meeting.
Indonesia held the G20 Presidency for 2022. The year’s theme was Recover Together, Stronger
Together. The agenda for the health track focused on Reshapingthe Global Health Architecture. Canada
has been working closely with our G20 partners to support the objectives of the Presidency: building
resilience for the global health system, harmonizing global health protocol standards, and expanding
global manufacturing and knowledge hubs for pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
Canada’s work on this front has included participating in a pilot project to support the interoperability of
proof of vaccination certificates at the international level. Canada will continue to support this work into
2023, as the Indonesian G20 presidency comes to an end. There will also be an opportunity to highlight
priorities related to addressing financing for pandemic prevention, preparedness and response through
the Financial Intermediary Fund, tuberculosis, One Health, and antimicrobial resistance. G20 Health
Ministers met on October 27-28, 2022 in Bali, Indonesia. G20 Finance and Health Ministers are also
scheduled to meet November 14th in advance of the Leaders Summit which will take place November
15-16.
In addition, senior and technical staff of the Health Portfolio have engaged with their counterparts in a
variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally, World Health Organization (WHO), the Pan American
Health Organization, U.S. Centers for Disease, Global Health Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert
and Response Network), to exchange information and best practices that have informed and enhanced
Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
On May 12, 2021, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR) published
their final report and recommendations. The report concludes that the pandemic was a result of
“failures and gaps in international and national responses” at every juncture of preparedness for, and
response to, COVID-19. As a result, “February 2020 was a lost month when steps could have been taken
to curtail the epidemic and forestall the pandemic.”
The IPPPR suggests that the failure of countries to respond was a combination of two things: “they did
not sufficiently appreciate the threat and know how to respond”; and, “in the absence of certainty
about how serious the consequences of this new pathogen would be, “wait and see” seemed less costly
and consequential than concerted public health action.”
The IPPPR also notes that stronger leadership and better coordination at national, regional and
international levels were needed to more effectively respond, and recommendsa more focused and
independent WHO, a pandemic treaty and a Senior Global Health Threats Council that would be led at
199
the Head of State and Government level. The Panel also recommends greater investment in
preparedness and stronger accountability mechanisms to spur action. They call for improved
surveillance and for the WHO to have authority to rapidly publish information and to dispatch expert
missions.
Canada has consistently supported a comprehensive evaluation and review process of the global
responseto COVID-19. Efforts to strengthen WHO and Member States preparedness and response
capacities are being discussed in several international fora including the WHO, G7, G20, Global Health
Security Initiative, Global Health Security Agenda and North AmericanPlan for Animal and Pandemic
Influenza. Canada recognizes the importance of continued bilateral and multilateral discussions on how
to enhance health security and to effectively address risks.
75th World Health Assembly
The 75th World Health Assembly (WHA) was held May 22 to May 28, 2022. Minister Duclos was head of
Canada’s delegation and had a strong bilateral program with counterparts as well as meeting with the
Director General (DG) of the WHO, Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who was re-elected to a second
five-year term as DG.
Consistent with the theme of this WHA, “Health for peace, Peace for Health”, the ongoing Russian
invasion of Ukraine was a dominant theme. WHO sustainable financing, the ongoing pandemic, and
strengthening WHO preparedness andresponse have also emerged as key themes. This included
decisions to start a forward process to negotiate amendments to the International Health Regulations
(2005) and adopt an amendment to the regulations that reduces the time, from 24 months to 12, for
these future amendments to enter into force. This will help make the instrument more agile, and ensure
that future amendments that we agree to are implemented without delay.
In Canada’s view, amendments should be limited in scope and should address specific issues, challenges
or gaps that are critical to supporting IHR implementation and compliance that cannot be effectively
addressed otherwise.
200
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
Issue
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health announced an independent review of the Public Health Agency
of Canada’s (PHAC’s) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). PHAC created and is
implementing an action plan to address the recommendations of the Final Report of the GPHIN
Independent Review and the Auditor General’s Report 8—Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and
Border Control Measures. There has been significant media and parliamentary interest in GPHIN since
early 2020.
Key Facts
• GPHIN is an event-based surveillance system that relieson publicly available information and
provides early-warning for potential health threats worldwide.
• GPHIN analysts conduct a daily review of more than 3,500 articles in nine languages (Arabic,
Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, andsimplified and traditional Chinese) and produce
a daily report.
• In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential
public health threat, GPHIN issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article
about a health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers.
• GPHIN Alerts do not include a risk assessment or recommendations for specific actions or
responses.
• The 2021 Final Report of the GPHIN Independent Review proposed recommendations to
improve GPHIN, and to better integrate PHAC’s surveillance and risk assessment programs.
• In response to the Independent Review, PHAC is taking a number of actions to enhance the
systems’ technical aspects and decision-making processes for GPHIN.
• The Independent Panel confirmed that GPHIN was never shut down. GPHIN provided early
warning of COVID-19 to Canadian public health professionals, and continues to operate as Canada’s
event-based public health surveillancesystem.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians, and we are
taking action to improve and strengthen Canada’s early warning system for potential emergencies,
including pandemics.
• These actions are focused on having the rightsystems, people, and partnerships in place to
detect and share information about potential public health threats.
Budget 2022 key messages
• Budget 2022 provides $436.2 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, with $15.5 million in
remaining amortization, to the Public Health Agency of Canada, to strengthen key surveillance and risk
assessment capacities within the Agency, including the GPHIN.
• This funding supports the real-time tracking of the evolution of viruses, the monitoring of the
longer-term health impacts of COVID-19, and will expand risk assessment capacity and research
networks for new strains of flu, emerging respiratory infections, and vaccine safety and effectiveness.
Progress to date
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has taken anumber of actions to improve Canada’s ability
to detect and share information about public health threats.
• The Agency has:
201
o improved GPHIN Alerts;
o strengthened collaboration with international partners;
o upgraded the GPHIN information technology platform; and
o established a Centre for Integrated Risk Assessment.
Background
About GPHIN
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open-source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological, and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public health agencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance. GPHIN’s products and services are freely available to
eligible users. GPHIN is an important contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic
Intelligence from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
• an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing
to automatically collect and filter data from multiple open sources; and
• a professional multidisciplinary team of analysts that reviews and refines the filtered data, and
also monitors additional open sources to scan for signals of potential public health threats.
Every day, the GPHIN system automatically collects about 7,000 articles, half of which are filtered out
before the GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of the remaining 3,500 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
Articles are collected from open sources and are validated and assessed for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report. This report goes directly from GPHIN to Canadian public health
practitioners at the federal, provincial, territorial, and regional levels, including senior management at
PHAC and other government departments.
In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential public
health threat, the GPHIN team issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article
about a health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers. Such
Alerts do not include a risk assessment or recommendations for specific actions or responses.
Independent Review of GPHIN
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health announced an Independent Review of GPHIN. PHAC finalized
and is implementing its Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP) responding to the
recommendations outlined in the Final Report of the GPHIN Independent Review (2021) and the Auditor
General’s Report 8—Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures (2020).
The independent review considered:
• The capabilities of the existing system;
• Its role in detecting and informing PHAC’s response to COVID-19, and in global and domestic
public health surveillance;
202
• Opportunities to improve the system; and
• The future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next
generation of intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of
Canada is well positioned to respond to future public health events.
The Review also looked beyond GPHIN and examined opportunities to improve how the Agency
synthesizes, shares, and leverages all of its key information sources for early detection of potential
public health threats.
TheIndependent Review Panel consisted of Margaret Bloodworth, Dr. Mylaine Breton, and Dr. Paul
Gully, who were selected based on their expertise in public health, governance, health security, and
intelligence. The panel interviewed more than 55 individuals, including former and current program
staff, provincial officials, international partners, and technical experts from the public and private sector.
The final report was published online on July 12, 2021, and the 36 recommendations therein relate to:
• The role and purpose of GPHIN, including better articulating its role and functions as part of
PHAC, the Government of Canada and the international community’s public health surveillance
activities;
• Extending its partnerships and subscriber outreach and regularly evaluating its processes and
products;
• Enhancing development, training, and recruitment of GPHIN staff;
• Modernizing technology, considering new sources of data, and planning for the next generation
of public health intelligence systems;
• Improving the flow of information from all relevant surveillance systems across PHAC; and
• Establishing a central risk assessment hub at PHAC.
The Government of Canada is committed to ongoing and future work on GPHIN and will focus efforts on
four key areas:
1. Clear mandate, vision, and operations
• Clarify and formalize GPHIN’s mission, vision, and mandate
• Establish processes to develop and continuously improve GPHIN products and services
• Continue to review standard operating procedures to makefurther improvements
2. State-of-the-art platform
• Short term: continue to make further improvements to the current platform
• Longer term: design and build a new modernized system to provide world-class, event-based,
public health surveillance and earlywarning
3. Strong people: Support for the GPHIN Team
• Create a stronger and more sustainable team through updated recruitment, retention, and
development practices
4. Strategic partnerships and connections
• Broaden and strengthen collaborations within PHAC and with key external partners including
security and intelligence communities, provinces and territories, researchers, and international
organizations (e.g., WHO).
To date, the Agency has undertaken the following actions to address the Panel’s recommendations:
• Improved decision-making process around Alerts and other communication products;
203
• Upgraded the existing GPHIN platform via migration to a cloud environment and resolved
outstanding “bugs”, and launched a project management process for development of a new, modern
and modular platform;
• Created strengthened partnerships between GPHIN and external stakeholders, including
partners in security and public safety fields;
• Increased staffing levels and provided improved professional training to GPHIN analysts and
epidemiologists; and
• Established a new Centre for Integrated Risk Assessment to lead integrated public health risk
assessments, working in partnership with surveillance and risk assessment experts Agency-wide.
Auditor General Reporton Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
titled COVID-19 Pandemic: Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures. This included an audit of PHAC’s and the Canada Border Services Agency’s pandemic
response. The report notes that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC
quickly mobilized and adapted its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potential public health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed. GPHIN did include a signal about a “mystery pneumonia outbreak” in the Daily GPHIN report,
published before 8 am on December 31, 2019, and sent to Canadian partners including federal,
provincial, and territorial public health officials. GPHIN thus performed its key function of providing early
warning within Canada. By the evening of December 31, 2019, the significance of this event was clear in
the public health surveillance community. Because the information was being disseminated widely
through a number of other mechanisms, and Canadian officials and international and domestic partners
were already aware (including through the GPHIN Daily Report), it was unnecessary to issue an alert to
further flag this event.
While the audit concluded it was problematic that PHAC did not issue an alert, it is clear that the lack of
issuing alert in no way impeded the actions and response of PHAC. The Interim report noted
“documents received by the Panel show that both PHAC’s former President and Chief Public Health
Officer (CPHO), took action upon receipt of the January 1 Special Report from GPHIN’s management
shortly after 9:00 am that day. The President shared information with the Minister of Health’s office, as
well as counterparts at the Privy Council Office (PCO), Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and Public Safety
Canada (PSC). The following day (January 2), the CPHO notified the Council of Chief Medical Officers of
Health (CCMOH), and PHAC alerted the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) Public Health Network
Communications Group and the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN). The first meeting
of CCMOH related to this viral pneumonia outbreak took place on January 14.”
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after which the
number of alerts decreased significantly.
• PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of, and response to,
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert reporting.
204
• In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure
was put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
PHAC has, and will continue to take actions to improve GPHIN policies, procedures, and operations in
response to the Auditor General’s recommendation and the recommendations from the GPHIN
Independent Review.
205
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON CHILDREN’S VACCINATION
Issue
The COVID-19 pandemic and associated public health measures that aim to limit transmission of the
virus have adversely impacted the availability and accessibility of prevention and health services at all
levels, including routine childhood vaccinations.
Routine vaccination programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect Canadians against
vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs), such as measles, mumps and tetanus. Many common infectious
diseases that were once a major cause of morbidity and mortality in Canada are now preventable with
vaccines. Nevertheless, VPDs remain a public health concern in Canada, and it is important to achieve
the highestpossible levels of vaccination.
Due to the ongoing pandemic, a decrease in routine childhood vaccination coverage is being reported by
provinces and territories (PTs) due to the reduction of in-person primary care visits, disruptions in
school-based vaccination programs, as well as healthcare workers being mobilized to respond to COVID-
19. Decreased confidence in vaccines stemming from widespread and growing mis-and dis-information
may also be widening gaps in vaccine acceptance as parents hesitate to get their children fully
vaccinated.
Disruptions to routine childhood immunization services leading to decreased vaccine coverage are
concerning for the possible resurgence of VPDs, including measles.
There is currently limited data to quantify the impact of the pandemic on pediatric immunization
coverage in Canada, and any differential impacts on specific groups of children.
Key Facts
• Vaccines can protect children against 16 serious diseases, including polio, mumps, diphtheria,
chicken pox, measles, whooping cough (pertussis), and tetanus, among others. Many vaccines for VPDs
are offered early in life (i.e., to infants, children and youth), based on evidence of the optimal timing and
protection of the vaccinations, as reflected in PTs’ recommended immunization schedules. Most of the
vaccines recommended in early life provide over 90% protection against the disease, with protection
being lifelong for some vaccinations.
• The best wayto protect children's health is to prevent these diseases in the first place by
keeping their vaccinations up-to-date.
• Multiple countries worldwide have reported significant declines, delays and disruptions in the
administration of routine childhood vaccines and VPD immunization coverage starting in the months
following the pandemic declaration.
• The highly infectious nature of many VPDs, the fact that the majority of the vaccine coverage
estimates are below the set goals in Canada, and the low vaccinecoverage estimates in some other
countries elevate the risk of outbreaks of potentially serious VPDs domestically and globally.
Response
• Routine immunization programs prevent illness, save lives and are critical in maintaining the
health of Canadiansand healthcare system capacity.
• When enough people are vaccinated against vaccine-preventable diseases, we protect ourselves
and those around us. Children, immunocompromised individuals, the elderly, and those who do not
have up-to-date vaccinations areat greater risk of contracting vaccine-preventable diseases.
• We are working with provinces and territories to monitor routine childhood immunization
coverage, including disparities in coverage across key groups.
• We are also working to ensure that public health and primary care services support parents and
families in catch-up of delayed/missed childhood immunizations in order to prevent potential outbreaks
206
of vaccine-preventable diseases and to support population protection in Canada against many vaccine-
preventable diseases that continue to circulate internationally.
Background
Global estimates of vaccination coverage in 2020 suggested that 23 million children did not receive basic
vaccines through routine immunization services, which is 3.7million more than in 2019. Disruptions to
routine childhood immunization services during the COVID-19 pandemic leading to decreased vaccine
coverage are concerning for possible resurgence of vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs), including
measles.
International and Canadian public health authorities continue to recommend that routine
immunizations are essential health services that should not be deferred.
Vaccine Surveillance
High levels of vaccination coverage for VPDs are required to help ensure the ongoing health and safety
of Canadians, particularly children, people who are immunocompromised (who have weakened immune
systems), and the elderly. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) monitors and leads surveillance of
national vaccination coverage andeffectiveness for the general population, as well as populations at
greater risk of disease and/or severe outcomes. Updated vaccination coverage goals and VPD reduction
targets were agreed to by PTs in 2017, in line with current evidence. Coverage goals range from 80-95%
depending on the age group and the VPD. The Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey (2019)
showed that while vaccination coverage in Canada is good, Canada is not reaching national coverage
goals except for the rubella vaccine among 7-year-olds and the tetanus-diphtheria-pertussis (Tdap)
vaccine booster dose among 17-year-olds. Further, due to the ongoing pandemic, a decrease in
vaccination coverage is being reported by PTs due to the closure of some primary care offices as well as
healthcare workers being mobilized to respond to COVID-19.
There is currently limited data to quantify the impact of the pandemic on pediatric immunization
coverage in Canada, and any differential impacts on specific groups of children. An Ontario study
showed that childhood immunization coverage rates for children under 2 years in Ontario decreased
significantly during the early period of the COVID-19 pandemic especially in children aged 15 to 18-
months old. The coverage rates recovered in the second half of 2020 but remained lower overall
compared to pre-pandemic rates. PHAC and Statistics Canada are currently administering the Childhood
National Immunization Coverage Survey to provide an updated national picture of childhood vaccination
coverage in Canada.
Vaccine Confidence
Vaccine hesitancy has been a longstanding challenge to reducing the burden of childhood illness around
the world and was identified as a top threat to global health by the World Health Organization in 2019.
The rapid spread of mis-and dis-information on COVID-19 vaccines is challenging confidence in all
vaccines, including routine childhood vaccinations. PHAC is working with provinces, territories,
Indigenous organizations and a range of trusted partners and stakeholders in public health to address
vaccine hesitancy by enhancing capacity building, information resources, culturally appropriate
vaccination approaches, and supporting community-led approaches to build vaccine confidence and
reduce access barriers. The Agency is also working to support health care providers with reliable
information on vaccines, and evidence-based strategies and resources to effectively discuss vaccines
207
with their patients and clients, including to support discussions and decisions about childhood
vaccination.
COVID-19 Vaccination
Health Canada has approved certain COVID-19 vaccines for infants, children and youth aged 6 months to
5 years and older.
Infants and young children (6 months to 4 years)
Health Canada has approved the:
• Moderna Spikevax (25 mcg) vaccine as a two-dose primary series for infants and young children
aged 6 months to 5 years
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (3 mcg) vaccine as a 3-dose primary series for infants and young
children aged 6 months to 4 years
NACI recommends that a primary series with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered to children 6
months to 4 years of age who are not moderately to severely immunocompromised and who do not
have contraindications to the vaccine, with a dosing interval of at least 8 weeks between doses. The
same mRNA vaccine is recommended for all doses of a primary series, if possible. A primary series plus
an additional dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered to children 6 months to 4 years of age
who are moderately to severely immunocompromised, with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks between each
dose (Discretionary NACI Recommendations). NACI preferentially recommends a 3-dose primary series
of the Moderna Spikevax vaccine for children who are moderately to severely immunocompromised.
Concurrentadministration with other vaccines is not recommended at this time in this age group. This is
a precautionary measure to help determine if a potential side effect is due to a COVID-19 vaccine or a
different vaccine. However, concurrent administration or a shortened interval between a COVID-19
vaccine and other vaccines may be warranted on an individual basis in some circumstances at the
clinical discretion of the healthcare provider.
Children (5 to 11 years old)
For a primary series, Health Canada hasapproved the:
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (10 mcg) vaccine for children 5 to 11 years old
• Moderna Spikevax (50 mcg) vaccine for children 6 to 11 years old
• Moderna Spikevax (25 mcg) vaccine for children 5 years old
For a booster dose, Health Canada hasapproved the:
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (10 mcg) vaccine for children 5 to 11 years old
The mRNA COVID-19 vaccines for children use a smaller dosage than the mRNA vaccines for those who
are 12 years of age and older. This is because, in clinical trials, lower doses provided children under 12
years of age with very good protection against COVID-19. How long protection lasts in children and
youth is still being evaluated.
NACI strongly recommends that children 5 to 11 years old receive 2 doses of an mRNA vaccine with the
second dose given at least 8 weeks after the first dose. Children 5 to 11 years of age who are moderately
to severely immunocompromised should receive 3 doses of an mRNA vaccine as their primary series
with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks between each dose (Strong NACI Recommendation).
208
Children who turn 12 before their second dose should receive an adult dose for their second dose.
The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (10 mcg) vaccine is preferred for children 5 to 11 years old. This is
because more data are available from the real-world use of this vaccine. Millions of children have safely
received this vaccine in Canada and around the world.
NACI recommends that children 5 to 11 years of age who have an underlying medical condition that
places them at high risk of severe illness due to COVID-19, including children who are
immunocompromised, should be offered a booster dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (10 mcg)
COVID-19 vaccine at least 6 months after completion of a primary series. (Strong NACI recommendation)
For all other children 5 to 11 years of age, NACI recommends that a booster dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty (10 mcg) COVID-19 vaccine may be offered at least 6 months after completion of a primary
series in the context of heightened epidemiological risk. (Discretionary NACI recommendation)
Health Canada, PHAC and NACI continue to monitor the safety and effectiveness of the mRNA COVID-19
vaccines in children 5 to 11 years of age and will provide updates if needed.
Youth (12 to 17years old)
Health Canada has approved the following mRNA COVID-19 vaccines for a primary series for people 12
years of age and older:
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (30 mcg) COVID-19 vaccine
• Moderna Spikevax (100 mcg) COVID-19 vaccine
NACI recommends youth 12 to 17 years of age should be offered 2 doses of an mRNA vaccine with a
dosing interval of 8 weeks. Youth 12 to 17 years of age that are moderately to severely
immunocompromised should receive 3 doses as their primary series with a recommended interval of 4
to 8 weeks between each dose (Strong NACI Recommendation).
The use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (30 mcg) vaccine is preferred for use in youth 12 to 17 years
of age for the primary series due to the lower risk of myocarditis/pericarditis.
Health Canada has approved the following mRNA COVID-19 vaccines for a booster dose for people 12
years of age and older:
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (30 mcg) vaccine is authorized as a first booster dose for individuals
16+
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty bivalent BA.1 (30 mcg) vaccine is authorized as a booster dose for
people 12+
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty bivalent BA.4/5 (30 mcg) vaccine is authorized as a booster dose for
people 12+
NACI recommends that individuals 12 years of age and older who are at increased risk of severe illness
from COVID-19 should be offered a fall 2022 COVID-19 booster dose, regardless of the number of
booster doses previously received (Strong NACI Recommendation). All other individuals 12 to 64 years
of age may be offered a fall 2022 COVID-19 vaccine booster dose, regardless of the number of booster
doses previously received (Discretionary NACI Recommendation). NACI recommends that bivalent
Omicron-containing mRNA COVID-19 vaccines are the preferred vaccine products for booster doses this
fall (Strong NACI Recommendation).
209
NACI recommends that fall booster doses may be offered at an interval of 6 months after a previous
COVID-19 vaccine dose or SARS-CoV-2 infection. A shorter interval of at least 3 months may be
considered, particularly in the context of heightened epidemiological risk, evolving epidemiology and
operational considerations for the efficient deployment of fall immunization programs. Based on what is
known at this time, it is not expected that a booster dose will be routinely provided every 3 months.
Youth may receive a COVID-19 vaccine at the same time, or any time before or after, other vaccines.
210
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) manages the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS)
to support provinces and territories during emergencies. To bolster the response to COVID-19 and
address the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care, PHAC works with
federal partners including Health Canada, National Research Council, Global Affairs Canada, the
Department of National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada, Statistics Canada, and
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada.
Key Facts
• Canada's NESS contains supplies that provinces and territories can request in emergencies, such
as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters, and other public health events, when their own
resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items such as personal protective
equipment (PPE); vaccine ancillary supplies; medical equipment (e.g. ventilators, biomedical equipment)
and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively distribute incoming medical supplies and
equipment, such as personal protective equipment and vaccine supplies, to provinces and territories to
support Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• Significant stockpiles of supplies are maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
(NESS) and are deployed in response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories.
• Budget 2022 provides $50 million in 2022-23 to help maintain critical medicalsupplies, including
personal protective equipment, so that Canada can continue to quickly respond to public health events
and other emergencies.
If pressed on how the government of Canada is working to secure a sufficient quantity of PPE in Canada
• ThePublic Health Agency of Canada continues to work with provincial and territorial partners to
monitor the sufficiency of National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventories, and will take steps to
address emerging supply gaps if required.
If pressed on NESS Inventory
• As of August 4, 2022, key supplies within the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventory
include:
o N95 respirators and equivalents: 52 million units
o Surgical masks: 212 million units
o Face shields: 25 million units
o Nitrile gloves: 797 million pairs
o Disposable and reusable gowns: 117 million units
o Needles and syringes: 206 million units
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively replenish its inventory to secure sufficient
quantities of supplies, including through multi-year contracts.
• The Government of Canada has procured enough first aid supplies, including band-aids and
swabs, to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines across the country.
211
If pressed on domestic PPE manufacturing
• The following percentages ofcommodities procured by the Public Health Agency of Canada are
domestically manufactured:
o Approximately 70% of N95 respirators. This percentage accounts for the 2 multi-year contracts
with AMD Medicom and 3M Canada.
o 50% of surgical masks. This percentage accounts for the multi-year contract with AMD
Medicom.
o 100% of face shields.
o 25% of disposable gowns.
If pressed on the disposal of PPE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada adheres to the Treasury Board Policy on Materiel
Management, which setsout a lifecycle management continuum for sound management of crown
assets.
If pressed on biomedical equipment
• Since the beginning of the pandemic the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile has increased
its stock of biomedical equipment from 858units and 14 models to 43,000 units and 58 different models
and continues to assess the need for new equipment to secure response capability for public health risks
and threats .
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with federal, provincial and territorial
partners to transfer biomedical equipment, including but not limited to ventilators, infusion pumps and
oxygen concentrators.
plan for the future of the NESS
• The top priority for the Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting Canada’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Agency is committed to enhancing its preparedness for future public health emergencies,
including working on improvements for the management of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada agreed with the recommendation of the Auditor General to
develop a comprehensive management plan for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to support
responses to future public health emergencies.
• This plan will focus on key areas, such as optimizing life-cycle materiel management, enhancing
infrastructure and systems, and working closely with provinces and territories and other key partners to
better define needs and roles and responsibilities.
Background
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to respond in a reasonable manner to the most common
emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement and management
of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• To provide surge capacity support to provinces and territoriesat their request when their own
resources are not sufficient
212
• As the sole provider of certain assets, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes,
required for rare public health emergencies
NESS Footprint
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 2.5 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
NESS Funding
As of February 2022, the NESS budget for COVID-19 response is approximately $7.4 billion for the
procurement of PPE, vaccine ancillary supplies, medical equipment and supplies, and for logistics and
warehousing, with approximately $5.5B spent. An additional $65.5 million has been approved for
ongoing funding for medical countermeasures.
Budget 2022 provides $50 million in 2022-23 to support the operations of the NESS. This funding will be
used to help maintain the critical medicalsupplies, including personal protective equipment, so that
Canada can continue to quickly respond to public health events and other emergencies.
Life-cycle Management
Taking into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC will develop a comprehensive
management plan for the NESS that will focus on capacity and readiness of the NESS to support
responses to future public health emergencies. This will include a focus on key areas such as optimizing
operations, including logistics and life-cycle management; enhancing infrastructure and systems;
working closely with the provinces and territories and other key partners to strengthen Canada’s overall
preparedness; and conducting ongoing analysis on asset requirements.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
Asa result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidancehas evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Canada has successfully secured an
adequate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet potential demand.
OAG Audit
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) undertook a performance audit on the Government of Canada’s
ability to meet the needs of provinces and territories, and the healthcare sector, for PPE and medical
devices to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The audit period covered January 2020 through to
August 31, 2020 and implicated the PHAC, PSPC and HC.
Overall, the OAG found that PHAC, PSPC and HC helped to meet the needs of provincial and territorial
governments for PPE and medical devices during the pandemic. The report does however highlight that
asa result of long-standing unaddressed problems with the systems and practices in place to manage
the NESS, PHAC was not as prepared as it could have been to respond to the needs of provinces and
territories for PPE and medical devices.
PHAC and HC have both committed to addressing the recommendations from the OAG within one year
of the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
213
OAG AUDIT REPORTS DURING THE PANDEMIC
Issue
In 2021, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled reports for three COVID-19 performanceaudits
that involved the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC): the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness,
Surveillance, and Border Control Measures (March 25); the Audit of Securing Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) and Medical Devices (May 26); and, theAudit of Enforcement of Quarantine and
COVID-19 Testing Orders (December 9). PHAC has been actively working on addressing the
recommendations from these audits.
Key Facts
• Management has accepted the recommendations found in all three Audits.
• A Deputy Head approved Management Response Action Plan (MRAP) was developed for each
Audit, which includes milestones and timelines.
• PHAC has begun making progress towards the completion of the Audit recommendations.
• The status of corresponding MRAPs is monitored on an ongoing basis and reported on
biannually against deadlines and deliverables to the PHAC Executive and Departmental Audit
Committees.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to consider findings and recommendations
from all three of these audit reports—along with other audits, evaluations and further lessons learned
from the response to COVID-19—to inform future planning and to position Canada well to respond to
future global health events.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s top priority is supporting Canada’s response to the COVID-
19 pandemic. The Agency will be taking all lessons learned into account to be prepared for potential
future pandemics.
• Work is underway to respond to the recommendations from the three audits, while maintaining
consideration for pandemic response priorities.
If pressed on how PHAC has addressed the recommendations from the previous audits
• Work is currently underway to respond to the recommendations from these three audits and
some recommendations will be completed within one year after the World Health Organization declares
the end of a pandemic based on global epidemiology, as the Public Health Agency of Canada and its
partners shift from emergency response mode to resuming regular operations.
• In the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, the Auditor
General made seven recommendations for the Agency related to pandemic planning, health surveillance
information, early warning of public health threats, and border measures. The Agency has begun making
progress in addressing recommendations related to health surveillance information and early warning of
public health threats.
• The Audit of Securing PPE and Medical Devices resulted in two recommendations for the Public
Health Agency of Canada related to assessing needs and managing the National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile. The Agency has already completedone recommendation, specifically related to documenting
and enforcing a contract management protocol and governance structure, and have begun work on the
remaining recommendation.
• For the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, the Public Health
Agency of Canada agreed with the two recommendations made in the report and developed a
214
corresponding action plan to address the recommendations. Action plans slated for completion by the
beginning of 2024, involve improving the Agency’s enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit
the spread of COVID-19 and improving the use of information on the outcomes of its referrals for follow-
up.
If pressed on how PHAC will address standing issues and be better prepared for the next pandemic
• There are and will be many lessons for everyone from this pandemic, in Canada and around the
world, which we are learning from in order to adjust our approach and ensure we remain well
positioned and prepared to respond to future global health events.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s response, its guidance, and its advice have evolved during
the pandemic and been informed by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert
opinions, which can change as new information becomes available.
• The Government of Canada has provided significant funding and resources to protect the health
and safety of all Canadians and to support the response to COVID-19, including $690.7 million for the
Agency over two years, as announced in the Fall 2020 Economic Statement, to strengthen the Agency’s
response and surge capacity in areas such as:
o communicating and advancing the science around epidemiology, modelling, vaccines, testing,
and therapeutics;
o offering rapid surge capacity support to provinces and territories for contact tracing, testing
assistance and equipment, laboratory services, and outbreak management; and
o making organizational changes and expanding the Agency to bolster its capacity in a number of
critical areas.
Background
ThePublic Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) plays a leadership role in preparing for and responding to
public health emergencies.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC has directed the implementation of border restrictions
and border control measuresto help prevent travellers from spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 in
Canada.
On March 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory quarantine
under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
Since then, there has been a strong focus from the Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) on the
Health Portfolio.
Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
On March 25, 2021, the Auditor General of Canada tabled a performance audit of Pandemic
Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures. Both PHAC and the Canada Border Services
Agency were implicated in this audit. The audit objectives were to:
• Determine whether PHAC was prepared to respond to a pandemic to protect the healthand
safety of Canadians, supported by accurate and timely public health surveillance information;
• Determine whether PHAC and the Canada Border Services Agency implemented border control
and quarantine measures to limit the introduction and further spreadin Canada of the virus that causes
COVID 19.
Taking into consideration the OAG’s recommendations, PHAC’s response, its guidance, and its advice
have evolved during the pandemic and have been informed by the latest available scientific evidence,
215
epidemiology, and expert opinions, which can change as new information becomes available. PHAC has
been actively working to address the OAG’s recommendations to be better prepared in the future.
Audit of Securing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Medical Device
On May 26, 2021, the OAG tabled their audit on PPE and Medical Devices, which implicated PHAC,
Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada. This audit focused on:
• whether PHAC and Health Canada, before and during the COVID-19 pandemic,helped meet the
needs of provincial and territorial governments for selected PPE and medical devices; and
• whether Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support.
Selected equipment for this audit included N95 respirators,medical gowns, testing swabs and
ventilators. These items were considered to be at risk due to high global demand, limited suppliers,
specific technical requirements and limited domestic production.
PHAC recognized that this audit identified areas for improvement to be better prepared for future
health events, including for the management of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile. PHAC is
committed to acting on these recommendations to enhance its preparedness for future public health
emergencies.
Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Within the same year of the first two audits, the OAG conducted their third PHAC audit, the audit of
Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders. This audit, concentrating solely on PHAC, was
the follow-up on the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures. This
audit focused on:
• Whether PHAC improved its administration of mandatory orders to limit the introduction of the
COVID-19 virus and its variants inCanada;
• Whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures introduced in early 2021
(such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and quarantine of air travellers at government-
authorized hotels pending the results of their on-arrival COVID-19 tests).
PHAC is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better follow up with
travellers who are subject to border measures, and is implementing GBA+ considerations to mitigate any
potential adverse impacts of existing and future programs on diverse and vulnerable groups.
PHAC will continue to address the action plans and complete them accordingly, taking into consideration
the ongoing response to the pandemic.
216
VACCINATION–GENERAL
Issue
Routine immunization programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect Canadians
against vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs), such as measles, mumps and tetanus. Many common
infectious diseases that were once a major cause of morbidity and mortality in Canadaare now
preventable with vaccines. Nevertheless, VPDs remain a public health concern in Canada, and it is
important to achieve the highest possible levels of vaccination.
As Canada and the world return to broader socio-economic activity following the acute phase of the
COVID-19 pandemic, the risk of VPDs is increasing. Monitoring uptake of routine childhood vaccinations
and ensuring that Canadians of all ages are up-to-date with their routine vaccinations remain important
ways to minimize outbreaks and prevent further spread of VPDs.
Key Facts
• In Canada, immunization is a shared responsibility among the federal, provincial and territorial
(FPT) governments. The provinces and territories (PTs) design, plan and deliver immunization programs.
The federalgovernment leads the regulatory approval of vaccines and supports the vaccine
administration of PTs across multiple functions, including coordinating the bulk purchasing of vaccines
for jurisdictions, conducting national vaccine surveillance, and facilitating FPT engagement on
immunization policies and programs.
Key Messages
• Routine vaccination programs prevent illness, save lives and are critical in supporting the health
of Canadians.
• When enough people are vaccinated, we protect ourselves and those around us. Children,
immunocompromised individuals, the elderly, and those who do not have up-to-date routine
vaccinations, as outlined in the Provinces’ and Territories’ recommended immunization schedules, are at
greater risk of contracting vaccine preventable diseases.
• When outbreaks occur, vaccine preventable diseases can have a profound impact on access to
and operations of all areas of our health services. This prospect is especiallyconcerning as health
systems across Canada are already operating beyond capacity due to the ongoing response to COVID-19.
• The federal government is working with provinces, territories and health professional partners
to promote, strengthen and support “catch up” within routine vaccination programs that have been
disrupted due to the pandemic to increase individuals’ and communities’ protection from vaccine
preventable diseases.
If pressed
• The Government of Canada is committed to supporting routine vaccination, as a vital means of
preventing disease, disability, and death, and reducing pressure on healthcare systems.
Background
Immunization is a shared responsibility among federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) governments.
Health Canada leadsthe regulatory approval of vaccines. This involves rigorous scientific review and
testing to assess the quality, safety, and efficacy of vaccines before they are approved for use. Once a
vaccine is authorized, Health Canada, together with the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC),
217
conducts post-market surveillance to monitor vaccine safety, detect and respond to possible adverse
events.
The provinces and territories (PTs) administer vaccines within their jurisdictions, which includes all policy
and program decision-making, design and implementation required to determine which public programs
to offer, which vaccines to buy, where to administer vaccines, and priority populations and eligibility
criteria for vaccination.
PHAC supports PTs in delivering their immunization programs by: leading FPT engagement and
coordination; bulk purchasing vaccines for all jurisdictions; conducting vaccine confidence research,
policy, and programming; managing vaccine coverage, effectiveness and safety surveillance; facilitating
immunization research; enhancing domestic manufacturing capacity; and supporting the delivery of the
Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP).
FPT Engagement
To support FPT engagement on immunization policies and programs, the Canadian Immunization
Committee (CIC) is a key national forum that brings together PT representatives and federal
departments responsible for immunization programming, including Health Canada, Indigenous Services
Canada, and Correctional Service Canada, among others. Under the direction of the Communicable and
Infectious Diseases Steering Committee of the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network Council, the CIC
provides a platform to implement the objectives of the National Immunization Strategy, foster FPT
collaboration, engage with non-governmental stakeholders, and discuss and provide strategic
operational and technical advice and best practices on issues related to vaccination in the interest of
coordinating and improving immunization policies and programs in Canada.
Vaccine Supply and Assurance
PHAC works with PT partners and Public Services Procurement Canada (PSPC) to lead vaccine supply
management. This includes routine immunization and influenza vaccine procurement and maintaining a
national state of readiness by securing pandemic influenza vaccine preparedness contracts. Through the
Bulk Procurement Program, PHAC works with PSPC to lead and advise on vaccine acquisition and
allocation for FPT programs. The team coordinates jurisdictional needs, seeks to enhance the security of
supply, and manages challenges and disruptions that could impact immunization program delivery.
Vaccine Confidence
The World Health Organization (WHO) identified vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten risks to global
health in 2019, threatening to reverse the progress that has been made in addressing VPDs. Vaccine
hesitancy is complex and can be more common in certain populations, including marginalized or
underserved communities who have historically experienced systemic racism and often do not trustthe
government. PHAC acts as the focal point for vaccine confidence policy, research and behavioural
analysis to inform development of evidence-based awareness and outreach campaigns and tools and
training to support healthcare providers communicate credible information about vaccine effectiveness
and safety to Canadians.
A core part of federal vaccine confidence efforts, the Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF) supports
public health actors, trusted partners, and communities across Canada to increase vaccine acceptance
and uptake through grants and contributions. The IPF provides funding to local, regional and national
organizations, and PTs to develop evidence-based approaches designed to improve vaccination
coverage rates and combat mis-and dis-information. Supporting trusted representatives from within
communities is proven to be an effective way to deliver programming, communicate information about
vaccines, and increase vaccine confidence and uptake.
218
Vaccine Surveillance
High levels of vaccination coverage for VPDs are required to help ensure the ongoing health and safety
of Canadians, particularly children, immunocompromised (weakened immune system) individuals, and
the elderly. PHAC monitors and leads surveillance of national vaccine coverage and effectiveness for the
general population as well as vulnerable populations. Updated vaccination coverage goals and VPD
reduction targets were agreed to by PTs in 2017, in line with current evidence. Coverage goals range
from 80-95% depending on the age group and the VPD. The most recent Childhood National
Immunization Coverage Survey (CNICS), which is a longstanding study that measures the immunization
coverage among children in Canada, showed that while the majority of the vaccine coverage estimates
are below the set goals, gains were made in some areas since earlier iterations of the survey. The most
up to-date results are available from CNICS 2019 (pre-pandemic). Results from CNICS 2021 will be
released in spring 2023, and we will shed additional light on the impact of the pandemic on routine
childhood vaccine uptake and changes that may have occurred towards achieving vaccine coverage
targets. Therefore, there is a need for ongoing vaccine coverage surveillance through CNICS.
After a vaccine isauthorized for use in Canada, post-market safety surveillance is conducted to monitor
and understand how vaccines behave in the entire population and their real-world impact. This is critical
for rapidly detecting and responding to safety issues, ensuringthat the benefits of a vaccine continue to
outweigh the risks, and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s
immunization programs. Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a
collaboration between PTs, PHAC, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers. Manufacturers are
required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the national regulatory authority, as well
as submit regular summaries of global safety information. Health Canada reviews these reports and
takes appropriate regulatory actions should new safety issues be identified. In addition, PHAC receives
and reviews reports of adverse events following immunization from FPTs immunization programs and
two active surveillance networks through the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization
Surveillance System. Adverse events following immunization reports are continuously assessed and
potential safety issues are flagged immediately for further investigation.
Immunization Research
Emerging, real-world research is a critical component of immunization program evidence-informed
decision-making. PHAC works with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to support public
health research. The Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) is an example of this; a multi-
disciplinary network that addresses diverse immunization research requirements in Canada on topics
related to vaccine safety, immunogenicity and effectiveness, vaccine hesitancy, and immunization
program implementation andevaluation. Knowledge translation activities are also supported by PHAC
to promote the communication of key research findings to decision-makers, academia and relevant
stakeholders.
Biomanufacturing
Recognizing the importance of a resilient and innovative biomanufacturing and life sciences sector, in
July 2021, the Ministers of Innovation, Science and Industry and Health launched, and share joint
accountability for the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy). The Health Portfolio is
working with the Department of Innovation, Science and Economic Development to advance the
Strategy, which outlines a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic capacity to rapidly develop
and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for future
pandemics or other health emergencies.
219
Recognizing the evolving technology and the advantages of leveraging newer, more rapidly adaptable
vaccine platforms. On November 7, 2022, the Prime Minister, Justin Trudeau, took part in the ground-
breaking of vaccine developer Moderna’s new state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in
Laval, Quebec. When completed, this new facility will be able to produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine
doses per year in non-pandemic timesand up to 100 million doses per year during a pandemic.
Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness, but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a
globalmRNA research and development hub. Moderna is committed to partnering with Canada’s
leading research universities and institutions to help advance research and development here at home.
For example, Moderna has already partnered with McGill University through Moderna’s mRNA Access
program to accelerate vaccine innovation, as well as with the University of Toronto to do research
across a range of scientific disciplines to develop new ways to treat infectious diseases.
The facility will boost the Canadian economy through the creation of hundreds of jobs during
construction and operation of the facility, including direct and indirect biomanufacturing and research
jobs. Moderna’s facility will also mean domestic opportunities for the brightest young minds in the field
through internships, co-op positions, and other Moderna-supported training and development
opportunities. In this way, the facility will enhance Canada’s talent pipeline by attracting, developing and
retaining a highly skilled workforce. The facility will also offer the potential for Canadian companies to
work with Moderna, and, where possible, opportunities to comprise part of Moderna’s supply chain.
The facility is expected to be operational in 2024 at the earliest, subject to planning and regulatory
approvals. In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, the facility is expected to be able to produce vaccines for
other respiratory diseases, such as influenza–pending their ongoing development by Moderna and
approval by Health Canada.
220
VACCINE INJURY SUPPORT PROGRAM
Issue
The Government of Canada has established a no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP). The
program ensures that all people in Canada who have experienced a serious and permanent injury as a
result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after December 8,
2020, have access to fair and timely financial support. The VISP is available to all Canadians outside the
province of Quebec. Quebec is receiving federal funds to continue to administer its existing provincial
program for people vaccinated in Quebec. The program brings Canada in line with a growing number of
countries that have such programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
Key Facts
• A total of $75 million in funding has been earmarked for the first five years of the program.
• The overall cost of the program will be dependent on the volume of claims and compensation
awarded over time. To date, $33.2 million over 5 years is allocated to RCGT Consulting Inc. (RCGT) for
administrationand claim payments. Up to $7.75 million over 5 years has been allocated to the
Government of Quebec for the continued delivery of its provincial vaccine injury compensation
program.
• Remaining funds are available to adapt to the demand for financial support.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring that Canadians who support public health
by being vaccinated are supported in the rare event that they experience a serious and permanent
injury as a result of vaccination.
• The no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP) was launched on June 1, 2021, and is being
administered independently by RCGT Consulting, which oversees all aspects of claims intake,
assessment and reporting.
• The program ensures people in Canada whoexperience a serious and permanent injury as a
result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8,
2020, have access to fair and timely financial support.
• The province of Quebec is receiving federal funds to continue to administer its existing
provincial program for people vaccinated in Quebec. Individuals vaccinated in all other provinces and
territories are eligible under the pan-Canadian program.
If pressedon timelines to process a claim
• As theindependent third-party administrator of the VISP, RCGT Consulting oversees all aspects
of claims intake and assessment.
• Timelines for a determination of eligibility and support will depend on the nature and
complexity of the claim. To receive compensation through the VISP, a causal relationship between the
injury and the vaccination must be objectively determined.
• The causality assessment process requires the third-party administrator to retrieve all relevant
medical records from the province or territory or from the medical institution where the patient
received care. This process can take time and create delays outside of the third-party administrator’s
control.
• Payments for those who have a serious and permanent injury from a vaccine will be retroactive
to the date of the injury.
221
If pressed on number of claims received
• The program is administered independently by RCGT Consulting.
• RCGT is committed to providing public reporting and began publishing program statistics on
their website in December 2021. The last publicly available information on their website is as of June
2022.
• As part of their mid-year reporting, RCGT has indicated to the Public Health Agency of Canada
that as of September 30, 2022, a total of 1,166 claims have been received. Of these, 128 were assessed
by a Medical Review Board and 33 claims were deemed eligible. In total, $2,034,314.95 has been
approved for payment to eligible claimants.
• RCGT will regularly update program statistics on their website. The next update is expected in
December 2022.
If pressed on the type of support available
• Eligible individuals may receive income replacement indemnities; injury indemnities; death
benefits, including coverage for funeral expenses; and reimbursement of eligible costs, such as
otherwise uncovered medical expenses.
• Compensation is comparable to what is provided through Quebec’s vaccine injury compensation
program.
Background
On December 10, 2020, the Prime Minister announced the creation of a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine
Injury Support Program (VISP). The program launched on June 1, 2021, and provides financial support to
people in Canada in the rare event that they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of
receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020.
The program will also provide death benefits and support for funeral expenses in the rare case of death
as a result of having received a Health Canada authorized vaccine.
Provinces and territories were given the option to create their own vaccine injury support programs
with federal funding. All, except Quebec, chose to participate in the national program. Quebec is
receiving federal funding to continue to deliver its existing program. A five-year contribution agreement
with the province of Quebec was signed on March 31, 2022. In order to ensure equity across the
country, the parameters of the pan-Canadian VISP have been modelled on Quebec’s successful regime,
to the extent possible.
An open solicitation process took place in February 2021 to identify a third-party administrator for the
VISP. PHAC received four proposals. A six-member Review Committee comprised of experts from inside
and outside government in the areas of privacy, compensation programs,procurement, and medical
expertise was established to review these proposals. After a comprehensive review, RCGT Consulting
Inc. was unanimously selected and is now administering the VISP independently from PHAC. A five-year
contribution agreement with RCGT Consulting Inc. was signed on June 1, 2021.
The process of establishing causality between a vaccine and an injury, as well as determining the
severity and permanency of an injury, is complex and can be lengthy. However, the current timelines for
RCGT to process claims are in line with other international vaccine injury programs. For example, as of
October 1, 2022, the US Countermeasures Injury Program (US VISP) had received 7,412 claims related to
COVID-19 vaccines and a total of $6 million had been paid out to 30 claimants.
RCGT is continuously working to improve its processes to ensure it is as responsive as possible to the
needs of those affected by vaccine injuries.
222
SECURITY AT THE NATIONAL MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY
Issue
Following a motion for the production of papers by the Special Committeeon Canada-China relations,
there has been a renewed interest in security protocols at the National Microbiology Laboratory.
Key Facts
• Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) is known around the world for scientific
excellence and contributions to global health. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) engages in
important scientific research relationships to advance public health research and science aimed at
improving public health. Collaborations with labs outside of Canada are critical to advance public health
research into infectious diseases.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada takes threats to research security, intellectual property and business
interests seriously.
• The National Microbiology Laboratory is a world class facility and abides by all Government of
Canada mandatory procedures for secure facilities.
• All individuals working within the National Microbiology Laboratory undergo a security
screening and must adhere to Government of Canada security protocols, procedures and policies based
on the level of access required.
If pressed on scientific collaborations with other countries
• Collaborations with laboratories outside of Canada are critical to advancing public health
research and science aimed at improving public healthon a global scale, including research into
infectious diseases.
• As an institution with global partnerships, the National Microbiology Laboratory looks to open
science and collaboration as core to its work, and has policies and processes that allow for scientific
collaboration.
If pressed on collaborations between NML and China
• While the NML does not have institutional-level collaborations with China, Canada’s scientists
have collaborated with Chinese scientists to contribute to the global public health fight against deadly
diseases, such as Ebola. These collaborations have yielded vaccine and treatment candidates for
diseases, as documented in peer-reviewed journals.
Background
Collaborations
The NML Science Excellence Program launched in September 2019 and is aimed at strengthening
policies and processes that allow for appropriate scientific collaboration while adhering to established
security controls.
While active collaborations may be time limited, publications resulting from collaborations can be
expected for many years. Publications must acknowledge the contributions of the individuals involved
through the scientific process, from inception to final write up. It is not possible to say how many future
publications could result from previous experimentation. The research work is intended to result in
academic publications for the advancement of science and knowledge, and so the intent is that papers
223
will be openly published in the normal community of peer-reviewed journals. The preparation and
publication of these manuscripts is being done in accordance to government policy in support of open
science.
Queries Regarding Employment Status
PHAC has received numerous questions from media as well as members of parliament regarding the
employment status of individuals as well as work performed at the NML. PHAC has important
obligations under the Privacy Act. As such, employment status with PHAC is not considered personal
information, but any additional information about individuals that are not or were not employees is
considered personal information and cannot be disclosed.
Security Screening at PHAC
Federal departments and agencies are responsible for managing the security screening process
following the Treasury Board Policy on Government Security. Approvals are granted by the Deputy
Head/President of PHAC or delegated official. At PHAC, the Chief Security Officer is responsible for the
management of the security screening program.
224
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. The Government has an ambitious target to
reduce tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035.
KEY FACTS
• Approximately 3.8 million Canadians smoke cigarettes–about 12% of the population over the
age of 15.
• Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330M investment
over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
healthof young people and people who do not smoke.
• Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death, and we are
working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Health Canada is updating tobacco labelling requirements to reflect the latest scientific
evidence. We will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke
from becoming addicted and to provide Canadians with information on the health hazards of tobacco
use.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE …
• We urge Canadians who smoke to consider quitting. When you give up cigarettes, your body
starts to renew itself as early as the first day, reducing your chance of developing heart disease, cancer,
breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help.
• Canadians can contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
them develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community where available.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW …
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of the Act on a two
year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The first review assessed whether the Act is making progress in achieving its vaping-related
objectives, particularly those related to protecting young people.
• Input from Canadians was sought in March and April 2022 to inform this review and over 3,000
submissions were received.
• With this first review, we wanted to hear from a wide range of stakeholders. The final report
was delayed to ensure ample time for public engagement.
The final report will be tabled in Parliament this Fall and will be made public onCanada.ca.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO COST RECOVERY …
• The tobacco industry is responsible for the leading preventable cause of disease and premature
death in Canada.
225
• That is why Minister Bennet’s mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobacco
manufacturers to pay for federal public health investments in tobacco control.
Health Canada is working with partners within the federal government to examine options and
determine next steps.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS…
• The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the devastating harms of tobacco use.
• That is why we areproposing to update health warning messages and to extend them to all
tobacco product packages to maintain their effectiveness.
• We are also proposing that Canada become the first country to introduce written health
warnings on certain individual tobaccoproducts, like cigarettes, so it would be virtually impossible to
avoid health warnings altogether.
• We held a 75-day consultation which ended on August 25, 2022, to seek input from Canadians
on these proposed measures. We are currently reviewing all thecomments received and will take them
into consideration as the proposal moves forward.
BACKGROUND
Data released on August 26th 2022, from the 2021 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), show
show a second year of declines in smoking. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts,
resulting in a national average rate of 12% (3.8M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. Daily smoking also
declined to 9% (2.7M) from 10% (3.2M) in 2019. A reliable estimate on daily smoking for youth aged 12
–17 or 15-19 cannot be determined for 2021.
While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking, reminding us that, despite
decades of effort to deter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public health problem in Canada.
Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all Canadians who
smoke dailyfor a long time. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit are
higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian SubstanceUse Costs and Harms 2015–2017”. The report identifies the enormous
burden tobacco use places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use
to society was approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco usewas identified as the
deadliest and most costly substance by far accounting for 47% of all attributable health care costs from
substance use and approximately 48,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per day or 17% of
all deaths).
Canada’s TobaccoStrategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada,Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Tobacco Cost Recovery/Levy
226
Minister Bennett’s mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobaccomanufacturers to pay for
the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco control. Health Canada is working closely with
other Government of Canada partners to examine options and determine next steps.
227
YOUTH VAPING AND SUBSTANCE USE
ISSUE
• Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of
measures to address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and
enforcement of existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
KEY FACTS
• Youth vaping rates doubled over a two year period (2017-2019). Since that time, smoking rates
among youth are at an all-time low and vaping rates have stabilized
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences ofVaping prevention
campaign to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping. To date, Health
Canada has invested more than $14 million and the interactive learning tour has reached over 158,000
across 968 schools.
• In the winterof 2023, online resources will be made available for teachers to host sessions.
KEY MESSAGES
• Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. Our Government is pleased to see
that vaping rates among Canadian youth have stabilized, accordingto a recent survey.
• Nonetheless, we remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and is taking
comprehensive action.
• Regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can
be seen or heard by youth.
• New regulations are also now in force setting a maximum nicotine concentration for all vaping
products, and Health Canada has consulted Canadians on proposed regulations to restrict flavours in
vaping products to make them less attractive.
• Our comprehensive evidence-based approach to substance use-related harm prevention helps
communities promote protective factors in order to create healthy, supportive environments and build
resiliency among youth.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS …
• A key objective of theCannabis Act is to protect young persons and others from inducements to
use cannabis.
• Since the enactment of the Cannabis Act, the consumption patterns among youth have not
changed significantly.
• The Cannabis regime includes provisions to reduce the appeal of cannabis to youth, including
strict promotion restrictions, child-resistant plain packaging, and THC limits in specific products.
• The Department continues to monitor research and evaluate potential measures that could be
taken to betterachieve the Act’s public health and public safety objectives.
• The Government of Canada invested in public education prior to legalization and regulation with
campaigns to educate youth and young adults, promote informed decision-making, and educate on the
health risks of cannabis and road safety.
• In Spring 2022, Health Canada launched the revamped teacher-led “Pursue Your Passion”
campaign for youth 13-15 as well as added cannabis content into the existing “Consider the
Consequences” high school vaping education campaign for youth aged 13-18.
228
IF PRESSED ON ILLEGAL CANNABIS PRODUCTS TARGETED AT YOUTH …
• The Cannabis Act includes requirements to protect youth from the risks of cannabis. These
include restrictions on promotion; prohibiting products and packaging appealing to youth; and THC
limits in specific products.
• Illegal cannabis products have no controls and are more likely to lead to negative health effects.
Illegal products often mimic common snacks and candy, and may contain dangerous contaminants or
high THC.
• The Act gives law enforcement tools to crackdown on illegal sales, including those targeting
youth.
• Health Canada continues to educate Canadians about the risks of illegal cannabis, and how to
recognize the difference between legaland illegal cannabis, launching the “Reduce your risk: Choose
legal cannabis” campaign in May 2022.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE IN PEDIATRIC CANNABISPOISONINGS …
• Health Canada continues to have concerns about the potential harms to children who
accidentally consume cannabis.
• This is why, in December 2022, the department issued a public advisory to help raise awareness
of this ongoing issue. The advisory, which was updated in April 2022, provided guidance on how to
properly store cannabis and tips for recognising legally sourced cannabis.
• Health Canada continues to educate Canadians through public education campaigns, to
encourage adults to store all cannabis securely and out of reach of children and youth. The department
also continuously monitors public awareness and reports of adverse reactions to cannabis and cannabis
products.
• The department will continue to monitor this issue closely and will continue to educate the
public and Canadian parents about ways to help avoid pediatric cannabis poisonings.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO AND VAPING USE …
• Our Government is pleased to see that smoking rates among Canadian youth are at an all time
low, and that vaping rates have stabilized, according to a recent survey.
• Nonetheless, our Government remains concerned about substance use, including youth vaping,
and is taking action, including its Consider the Consequences of Vaping youth prevention campaign,
investing more than $14 million to date.
• We will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke from
becoming addicted to nicotine and tobacco and provide Canadians with health information on tobacco
use.
IF PRESSEDON OPIOID USE AMONG YOUTH …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the opioid overdose crisis is one of the most serious
public health threats in Canada.
• To support awareness, the Know More Tour, launched in 2018, engages with teens and young
adults on the health risks associated with opioid use, as well as the harms of substance-use stigma.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to leading a whole-of-society approach to
address the opioid overdose crisis. Our approach seeks to ensure that all Canadians can access the life-
saving substance use and health supports they need.
229
IF PRESSED ON THEYOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN …
• We have invested in prevention campaigns to educate youth and young adults on the risks and
harms of substance use, including vaping to provide guidance to reduce those harms, and to reduce
substance-use stigma.
• In 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping youth prevention
campaign, investing more than $14 million to date.
• The campaign has included in-print and online advertising, as well as an interactive learning tour
in schoolsand community venues or virtually. Vaping awareness kits were provided to all middle and
high schools, and information resources sent to health care professionals.
• In 2021-22, the campaign focused on reaching youth with new advertising framed with
empowerment messaging.
• As of June 2022, the interactive learning tour has reached over 158,000 youth in over 968
schools across the country. Starting in the winter of 2023, an online resource adapted from the learning
tour will be available for teachers to host their own sessions.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES …
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and promotions.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove lifestyle advertising from
television and in-store displays, and online content from social media influencers.
• Between August 2021 and March 2022, Health Canada inspected more than 1,400 vaping
retailers and seized non-compliant vaping products at over 250 establishments.
• Between December 2021 and February 2022, Health Canada conducted inspections of 30 online
vaping-product retailers and issued 24 Warning Letters.
IF PRESSED ON FLAVOURS REGULATIONS…
• On June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the proposed order to amend the Tobacco and
Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes
Regulations.
• The proposal would implement a complementary three-pronged approach to restricting the
flavours of vaping products.
• The consultations closed on September 2, 2021. Health Canada received over 25,000
submissions and is currently reviewing the input it received from Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to
address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and enforcement of
existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. To date, Health Canada has invested more than $13
million, and an additional $1 million is planned to continue the campaign this year.
230
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The VapingProducts Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On July 8, 2021, new Nicotine Concentration in Vaping Products Regulations came into force, which set a
maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products sold to 20 mg/ml, down from 66 mg/ml. As of July
23, 2021, it is prohibited to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than 20 mg/ml
in Canada.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, on June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the
proposed Order Amending Schedules 2 and 3 to the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the
proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes Regulations. The proposal is a three-
pronged approach to restricting flavoured vaping products. The regulations would restrict the
promotion of flavours in vaping products to tobacco, mint, and menthol; prohibit all sugars and
sweeteners and most flavouring ingredients; and prescribe sensory attributes standards to prevent a
sensory perception other than one that is typical of tobacco or mint/menthol. The consultation period
for the proposed regulations closed September 2, 2021 and the department is reviewing feedback on
this proposal.
231
ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
ISSUE
• Currently, women, youth, 2SLGBTQI+ people, racialized Canadians, and Indigenous populations
face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks andthe greatest barriers to accessing support,
information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the same quality of care, particularly if they are
from marginalized communities.
KEY FACTS
• Canadians, especially those from underserved populations (including women, members of
2SLGBTQI+ communities, Indigenous and racialized people, and youth), continue to face barriers to
access abortion services which includes a lack of availability, a lack of financial and logistical resources
required to travel toaccess abortion care, and lack of culturally-safe, stigma-free sexual and
reproductive health services. Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created to
advance mandate commitments relating to sexual and reproductive health and to strengthen the
healthcare system and public health supports for vulnerable members of our communities, and those
who have faced discrimination by the very system that is meant to heal.
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We are funding community-based organizations to provide training and to increase knowledge
and capacity among sexual and reproductive health care providers, develop and implement best
practices, carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to access
abortion care.
• Budget 2021 committed $45 million to advancing sexual and reproductive health. To date, $24.9
million has been allocated. Nine projects, valued at $15.3 million, are underway. Of these nine projects,
two address access to abortion, five address 2SLGBTQI+ communities, two address youth. Two of the
nine projects include components focusing on Indigenous peoples. In addition, per capita funding of
$9.7M has been allocated to the Province of Québec to support community-based organizations located
in Québec.
IF PRESSED ON DATA…
• We are also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill
existinginformation gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTIONSERVICES…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
• Of the $45 Million committed in Budget 2021, the Government of Canada has invested $3.6M to
date to support access to abortion for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to care. In the
first six months of funding Action Canada provided 234% greater levels of financial support, and for a
208% increase in number of people supported, as compared to the same period in 2021.
232
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING
ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY) …
• This fund is specifically designed to help women access abortion and it will not support
initiatives that discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or attempt to override the individual’s
right to make decisions about their own body.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist lens, and
realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive health
services remain. Women, members of2SLGBTQI+ communities, youth, racialized Canadians and
Indigenous peoples face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to
accessing support, information, and services.
An initial targeted call for proposals inviting select organizations to submit applications for funding was
launched on July 29th, 2021 and closed October 4, 2021. Nine contribution agreements have been
signed. A second targeted Call for Proposals was launched on July 12, 2022 and closed on September
16th.Further funding decisions will be made in the coming months.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range of
indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based decision-
making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including prevalence
of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual knowledge and
behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services
Although access to abortion services in Canada has been improved by the approval and roll-out of
Mifegymiso for medical abortion, the availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces and
territories and nationally. Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for
surgical abortion services in a limited number of private clinics in both New Brunswick and Ontario.
Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the
Canada Health Act.
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges
for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act
and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since March 2020,
deductions totaling $269,916 have been levied against the NB’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments
in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for abortions performed
in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution. Currently, Clinic
554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion
services.
233
In summer 2019, media stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical
abortion services in some private clinics. Health Canada followed up on these reports by analyzing clinic
websites, and by makingphone or email inquiries to clinics of concern. While the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for
uninsured services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to
accessing insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations the patient charges discovered were
reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021 and March 2022
deductions (totaling $20,465). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to
Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical
abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontarioas it works to
implement its action plan and eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services and the province
will provide an updated status report in the coming months, which will be published in the Canada
Health Act Annual Report for 2021-2022.
Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization in the United States
The U.S. Supreme Court, in rendering their decision in the case Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, held that the Constitution of the United States does not confer any right toabortion,
overruling the decisions in Roe v. Wade (1973) and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1993) that prohibit
U.S. states from passing legislation criminalizing abortion. This decision will make it possible for states to
criminalize abortion at their discretion.
There has been concern in Canada about Americans coming to Canada seeking abortion care, potentially
overwhelming limited Canadian resources. Since many states, including several on the U.S.-Canadian
border, have announced their intention to protect abortion services, a large influx of American patients
seems unlikely. Similar to other health care services, Americans coming to Canada would be able to
obtain safe abortion care in Canada, but would have to pay for the service out-of-pocket. Media articles
have reported an increase in phone enquiries from Americans seeking information since the decision,
but no increase in the booking of appointments.
Because of differences between the American and Canadian legislative and judicial systems, the
Canadian legal context for abortion is distinct. In Canada, following the Supreme Court of Canada’s
decision in R. v. Morgentaler (1988), abortion was decriminalized in Canada. There is therefore no
regulation at the federal level regarding abortion. As with other health care, abortion service delivery is
managed at the provincial or territorial level.
234
2SLGBTQI+ Health
Issue
2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations experience worse health outcomes across a range of
issues. These health inequities are the result of persistent, inequitable social and economic conditions
for these groups. These impacts are amplified for Indigenous and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations
affected by the intersecting impacts of colonialism and racism.
Key Facts
• Mentalhealth: Worse outcomes for 2SLGBTQI+ people have been reported across a range of
indicators, including (but not limited to) mental health. For example, the prevalence of low self-rated
mental health among bisexual adults is 3 times that of heterosexual adults; among gay/lesbian adults it
is 1.7 times that of heterosexual adults.
• Suicide: 2SLGBTQI+ people in Canada are more likely to contemplate suicide in their lifetime
(approximately 40% of LGB Canadians vs 15% of heterosexual Canadians).
• Substance use: 24% of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and other non-heterosexual respondents to the
2018 Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces reported having used drugs or alcohol to cope with
experiences of emotional abuse and physical violence, versus 10% of heterosexual respondents.
• Chronic disease: Higher prevalence of cardiovascular diseases, some types of cancer and
respiratory diseases among 2SLGBTQI+ communities, with the onset of chronic diseases also happening
earlier in life.
• Barriers accessing healthcare: Experiences of discrimination within the healthcare system
sometimes cause 2SLGBTQI+ people to avoid seeking healthcare in the first place. For example, 12% of
respondents to the Trans PULSE survey had avoided the emergency room in the previous year,despite
needing care, and 45% reported having unmet healthcare needs within the same period.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to addressing stigma and discrimination against
2SLGBTQI+ populations and reducing the social and health inequities that they face.
• Our focus is on creating inclusive environments where everyone feels seen, safe, respected and
welcomed.
• This work is important because we know that intersecting systems of discrimination create
barriers to employment, housing, social support, health, and social services, and threaten the personal
safety and overall well-being of 2SLGBTQI+ individuals.
• To address the unique needs of these populations, we are investing in research, health
promotion and disease prevention programs, as well as initiatives to improve health care. This includes
programs to address mental health, gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health.
BACKGROUND
Historical and ongoing injustices endured by 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, racialized, immigrant, and disabled
populations, and women, have created persistent, inequitable social and economic conditions for these
groups. Consequently, 2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations experience stigma, discrimination
and worse health outcomes across a range of issues. These health inequities are amplified for
Indigenous and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations affected by the intersecting impacts of colonialism and
racism.
235
Gay, lesbian and bisexual Canadians experience substantial inequities in self-rated health and mental
health, household food insecurity, smoking, heavy drinking, asthma, arthritis, and HIV infection.
Canadian studies have also revealed significant socioeconomic inequities facing 2SLGBTQI+ populations,
including in income, employmentand workplace stress, as well as experiences of violence, hate crimes,
and discrimination. Suicidal thoughts, plans and attempts are disproportionately prevalent among
2SLGBTQI+ youth compared to non-2SLGBTQI+ peers.
Recent Developments to Support 2SLGBTQI+
Blood Donor Deferral Period for Men who have sex with Men
There are two blood system operators in Canada–Canadian Blood Services (serving all provinces and
territories except Québec) and Héma-Québec (serving the province of Québec). Both are regulated by
Health Canada.
On September 11, 2022, Canadian Blood Services eliminated the three month blanket donor deferral
period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and instead began screening all donors,
regardless of gender or sexuality, for high risk sexual behaviour. Health Canada authorized this change
towards more inclusive screening on April 28, 2022. The Government of Canada provided $5.4M,
starting in 2016, to support the necessary research to effect this change.
In March 2022, Health Canada approved a submission from Héma-Québec to move to sexual-behaviour
based screening for all source plasma donors. On October 2, 2022, Héma-Québec replaced their plasma
donation questionnaire with a gender-neutral questionnaire, using the same questions as those
authorized for Canadian Blood Services for use in the rest of Canada.
On September 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized Héma-Québec’s submission to eliminate the three
month blanket donor deferral period for all sexually active men who have sex withmen, and others
impacted by this process, and to begin screening all blood, platelet, and plasma donors, regardless of
gender or sexuality for high risk sexual behaviour. Gender neutral, behaviour-based screening for blood
and platelets will take effect on December 4, 2022.
Moreover, non-binary and transgender donors must presently be evaluated by Héma-Québec medical
staff for donation eligibility prior to attending blood drives. As of December 4, 2022, anyone wishing to
donate blood products through Héma-Québec will answer the same questions regardless of sex or
gender identity, and an evaluation by a Héma-Québec medical staff member will no longer be required.
Monkeypox
Community-based organizations have been an important source of expertise regarding health
promotion, disease prevention, and culturally responsive communications for the Government’s
response to monkeypox. The virus continues to be an ongoing concern, andmore work remains to be
done. As of August 12, 2022, Public Health Agency of Canada has invested $900,000 in new investments
through the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to the Community Based Research Centre
(CBRC), H.I.M. Health Initiative for Men Society in Vancouver, the Queer and Trans Health Collective in
Edmonton, The AIDS Committee of Toronto, RÉZO Montreal, and the Ottawa Gay Men’s Wellness
Initiative (MAX Ottawa) to increase the capacity of communities in the regions most impacted by the
monkeypox outbreak.
AIDS 2022
On August 1, 2022 at the AIDS 2022 conference hosted by Canada, the Government of Canada
announced a time-limited (September 2022–March 2023) investment of $8 million to acquire HIV self-
test kits and support community-based organizations.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
The Health Portfolio currently supports the health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations through a range of both
targeted and inclusive initiatives, and will seek opportunities to strengthen these efforts as the
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan evolves over its 5-year timeline. Some of these initiatives include:
236
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC):
1) Data and surveillance initiatives, such as the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting
Initiative and enhanced surveillance throughfunding support for the Sex Now Survey;
2) Education and training initiatives, such as the Agency’s involvement in updating the “Pride
Guide” resource for 2SLGBTQI+ youth in Canada;
3) Funding programs that have supported 2SLGBTQI+ projects, including theMental Health
Promotion Innovation Fund (2 targeted projects), the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (23
targeted projects), the Preventing Gender-Based Violence initiative (5 targeted projects), the Mental
Health of Black Canadians Fund (3 targeted projects), the Dementia Community Investment (1 targeted
project), and the Harm Reduction Fund (3 targeted projects);
4) Research and knowledge translation initiatives, such as the Canadian Research and Knowledge
Translation Agenda on Suicide and its Prevention, which includes a focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; and
5) Emergency preparedness and response, such as the $900,000 investment from the HIV and
Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to increase capacity of 2SLGBTQI+ community organizations in the
regions most impacted by the monkeypox outbreak.
Health Canada:
1) Funding programs that have supported, or are anticipated to support projects focused on
2SLGBTQI+ populations. The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund ($45 million over 3 years, starting in
2021/22) has a strong emphasis on initiatives focusing on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; of the first 9 projects
that were funded, 5 focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, for a total dollar value of $8.8 million. Additional
funding programs supporting 2SLGBTQI+ populations include the Substance Use and Addictions Program
($100 million over 3 years, starting in 2022/23); and the Addressing Racism and Discrimination in
Canada’s Health Systems Program ($14.9 million over three years, beginning in 2021/22); and
2) Broader initiatives to improve access to care, which do not focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, but
include the populations through an SGBA Plus lens, such as the Action Plan on Palliative Care, National
Standards for Mental Health Services, National Standards for Long Term Care, the Task Team on
Equitable Access to Virtual Care, and Wellness Together Canada.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR):
1) CIHR supports research and knowledge mobilization related to 2SLGBTQI+ health, including
through the following time-limited priority-driven research initiatives:
• Catalyst and support grants for Community-Led Research on LGBTQIA/2S Wellness;
• The Health Research Training Platform on Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness for
LGBTQ/2S Populations (co-fundedwith PHAC and Egale);
• The CIHR Sex and Gender Science Chair-LGBTQI2S Wellness and Resilience;
• The Transitions in Care initiative, which includes research that will inform how healthcare teams
can collaboratively work with intersex individuals acrossCanada in an effort to improve lifelong
wellbeing within this population across several transitions in care;
• The Indigenous Gender and Wellness Initiative, which includes research to improve wellness of
Indigenous Two-Spirit and LGBTQI+ individuals and communities;
• Catalyst Grants for Healthy Youth, which includes dedicated funding for 2SLGBTQI+ youth (Note:
this competition is currently underway with results expected in March 2023);
• Transforming Health with Integrated Care Implementation Science TeamGrants, including
projects related to gender-affirming health (Note: this competition is currently underway with results
expected in April 2023);
• CIHR recently launched the National Women’s Health Research Initiative in partnership with the
Department of Women and Gender Equality (WAGE). This will invest $20 million over five years to
advance a coordinated research program that addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of
237
women's health. The initiative promotes an intersectional lens to researchand care to tackle persistent
gaps for all women, including members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities.
2) CIHR also continues to advance measures to promote equity, diversity and inclusion within the
research ecosystem, including for/with 2SLGBTQI+ researchers and trainees, for example through
commitments to further gender equity in CIHR’s strategic plan and the Tri-Agency Equity, Diversity and
Inclusion Action Plan.
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan
On August 28, 2022, the Government of Canada launched the first-ever federal 2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan,
which seeks to improve the social, economic and health outcomes of 2SLGBTQI+ populations in Canada
through a whole-of-government approach. WAGE is the federal lead on the Action Plan.
The historic $100 million Budget 2022investment in the Action Plan, allocated entirely to WAGE, will
support activities such as community capacity, anti-stigma, awareness and research–all of which will
advance meaningful action on the social determinants of health and have a positive impacton the
health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations.
The Health Portfolio’s current initiatives to support 2SLGBTQI+ populations also contribute to the Action
Plan’s objectives, but more work remains to be done. The Health Portfolio will continue to work with
federalpartners such as WAGE to advance the priorities of the Action Plan and related Government of
Canada equity initiatives, such as Canada’s Anti-Racism Strategy 2.0, Canada’s Action Plan on
Combatting Hate, and the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls 2SLGBTQIA+ National
Action Plan.
238
PESTICIDESREGULATION
ISSUE
• Pesticides are stringently regulated in Canada to ensure they pose minimal risk to human health
and the environment. Under authority of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA), Health Canada:
o registers pesticides after a science-based evaluation that ensures any risks are acceptable;
o re-evaluates the pesticides currently on the market on a 15-year cycle to ensure the products
meet current scientific standards; and
o promotes, monitorsand enforces compliance with the PCPA.
• To further strengthen pesticide oversight and protection of human health and the environment
and improve transparency, on August 4th, 2021, the Federal Government announced a $50 million
investment in Health Canada's PMRA and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest management
research, to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC). This investment is
intended to further strengthen pesticide monitoring and protection of human health and the
environment, and to increase transparency.
KEY FACTS
• To deliver on this commitment, the PMRA has established a Transformation Agenda, which
focuses on four major areas: strengthen human and environmental health and safety oversight and
protection throughmodernized business processes, improve transparency to increase the public’s
participation in the decision making process for pesticides, increase use of real-world independent data
and independent advice to better inform regulatory decision making, and a targeted review of the Pest
Control Products Act (PCPA).
• Health Canada launched extensive public consultations on a review of specific provisions of the
PCPA, in alignment with the Minister of Health’s mandate letter. The consultations, which closed on
June 30, 2022, sought the ideas and input of Canadians and stakeholders on a series of questions to
inform the review. A What We Heard report was published on the Government of Canada’s web site.
The report summarizes the input received from 121 written submissions and over 40 engagement
sessions with a broad range of stakeholders and partners. Health Canada is currently taking into
consideration all feedback received to inform the targeted legislative review, as well as to inform the
various policy and regulatory initiatives currently underway.
• Other results achieved to date includes the creation of a science advisory committee to provide
independent advice to the PMRA prior to making certain pesticide decisions, the launch of water
sampling at varioussites across the country to inform the development of a national water monitoring
framework for pesticides, and revamping PMRA’s website to facilitate navigation and search for
information by users on registered pesticides or consultations underway. The PMRA has also initiated
implementation of certain elements on its new approach that aims to continuously review emerging
science on pesticides across their life-cycle.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada takes pesticide safety very seriously, and is committed to making
evidence-based scientific decisions. Pesticides are only approved for use in Canada after being
thoroughly assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the environment will occur when used
according to the label.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes increasing use of independent data, modernizing business processes, and
improving transparency.
239
• Health Canada conducted extensive public consultations between March and June 2022, on
ways to increase transparency and strengthen human health and environmental protection.
• The development of a national water monitoring program and of new transparency measures
are currently underway. Implementation of elements of thenew approach to continuous oversight of
pesticides across their life-cycle has also started. Health Canada will continue to implement further
initiatives to ensure our pesticide review process meets the expectations of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER DETAILS ON THE SCIENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE …
• The Transformation agenda includes the creation of a new independent Science Advisory
Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada (SAC-PCP). The committee membership was announced
on June 27, 2022 and already held its first 2 meetings in July and October.
• The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide independent
scientific advice, as appropriate, to Health Canada’s PMRA to help inform evidence-based decisions on
pesticides.
• The Committee is a source of scientific advice for PMRA on specific issues related to pest control
products, including on MRL processes, and other scientific questions.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONTINUED USE OF GLYPHOSATE IN CANADA …
• Health Canada scientists have conducted an extensive review of this chemical and have
concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions are followed.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOINGTO MONITORGLYPHOSATE IN THE ENVIRONMENT …
• Health Canada is establishing a national water monitoring framework with provinces, territories,
and other key stakeholders, to collect real-world data on the presence of pesticides, including
glyphosate, in surface and groundwater in Canada.
• This framework will help to shed better light on regulatory decisions on pesticides. Sampling
began in the summer of 2022 and the first results will be published in mid-December 2022.
IF PRESSEDON GLYPHOSATE FOUND INFOOD …
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) shows levels found are compliant
with the maximum residue limits allowed to be in or on food. As such, the levels detected by the CFIA
are not a cause for health concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN DRINKING WATER …
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk of glyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosate was found not to be of
concern.
IF PRESSED ON THE PROPOSAL TO INCREASE GLYPHOSATE MRLS …
• Health Canada is currently working to increase transparency and its use of independent data
and advice, including to clearly communicate rationales for its decisions, the science that underpins
them, and how decisions will impact Canadians.
• Health Canada received significant feedback from the public in response to the proposed
increase to MRLs for glyphosate in May 2021. MRL-related comments resulting from the Pest Control
Products Act (PCPA) consultation, which closed on June 30, 2022, are also being considered.
240
• Health Canada is currently reviewing all feedback received to inform its approach including on
MRLs.
• Health Canada will continue to welcome feedback from all stakeholders and engageinterested
partners, including Indigenous organizations, as it continues to develop and implement its proposed
initiatives on business process modernization, improved transparency and increased use of real-world
data.
• In October, Health Canada sought independent advice from the new SAC-PCP to better inform
its decisions on MRLs. Moving forward, additional scientific advice will be sought to inform Health
Canada’s proposed continuous oversight approach to identify and consider emerging scientific
information in a timelier manner. These steps will help ensure that MRLs are established and reviewed
using an evidence-based approach and based on the best science available.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA–WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES OF
NEONICOTINOIDS–IS TAKING A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSUREFROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR
…
• As part of the public consultation on its proposed decisions, Health Canada received more than
47,000 comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces.
As well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from
various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were
reviewed.
• The Departmentconsidered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these
neonicotinoid insecticides in Canada.
• An evaluation of available scientific information resulted in certain uses being cancelled to
address potential risks of concern to pollinators. Some uses meet current standards for protection of
pollinators when used according to the conditions of registration, which include required amendments
to labeldirections.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S DECISION TO CANCEL THE USE OF STRYCHNINE FOR RICHARDSONS’S
GROUND SQUIRREL CONTROL IN SASKATCHEWAN AND ALBERTA DESPITE A STUDY SUBMITTED FROM
SASKATCHEWAN …
• Health Canada’s scientists reviewed all pertinent information, including the study from
Saskatchewan, before concluding that no practical mitigation measures could be implemented to
protect the environment adequately.
BACKGROUND
Before a pesticide is allowed to be used or sold in Canada, it must undergo a rigorous scientific
assessment that provides reasonable certainty that no harm to human health and the environment will
occur when it is used according to label directions. Depending on the type of pesticide being evaluated,
results from up to 200 scientific studies (or more in some cases) may be required to determine whether
the pesticide would have any negative effect on people (e.g. chronic effects such as cancer), animals or
plants, including organisms in the soil and water. This assessment also takes into consideration sensitive
populations, such as pregnant and nursing women, infants, children and seniors.
Health Canada’s PMRA must also periodically re-evaluate pesticides that are on the market to determine
whether they continue to meet the Department’s health and environmental standards and hence,
241
whether they should continue to be permitted for use in Canada. The PCPA also requires Health Canada
to initiate a special review of a registered pest control product when there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the health or environmental risks of the product are, or its value is, unacceptable, or when
an OECD member country prohibits all uses of an active ingredient for health or environmental reasons.
On August 4, 2021, the Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's
Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest
management research, to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
To deliver on this commitment, the PMRA has established a Transformation Agenda, which focuses on
four major areas: strengthen its oversight and protection of human health and the environment through
modernized business processes. This includes increasing the availability of independent data and
independent advice to better inform regulatory decision making, and improve transparency to increase
the public’s understanding of the decision-making process for pesticides and a targeted review of the
PCPA.
The Transformation agenda includes the creation of a new independent Science Advisory Committee on
Pest Control Products in Canada (SAC-PCP). On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call
for nominations to create the new SAC-PCP. Nominations closed March 11, 2022, and thecommittee
membership was announced on June 27, 2022. The committee held its first meeting in July. A second
meeting was held October 20, and a subsequent meeting is scheduled for December 5, 2022.
The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide scientific advice, as
appropriate, to Health Canada’s PMRA to help inform evidence-based decisions on pesticides. The
Committee is a source of scientific advice for PMRA on specific issues related to pest control products,
including on MRL processes, and other scientific questions.
In Spring 2022, PMRA launched consultations with a broad range of partners and stakeholders on a
targeted review of the PCPA through a discussion document published onCanada.ca.A total of 121
writtensubmissions were received. Additionally, over 40 meetings were held with partners and
stakeholders, including meetings of the Transformation Steering Committee (TSC), technical working
groups (TWG), public information sessions, and meetings on an ad-hoc basis with stakeholders.
Throughout these consultations, PMRA heard from a variety of groups–pesticide manufacturer
associations, agricultural and non-agricultural pesticide users, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
academia, Indigenous organizations,the provinces and territories, foreign jurisdictions, including the
United States, Australia and the European Union, and the general public.
This consultation concluded on June 30, 2022, followed by extensive review of the feedback received to
inform thepath forward on pesticides. The ‘What We Heard’ report, published on November 1, 2022,
provides an overview of what PMRA heard through the consultation. As such, it is intended to reflect the
views of respondents as they were expressed and does not necessarily reflect the views of the
Government of Canada, the existing legislative framework in the PCPA or the operational practices of
PMRA.
Working with Provinces, territories as well as federal partners, PMRA also launched a water sampling
pilot in spring2022 to inform the development of a national water monitoring framework for pesticides.
242
Results will be released publicly on the Government of Canada’s open Portal as soon as they become
available.
The PMRA has also taken steps to improve access toinformation on pesticides by revamping its website
in late October 2022. As a result, users can now easily search for information in the Public Registry, on
consultations underway or on specific pesticide decisions, including MRLs.
243
PESTICIDE PROGRAM TRANSFORMATION AND TARGETED REVIEW OF THE PEST CONTROL PRODUCTS
ACT
ISSUE
• On August 4, 2021, the Federal Government announced that it would begin consulting on
specific provisions of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) to consider ways to strengthen PMRA’s
oversight and protection of human health and the environment and increase transparency in the
regulation of pesticides. In addition, the Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in
Health Canada's Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada
(AAFC)'s pest management research, to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada
(ECCC).
• This includes $42 million over three years to be invested in the PMRA to further strengthen its
oversight and protection of human health and the environment. A further $7 million will be invested to
AAFC, and $1 million to ECCC in supporting work, to accelerate the research, development and adoption
of alternative pest management solutions.
• This investment supports Health Canada’s commitment set forth in the Minister of Health’s
Mandate letter: To ensure Canadians are protected from risks associated with the use of pesticides and
to better protect human health, wildlife and the environment, modernize and strengthen the Pest
Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent scientific evidence and
input to the decision-making process.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada's Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) is undergoing a transformation
process thatwill strengthen its oversight and its protection of human health and the environment. The
transformation process will ensure the pesticide review process meets the expectations of Canadians in
the areas of transparency and sustainability.
• Transformationwill be undertaken in four major areas: improved transparency; increased use of
real-world data and independent advice; strengthened human health and environmental protection
through modernized business processes; and a targeted review of the Pest ControlProducts Act.
• The targeted legislative review will help the PMRA determine if any legislative changes to the
PCPA are required to modernize and strengthen the regulatory system on issues like transparency,
modernized business processes and the use of real world data.
• Between March 21 and June 30, 2022, Health Canada consulted on specific elements of the Pest
Control Products Act (PCPA) through the discussion paper: Further Strengthening Protection of Health
and the Environment: Targeted Review of the Pest Control Products Act.
• On November 1, 2022, Health Canada published a ‘What We Heard’ report for the Targeted
Review of the PCPA. This report summarizes input from a broad range of stakeholders on the recent
consultations regarding the Transformation Agenda and will inform the path forward on pesticides.
• Health Canada is currently taking into consideration all feedback received to inform the targeted
legislative review, as well as to inform the various policy and regulatory initiatives currently underway.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada takes pesticide safety very seriously, and is strongly committed to
making evidence-based scientific decisions. Pesticides are only approved for use in Canada after being
thoroughly assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the environment will occur when used
according to the label.
• Health Canada is implementing a Transformation Agenda to strengthen its oversight and
protection of human health and the environment. This includes improving access to independent data,
244
modernizing business processes, and improving transparency of the regulatory process and decision-
making.
• Health Canada conducted extensive public consultations between March and June 2022. This
feedback is being used to inform the targeted legislative review, as well as to inform the various
initiatives currently underway.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER DETAILS ONTHE SCIENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
• To support the Transformation objective of increasing the use of independent advice, on June
27, 2022, Health Canada announced the membership of the new Science Advisory Committee on Pest
Control Products (SAC-PCP) in Canada. The committee is meeting regularly to provide independent
scientific advice to further support PMRA’s evidence-based decisions on health and environmental risks
and value assessments of pesticides.
• The Committee held its first two meetings in July and October 2022 and has provided helpful
advice to the PMRA on specific scientific questions including on Maximum Residue Limits. The third
meeting of the SAC-PCP is anticipated in December 2022 where the committee will be asked to consider
another scientific question from the PMRA.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, all pesticides are subject to the federal Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) administered by
Health Canada. Under the Act, pesticide products must be registered, or otherwise authorized, before
they may be sold or used in Canada.
Before pesticides are approved, they must undergo a rigorous scientific assessment process, inclusive of
hundreds of types of scientific studies, that provides reasonable certainty that no harm to human health
and the environment will occur when it is used according to label directions.
On August 4, 2021, the Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's
Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest
management research, to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
To deliver on this commitment, the PMRA has established a Transformation Agenda, which focuses on
four major areas: strengthen its oversight and protection of human health and the environment through
modernized business processes. This includes increasing the availability of independent data and
independent advice to better inform regulatory decision making, and improve transparency to increase
the public’s understanding of the decision-making process for pesticides and a targeted review of the
PCPA.
The Transformation agenda includes the creation of a new independent Science Advisory Committee on
Pest Control Products in Canada (SAC-PCP). On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call
for nominations to create the new SAC-PCP. Nominations closed March 11, 2022, and the committee
membership was announced on June 27, 2022. The committee held its first meeting in July. A second
meeting was held October 20, and a subsequent meeting is scheduled for December 5, 2022.
The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide scientific advice, as
appropriate, to Health Canada’s PMRA to help inform evidence-based decisions on pesticides.
245
The Committee is a source of scientific advice for PMRA on specific issues related to pest control
products, including on MRL processes, and other scientific questions.
In Spring 2022, PMRA launched consultations with a broad range of partners and stakeholders on a
targeted review of the PCPA through a discussion document published onCanada.ca.A total of 121
written submissions were received. Additionally, over 40 meetings were held with partners and
stakeholders, including meetings of the Transformation Steering Committee (TSC), technicalworking
groups (TWG), public information sessions, and meetings on an ad-hoc basis with stakeholders.
Throughout these consultations, PMRA heard from a variety of groups–pesticide manufacturer
associations, agricultural and non-agricultural pesticide users, non-governmental organizations (NGOs),
academia, Indigenous organizations, the provinces and territories, foreign jurisdictions, including the
United States, Australia and the European Union, and the general public.
This consultation concluded on June 30, 2022, followed by extensive review of the feedback received to
inform the path forward on pesticides. The ‘What We Heard’ report, published on November 1, 2022,
provides an overview of what PMRA heard through the consultation. As such, it is intended to reflect the
views of respondents as they were expressed and does not necessarily reflect the views of the
Government of Canada, the existing legislative framework in the PCPA or the operational practices of
PMRA.
246
2021-22 HEALTH CANADAPUBLIC ACCOUNTS
ISSUE
• The Public Accounts of Canada were tabled on October 27, 2022.
KEY FACTS
• The Department’s authorities used (spending) for the 2021-22 fiscal year was $6.04 billion. Total
authorities received were $9.45 billion. The resulting lapse is $3.40 billion, or 36.0%. Compared with
2020-21 authorities used of $3.12 billion, there was an increase in spending of 94.0%.
KEY MESSAGES
• My Department is committed to ensuring that public funds are spent effectively, and in a
transparent manner.
• Health Canada has strong internal financial controls designed to detect and minimize errors and
financial losses.
• The Department also regularly audits its internal controls to make sure they are up to date and
effective, and takes action to recoverany inappropriate spending or financial losses.
IF PRESSED ON SPENDING LAPSE …
• Health Canada works to ensure that the resources at its disposal are fully and efficiently utilized
in order to improve the health of Canadians.
• For the 2021-22 fiscal year, Health Canada experienced a spending lapse of $3.4 billion. This is
mainly the result of requesting $2.5 billion through both statutory (Bill C-10) and voted spending
authorities (Supplementary Estimates C) allowing for flexibility for the procurement of critical and time-
sensitive additional COVID-19 rapid tests. The expenditures were charged against the statutory authority
in this case, and the appropriations were frozen and allowed to lapse to ensure that funding was not
spent twice.
• Additionally, the lapse includes a reprofile from 2021-22 to 2022-23 of $575 million related to
supporting emergency measures related to the pandemic (COVID-19).
IFPRESSED ON MINISTER EXPENSES …
• Our Government is firmly committed to engaging and consulting with Canadians, and as
Minister of Health this often requires travel to all of Canada’s regions to discuss their health needs.
• The expenses found in the Public Accounts line up with those that are released regularly
through the proactive disclosure process.
IF PRESSED ON LOSSES OF PUBLIC MONEY OR PUBLIC PROPERTY …
• Health Canada handles a high number of financial transactions every year and takes all losses of
public money or property seriously.
• As losses are discovered, an investigation is launched on each case and we seek to recover
taxpayers’ money through all available means, including involving law enforcement agencies if needed.
IF PRESSED ON DEBT WRITE-OFF …
• Departmental debt write-offs tend to fluctuate year over year.
• In all cases, we seek to get the best possible value for Canadian taxpayers, including through
debt collection actions where warranted.
247
IF PRESSED ON CLAIMS AGAINST THE CROWN …
• The Department attempts to limit all situations where claims against the Crown may arise.
• However when claims do arise, they are reviewed in depth by Department of Justice officials to
ensure that any settlements made are in the best interest of the Crown.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNAL AUDIT REPORTING OF 35,000 MISSING COMPUTERS AS OF THE END OF 2019
…
• The scope of the audit included the examination and assessment of all relevant systems,
records, personnel, and physical properties related to HC and PHAC IT assets upto June 2019, while the
Public Accounts cover FY 2021-22. As such, the finding and the subject matter are not part of the public
accounts reporting.
• Since 2017, all IT assets that have financial (beyond a nominal low dollar threshold) or business
value(all procured assets that could contain data, including computing and storage devices) are being
tagged and tracked in a single, integrated system.
• The Department’s analysis of the audit findings has determined that the inability to confirm the
existenceand location of these computers and devices is largely a result of data discrepancies on the
number of assets, rather than missing devices.
BACKGROUND
The Public Accounts of Canada is the report of the Government of Canada prepared annually by the
Receiver General, as required by section 64 of the Financial Administration Act. It covers the
Government fiscal year, which ends on March 31.
The information in the report originates from two sources of data:
• the summarized financial transactions presentedin the accounts of Canada, maintained by the
Receiver General; and
• the detailed records, maintained by departments and agencies.
Each department and agency is responsible for reconciling its accounts to the control accounts of the
Receiver General, andfor maintaining detailed records of the transactions in its accounts.
The Public Accounts report the financial transactions of the Government during the year. In certain
cases, Parliamentary authority to undertake transactions was provided by legislationapproved in earlier
years.
Each year, the President of the Treasury Board tables a detailed report of the financial transactions of all
government departments and agencies, entitled the Public Accounts of Canada. Responsibility for the
form andcontent of the Public Accounts rests with the President of the Treasury Board and the Minister
of Finance.
The Deputy Head and Chief Financial Officer sign the Letter of Representation to the Office of the
Auditor General and Deputy Receiver General. TheLetter of Representation acknowledges
management’s responsibility with regard to departmental system of internal control and accuracy of the
financial information.
248
The Public Accounts normally do not generate much attention at the departmental level. However,
losses of public money and other financial transactions have received some attention in the past for
other departments. The following areas have been of interest in recent years:
Spending
The Department’s authorities used (spending) for the 2021-22fiscal year was $6.04 billion. Total
authorities received were $9.45 billion. The resulting lapse is $3.40 billion, or 36.0 %.
Compared with 2020-21 authorities used of $3.12 billion, there was an increase in spending of 94.0%.
Remissions and Debt Write-offs
Debt write-offs are accounting entries to remove from the accounts of a department, a debt or, a part of
a debt, which is determined to be uncollectable. Health Canada did not report any significant remissions
or debt write-offs.
Losses of Public Money and Property
Heath Canada did not have any significant new cases to report and provided updates on five cases
previously reported.
Claims Against the Crown
Claims are generally in relation to the settlement of grievances and other employment-related issues,
which includes Phoenix pay system related claims.
35,000 Missing Computers as of 2019
A recent internal audit report has identified that the department was unable to confirm the existence
and location of approximately 35,000 computing devices as of2019. Health Canada’s analysis
determined that the audit findings are largely a result of data discrepancies on the number of assets,
rather than missing devices. Technologies are in place that mitigate the risk of information being
mishandled.
249
TABLING OF THE 2021-22 PUBLIC ACCOUNTS OF CANADA: CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY (CFIA)
FINANCIAL INFORMATION
ISSUE
• The annual 2021-22 Public Accounts that are audited at the Government of Canada level by the
Auditor General of Canada were tabledOctober 25, 2022.
KEY FACTS
• The CFIA’s spending in 2021-22 ($824 M) was $15 M greater than the previous fiscal year (2020-
21, $809 M) mainly due to an increase in salary costs of new collective agreements.
• Most of the Agency’s unspent funding was carried forward to fiscal year 2022-23 to help support
Agency priorities.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is dedicated to safeguarding Canada’s food, animal and
plant resource base so that Canadian families continue to have confidence inthe food they eat.
• Canadians can, therefore, rest assured that at no time was food safety or animal or plant health
compromised due to fluctuations in the Agency’s spending.
• The CFIA’s spending in 2021-22 ($824 M) is $15 M greater than the previous fiscal year (2020-
21, $809 M). The spending in 2021-22 was higher mainly due to the increase in salary costs of new
collective agreements.
IF PRESSED ON THEFT OF 370 CELLPHONES…
• During this past year (fiscal year 2021-22), the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) had an
isolated incident where 370 smartphones were stolen from a CFIA building.
• When a mobile device is reported stolen, the procedure is to remove any information remotely
from the device. In this particular case, the smartphones that were taken were set to be deployed to
users and there was no information on the devices.
• The Agency maintains stringent control measures to appropriately mitigate losses and risks.
• Following the incident, a police report was filed. Storage has been moved toanother location
and additional security measures have been implemented to secure those assets.
IF PRESSED ON THE REMISSION OF $15.4M IN GRAIN SERVICE FEES…
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency has an obligation to charge fees as per their Fees Notice
for established services. The individual fees range from $5.20 to $37.97 and vary based on the volume of
grain products being exported.
• A fee remission is a measure that allows the Minister of Health to provide full or partial relief
under circumstances in which relief is justified.
• The President of the Agency approved a remission of service fees for the inspection and testing
of grain and grain products for export, exercising the delegated authority conferred by the Minister of
Health in the CFIA Act.
• The Agency has implemented the consistent administration of these service fees as of April 1,
2022.
250
BACKGROUND
Canadians can remain confident that at no time was food safety or animal or plant health compromised
due to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s (CFIA) fluctuation in spending. Budgetary changes were
normal and well planned in advance. The spending fluctuations were mainly related to time-limited
initiatives and capital projects.
The CFIA’s spending in 2021-22 ($824 M) is $15 Mgreater than the previous fiscal year (2020-21, $809
M). The spending in 2021-22 was higher mainly due to the increase in salary costs of new collective
agreements.
The overall use of operating (including cost for employee benefit plan) and revenue re-spending
authorities increased by $20 M from $777 M in 2020-21 to $797 M in 2021-22, primarily due the
increased salary payments for the signed collective agreements.
Capital expenditures increased by $2 M from $22 M in 2020-21 to $24 M in 2021-22. The capital
spending in 2021-22 was higher mainly due to major capital projects such as the Sidney lab rebuild and
E-certification platform.
Statutory transfer payments related to disease compensation payments of $4 M were lower in 2021-22
compared to $10 M in2020-21 as the claims for Chronic Wasting Disease decreased. These
compensation payments were made to producers of animals or plants ordered to be destroyed under
the Health of Animal Act or the Plant Protection Act which are necessary to keep humans and animals
safe, and to keep export markets open.
2021-22 lapsed authorities (approximately $17 M) was mainly for a planned carry-forward to the
subsequent fiscal year to support Agency priorities.
The vast majority of 2021-22 total revenues of $63.2 M weregenerated from inspection fees, reported
as services of a regulatory nature in the Public Accounts.
251
PUBLIC ACCOUNTS (PHAC/ASPC)
Issue
The Public Accounts of Canada were tabled in the House of Commons on October 28, 2022.
Key Facts
• ThePublic Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is reporting outstanding contractual obligations of
$7.9 billion spread over the next 6 years.
• PHAC reported $7.7 billion in unspent authorities. PHAC transferred $6.4 billion from its
spending authorities from 2021-22 to future years. After reprofiles, PHAC will lapse $1.3 billion of its
spending authorities.
• PHAC reported total professional services expenditures of $1.1 billion, an increase of 262% over
the previous year.
Key Messages
• The Public Health Agencyof Canada is committed to ensuring that public funds are spent
effectively, and in a transparent manner.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada works to ensure that the resources at its disposal are
utilized efficiently in order to promote and protect the health of Canadians.
If pressed on outstanding contracts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada contracts for goods and services in pursuit of its mandate.
• The Agency is reporting $7.9 billion in outstanding contractual obligations, a 39% increase over
2020-21.
• $6.8 billion of the contractual obligations are of a sensitive nature. As a result, the contractor
names are being withheld from publication due to non-disclosure clauses in contracts.
• More than 99% of outstanding contracts are related to COVID-19.
If pressed on unused authorities
• The Public Health Agency of Canada works to ensure that the resources at its disposal are
utilized efficiently in order to promote and protect the health of Canadians.
• Overall, the Public Health Agency of Canada’s unused authorities at 2021-22 fiscal year end,
were 47% of total authorities. 83% of lapsed authorities is re-profiled for use in 2022-23 and future
years.
• After maximizing its options for reprofiling funding, the remaining $1.3 billion lapse occurred in
funding for personal protective equipment, border testing and quarantine measures, and strengthening
of pre-clinical countermeasures.
If pressed on contracting professional services
• As part of its COVID-19 response, the Public Health Agency of Canada used a variety of vehicles
to augment its capacity and protect the health of Canadians.
• Contracting professional services allowed the Agency to acquire specific expertise to help
complement its existing capabilities.
• The Agency exercised due diligence in selecting the appropriate mechanism to augment its
capacity, always seeking to obtain the best value for Canadians while operating in unprecedented and
rapidly changing circumstances.
252
BACKGROUND
The Public Accounts of Canada is the report of theGovernment of Canada prepared annually by the
Receiver General, as required by section 64 of the Financial Administration Act. It covers the
Government fiscal year, which ends on March 31.
The information in the report originates from two sources of data:
• the summarized financial transactions presented in the accounts of Canada, maintained by the
Receiver General; and
• the detailed records, maintained by departments and agencies.
Each department and agency is responsible for reconciling its accounts tothe control accounts of the
Receiver General, and for maintaining detailed records of the transactions in its accounts.
Outstanding contracts
The Agency’s contractual obligations relate to its response to the COVID-19 pandemic for the
procurement of essential goods and services to achieve its mandate.
These contracts relate mostly to the procurement of vaccines, therapeutics, pharmaceuticals, medical
equipment, and laboratory services and supplies. The Government is bound by the confidentiality
provisionsof each agreement, and cannot provide additional details about these contracts.
$7.4 million of the contractual obligations is spread over a maximum of 2 years; however, many
contracts have option years that may be exercised.
$513 million (6%) of the outstanding contractual obligations are for transfer payments.
Unused authorities
The Agency was provided total spending authorities of $16.4 billion, of which it spent $8.7 billion. A total
of $6.4 billion was re-profiled and will be available for use in future years, leaving $1.3 billion as the
remaining lapse.
The re-profiled spending authorities were for a variety of initiatives, most notably for procurement of
vaccines and medical countermeasures, the procurement of therapeutics, and for border testingand
quarantine measures.
This re-profiling will allow the Agency to access existing funding in future years when it will be needed,
with funding immediately available in 2022-23, and beyond, in order to adjust and continue the ongoing
management of COVID-19 and to address other public health priorities
Professional services
The Agency’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic is the primary reason for a 262% increase.
The bulk of the $1.1 billion in professional expenditures relates to:
• security services and increased testing capacity at borders and quarantine sites;
• communications and IT services; and
• storage, warehousing and logistics costs for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to
strategically position its reserve of personalprotective equipment.
253
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
generate evidence to inform how decisions are made to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and its long-
term impacts and return to a more normal life.
KEY FACTS
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, CIHR and partners have invested over $414 million on 965
research projects through 40 competitions.
• Funds have been allocated towards the initial Rapid Research response to develop COVID-19
tests and vaccines, as well as to the study of the mental health impacts and long-term health impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic on Canadians.
• Budget 2022 committed $20 million over 5 years to support additional research on the long-
term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians, as well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health
and health care systems.
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partnersto find solutions to this pandemic and its long-
term health consequences.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will continue to contribute to the evidence
we need to help Canada address this public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILSOF THESE INVESTMENTS…
• Since March 2020, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $414
million in 965 research projects, which focus not only on vaccines, but also on other therapeutics,
testing, and transmission dynamics, and other COVID-19 related priority areas as they emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Through Budget 2022, our government reiterated our commitment to understanding the long-
term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians’ health and health systems. Through these
investments, CIHR recently launched a funding opportunity that will establish a research network to
strengthen Canada’s capacity to undertake and contribute to ongoing research and support an
evidence-based and equitable response to post COVID-19 condition.
• These investments support research that will increase our understanding of persistent and
emerging gaps and priority areas–including variants of concern and Long-COVID–that continue to
provide decision makers with rapid evidence from which guidance can be developed and evaluated.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
254
Since March 2020, CIHR has invested approximately $414 million in 965 COVID-19 research projects.
These projects span everything from diagnostics and potential treatments to public health responses
and communication strategies.
CIHR has also worked with partners to invest in Canadian COVID-19 research with dedicated funding for
specific topics such as:
• Indigenous communities’ experiences with COVID-19;
• addressing the mental health and substance use challenges facing Canadians during the
pandemic;
• how tokeep residents and staff of long-term care homes safe from COVID-19;
• developing guidelines related to prescribing and dispending opioids during the pandemic; and
• accelerating research and leading the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align
efforts in this field.
CIHR also has engaged with international partners to ensure the alignment and coordination of Canada’s
research with the international response.
Most recently, CIHR, in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, has
invested $10 million to create a pan-Canadian platform to advance research into the effectiveness and
clinical challenges of new COVID-19 treatments in non-hospitalized patients. The Canadian ADAptive
Platform Trial of COVID-19 Therapeutics in Community Settings will evaluate the clinical and cost
effectiveness of COVID-19 treatments, such as outpatient medications for COVID-19 and whether they
prevent hospitalization and post COVID-19 condition.
CIHR has also provided $6.7M over 2 years to establish the Pediatric Outcomes Improvement through
Coordination of Research (POPCORN), which is a research structure that is able to comprehensively
answer important child health questions on COVID-19 including the acute and long-term outcomes
following COVID-19 infection and to understand vaccinations in children. In collaboration with the
COVID Immunity Task Force, a $3M supplement has been provided to support the supplement of the
POPCORN to rapidly initiate this serosurvey study on children and youth.
Further, the Government of Canada, under the leadership of CIHR, has established a Centre for Research
on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies. The Research Centre will allow CIHR to support
real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the research community and
decision-makers alike, as well as to invest $15 million per year to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
For example, the Centre has been leveraged to implement an investment of $20 million over 5 years in a
Canadian Post COVID-19 Condition Research Network. The network will strengthen Canada’s capacity to
undertake and contribute to ongoing research on post COVID-19 condition and enable the use of
existing andemerging research evidence in a timely and comprehensive manner while engaging relevant
stakeholders, which allows for more equitable and inclusive processes. Competition results are
anticipated early in the new year.
255
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Health researchers continue to be supportive of the recommendations made in Canada’s
Fundamental Science Review report (2017). Many stakeholders have called for increased funding for
fundamental science and research in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• InBudget 2018 alone, the federal government committed nearly $4 billion over five years to
support the next generation of Canadian researchers. This included $354.7 million over five years, with
$90.1 million per year ongoing, for the Canadian Institutes ofHealth Research (CIHR) to increase its
support for fundamental research.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that investing in research and supporting Canadian researchers is
pivotal to addressing health issues facing Canadians, and the current pandemic has reminded us all of
the importance of having access to research evidence.
• Overthe last 5 years, we made historical investments toward research.
• In Budget 2018 alone, we committed nearly $4 billion over five years to support the next
generation of Canadian researchers.
• This included $354.7 million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its support for fundamental research.
• Our government continues to invest in research that is important to the health of Canadians.
Budget 2022 announced $20 million to study long-term effects of COVID-19 infections, and wider
impacts on health and health care systems, and $20 million to increase our knowledge of dementia and
brain health, that will be funded over 5 years through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or
CIHR.
IF PRESSED ON BUDGET 2022 INVESTMENTS…
• Budget 2022 further committed to funding important research areas including long-term
impacts of COVID-19, and brain health and dementia–to name a few.
• With these continued investments, our Government demonstrates its commitment to support a
vibrant, equitable and diverse research community that will help us address the major health challenges
of tomorrow.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2018
Among other investments to support research, Budget 2018 provided Canada’s federal granting
agencies with investments in fundamental science:
o CIHR: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o NSERC: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o SSHRC: $215.5 million over 5 years, $54.8 million ongoing
256
Support for Canadian Researchers in response to the pandemic
In April 2020, the Government of Canada announced comprehensive support of nearly $9 billion for
post-secondary students and recent graduates. As part of this investment, the government extended
expiring federal graduate research scholarships and postdoctoral fellowships, and supplemented
existing federal research grants, to support students and post-doctoral fellows, by providing $291.6
million to the federal granting councils.
In May 2020,the Government of Canada announced $450 million in funding to help Canada's academic
research community during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 invested in research in priority areas, including major investments to grow Canada’s bio-
manufacturing sector:
• $250M to create a new Clinical Trials Fund, managed by CIHR, which will support research teams
and infrastructure across the country to conduct clinical trials. These trials will test new drugs,
treatments, and interventions to prevent, detect, treat or manage various diseases or medical
conditions.
• $250M to create a biomedical research fund to support bio-innovation-related research that
straddles the health and natural sciences and connects these efforts to industrial and health system
partners to enhance key bio-innovation capabilities.
Budget 2022
Through the 2021 mandate letters, the Prime Minister tasked all Ministers with using science and
evidence-based decision-making. Therefore, through Budget 2022, the Government continued to invest
in research.
For example, Budget 2022 includes an investment of $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for
CIHR to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians, as
well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care systems.
To support the implementation of Canada’s first national dementia strategy, Budget 2022 committed
$20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for CIHR to ramp up efforts to learn more about
dementiaand brain health, to improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, and
to evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
In addition, Budget 2022 committed $40.9 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $9.7 million
ongoing to the federal granting councils to support targeted scholarships and fellowships for promising
Black student researchers.
To reinforce Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination choice for world-class research, Budget
2022 announced $38.3 million over four years, starting in 2023-24, and $12.7 million ongoing for the
federal granting councils to add new, internationally recruited Canada Excellence Research Chairs in the
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Finally, through Budget 2022, the federal government also announced $34.6 million over five years,
starting in 2022-23, and $8.4 million ongoing, to enhance Canada’s ability to protect our research, and
to establish a Research Security Centre that will provide advice and guidance directly to research
institutions.
257
CIHR SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has committed to work with the provinces and territories to
increase the availability of high-quality mental health and addiction services for Canadians, particularly
in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
KEY FACTS
• Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested over $496 million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research, approximately $180 million in research on addictions, and over $31
million dollars in research related to suicide prevention.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, the Government of Canada committed $45 million over two years
to develop evidence-informed national mental health service standards.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government continues to recognize the importance of funding innovative and timely
research that will improve health outcomes for people experiencing challenges related to mental health
and substance use.
• That is why, over the last five years, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or CIHR
we have invested over $496 million in mental health and behavioural disorders research, over $22
million in research related to Post Traumatic Stress Injury, and approximately $180 million in research
on addictions.
• This includes investments of $13.5 million in the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative,
supporting research to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to develop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
BACKGROUND
Mental Health
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested over $496 million in mental health and behavioural
disorders research. This represents more than 2300 projects led by experts across the country.
Children and Youth: CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS
Open Minds, a national project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care
by developing and testing evidence-informed approaches. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7
provinces and one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways
based on local context by providing Integrated Youth Services (IYS). For example, in Ulukhaktok, a
remote community in the Northwest Territories where professional service providers are not always
available, the site is evaluating a model where lay health workers are trained to provide support to
youth in distress. Additionally, the first phase of the IYS Network-of-Networks (IYS-Net) initiative ($1M
over 1 year), was launched in April 2022 to help inform the development of pan-Canadian create a
Canada-wide network of provincial and territorial learning health systems for Integrated Youth Services
for mental health and substance use.
258
In addition, CIHR committed for $6.25M over 5 years to the Mental Health in the Early Years funding
opportunity in March 2022, with a focus area on mental health initiatives for young children (ages 0-5),
Indigenous peoples, as well as transforming mental health with integrated care.
National Standards for Mental Health Services: Budget 2021 committed $45 million over two years, to
help develop national mental health service standards, in collaboration with PTs, health organizations,
and key stakeholders. CIHR will support research and KM to inform standards development and
evaluation.
Suicide Prevention: Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested over $31 million dollars in research
related to suicide prevention. This research will lead to the discovery of new, effective solutions for
better prevention.
Post Traumatic Stress Injury: CIHR, in partnership with the Canadian Institute for Public Safety Research
and Treatment (CIPSRT) work to address PTSI in public safety personnel. Budget 2018 invested $20
million over five years, which has led to several funding opportunities, including the establishment of
research and coordinationhubs for public safety, as well as crisis line and app, to help inform the
evidence base on PTSI for public safety personnel.
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative (CMH)
The mental health of Canadians has worsened during the pandemic. In April 2020, CIHRlaunched the
CMH initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19. CIHR launched four funding opportunities under this initiative,
supporting a total of 101 projects for a total investment of $13.7M from CIHR and partners.
Substance Use
CIHR supports researchers across Canada that aim to address various issues related to substance use
and has invested approximately $180 million in the area between 2017-18 and 2021-22.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM was originally composed of four large regional
nodes (British Columbia, Prairies, Ontario, Québec/Atlantic) that connected researchers, service
providers, decision makers and people with lived experience from across Canada. CRISM is recognized as
a critical network that responds to the policy and evidence needs of decision-makers. CRISM activities
include:
• The OPTIMA Study (2016-2022)–a national multi-site clinical trial involving over 270
participants recruited from all four CRISM Nodes to compare and evaluate two models of care for the
treatment of opioid use disorder. (~$4.4 million over 4 years).
• National Treatment Guideline–CRISM has developed a National Guideline for the clinical
management of opioid use disorder, which was published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal
on March 5, 2018.
• Implementation Research Program–On September 14, 2017, CIHR announced a new
investment of $7.5 million over six years for CRISM to conduct a national research program for effective
implementation of evidence-based interventions into clinical and community.
In 2022, CIHR renewed its support for CRISM with an investment of $17 million over 6 years. Phase II of
CRISM looks to build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number
of Regional Nodes to enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for the Atlantic
259
region) while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity. The renewed investment
also includes $5 million for a national study on methamphetamine use disorder.
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, in 2019 CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use, totaling
$700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing treatment
options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and epidemiology of
methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
In November 2020, CIHR hosted the ‘Innovations in Virtual Care for Mental Healthand Substance Use’
BBE in collaboration with the British Columbia Ministry of Health, British Columbia Ministry of Mental
Health and Addictions, and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. This BBE brought together
provincial policy and decision makers, researchers and implementation experts, non-governmental
organizations and other key stakeholders to gain an understanding of how virtual care can meet the
unique and evolving mental health and substance use service needs of British Columbia’s diverse
population during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
260
HEALTHY EATING STRATEGY
ISSUE
• In October 2016, Health Canada launched the multi-year Healthy Eating Strategy, which consists
of a suite of initiatives that aim to improve the food environment and help make the healthier choice
the easier choice for all Canadians. Recognizing that a healthy population is key to reducing vulnerability
to health events, the 2021 Minister of Health mandate letter included a commitment to promote
healthyeating by advancing the Healthy Eating Strategy. This included finalizing front-of-package (FOP)
nutrition labelling and supporting restrictions on the commercial marketing of food and beverages to
children.
KEY FACTS
• Obesity and diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the Canadian
health care system.
• There is a strong body of evidence showing that healthy eating patterns can reduce the risk of
obesity and chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, certain cancers and type 2 diabetes.
• Since 2016, our Government has taken a number of steps to help make it easier to choose
heathier foods.
• Significant progress has been made in recent years on healthy eating initiatives by improving
nutrition labelling, eliminating industrially produced trans fats in the food supply, releasing a new
Canada’s Food Guide, publishing new sodium reduction targets for processed foods and introducing
front-of-package nutrition labelling.
• The 2019 Canada’s food guide provides Canadians witheasier access to information about
healthy eating.
• The FOP nutrition labelling regulations were published on July 20, 2022, with a compliance date
of January 1, 2026 for the food industry to make any necessary changes to their labels.
• Health Canadaalso continues to advance work on restricting food advertising to children.
KEY MESSAGES
• Obesity and diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the Canadian
health care system.
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health of Canadians and creating conditions to
make the healthier choice easier for all.
• Significant progress has been made in recent years on healthy eating initiatives by improving
nutrition labelling, eliminating industrially produced trans fats in the food supply, releasing a new
Canada’s Food Guide, publishing new sodium reduction targets for processed foods and introducing
front-of-package nutrition labelling.
• This government remains committed to supporting restrictions on the commercial marketing of
food and beverages to children and continues to advance work on this initiative.
IF PRESSED ON FRONT-OF-PACKAGE NUTRITION LABELLING…
• As part of Health Canada's Healthy Eating Strategy, front-of-package nutrition labelling
regulations were published in the Canada Gazette, Part II on July 20, 2022.
• FOP nutrition labelling aims to help reduce risks to health by providing consumers with quick
and easy-to-use information on foods high in saturated fat, sugars and/or sodium.
• Average intakes of these nutrients remain above recommended limits in the Canadian
population. Unhealthy diets with high levels of these nutrients are risk factors for overweight and
261
obesity, hypertension, and chronic diseases, such as cardiovascular disease (i.e., heart disease and
stroke), some cancers and type 2 diabetes.
• The FOP nutrition symbol will complement existing labelling policies and other initiatives, such
as the Nutrition Facts table and Canada’s Food Guide, to help Canadians make informed decisions.
IF PRESSED ONEXEMPTIONS FOR DAIRY PRODUCTS …
• FOP nutrition labelling aims to help reduce risks to health by providing consumers with quick
and easy-to-use information on foods high in sodium, sugars and/or saturated fat.
• To ensure the policy is effective, exemptions are only provided in specific circumstances. For
example, when there is evidence that a food provides a protective effect on health, such as whole and
2% milk.
• Although cheese is a top contributor to sodium and saturated fat intakes, it is also an important
source of calcium in Canadian diets -a nutrient of public health concern due to inadequate intakes
among Canadians.
• Health Canada determined that cheese, yogurt, kefir and buttermilk meeting a certain calcium
threshold will be eligible for anexemption due to Canadians’ inadequate intakes of calcium.
• To help support healthier choices with respect to exempted foods, Health Canada will launch a
consumer education and awareness campaign following implementation of the regulations.
IF PRESSED ON RETAIL SCALE LABELS …
• FOP nutrition symbols will be required on products with labels printed using retail scales to
ensure consistent application of the FOP policy.
• Keeping the design of the FOP symbol consistent on most packages will allow consumers to
quickly and easily identify foods high in sodium, sugars and/or saturated fat.
• However, Health Canada acknowledges the challenges associated with retail scale labelling, and
has provided additional flexibilities.
• For example, a separate FOP symbolsticker can be applied if retail establishments are not able
to print the FOP nutrition symbol directly on the label.
• A webinar was held September 22 and 27, 2022 (EN/FR) to explain the regulations and guidance
to stakeholders. Health Canada welcomes any feedback that may help address these issues and could be
incorporated into the next version of the guidance document.
IF PRESSED ON THE TRANSITION PERIOD …
• Regulated parties have been given a transition period for the FOP nutrition labelling
requirements, ending on December 31, 2025.
• The compliance date of January 1, 2026 aligns with the joint Health Canada and Canadian Food
Inspection Agency Food Labelling Coordination Policy (FLCP).
• This policy was developed, in part, to provide greater predictability with respect to the
compliance dates for changes to food labelling requirements. It establishes compliance date options for
food labelling requirements at a two-year interval, beginning on January 1, 2026.
• Health Canada recognizes the resources involved in making label changes and acknowledges
that the food industry has faced additional challenges related to COVID-19 and supply chain issues.
• However, Health Canada considers that aligning with the FLCP’s first compliance date provides
sufficient time for regulated parties to make the necessary changes to their labels, if required, while
ensuring that the benefits of the initiative are not further delayed.
262
IF PRESSED ON ADVERTISING TO CHILDREN OR BILL C-252…
• As outlined in my Mandate letter, our Government is committed to supporting restrictions on
the commercial marketing of foods and beverages to children, in order to protect them from the risks of
chronic diseases caused by an unhealthy diet.
• We are progressing on this commitment. In September 2022, we supported further
consideration of my colleague’s Private Member’s Bill C-252, the Child Health Protection Act as a way to
help protect children from the influence of advertising of certain foods.
• In June 2021, four industry associations launched a self-regulatory advertising code, to be
implemented by the summer of 2023. We appreciate their efforts to develop a new code but this
government believes industry self-regulation is not enough to protect children.
• As Bill C-252 advances throughthe parliamentary process, Health Canada will continue
reviewing international initiatives, new evidence, as well as the results of its monitoring activities on
food advertising practices to children to determine an appropriate approach to further supporting
restrictions in Canada.
• As Health Canada moves forward, it remains committed to engaging with all key stakeholders,
including health and industry organizations.
IFPRESSED ON CANADA’S FOOD GUIDE…
· The food guide was released in January 2019.
· Canada’s food guide is based on a rigorous scientific process using the best available evidence
and extensive consultation.
· The food guide provides Canadians with easier access to information about healthy eating. It
provides advice on what to eat and recognizes that healthy eating is more than food choices, by
encouraging healthy eating habits.
· Health Canada continues to develop new resources for various audiences to increase reach,
integration, and use of the food guide.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE…
· Health Canada follows a rigorous scientific process in reviewing pertinent evidence when
developing policies related to the Healthy Eating Strategy.
· Health Canada focuses on the strongest evidence, where there is a well-established evidence
base on public health need, and where the evidence is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future.
BACKGROUND
Health Portfolio Initiatives
Unhealthy diet is a major risk factor for many chronic diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and heart
disease, which are becoming more and more common in Canada. This places a significant burden on the
health of Canadians and our healthcare system. Health Portfolio’s healthy eating initiatives aim to
improve the food environment and help make the healthier choice the easier choice for all Canadians.
Improve nutrition information and literacy
Canada’s food guide
• The 2019 Canada’s food guide provides Canadians with easier access to dietary guidance.
263
• The revision strengthens healthy eating recommendations and communicates guidance in ways
that better meet the needs of different users, such as the public, policy makers and health professionals.
• The food guide snapshot provides a summary of the dietary guidelines and healthy eating
recommendations, and is available in 31 languages, including nine Indigenous languages, making it more
accessible for Canadians.
• Health Canada continues to work and engage with interested parties and the public to make
sure that guidance and resources are relevant and useful. This includes integrating a diversity and
inclusion lens into food guide content and supporting Indigenous partners in the development of
healthy eating tools for Indigenous Peoples.
Improve the Nutrition Facts table and list of ingredients
• In December 2016, Health Canada published final amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations on nutrition labelling and food colours, to make the Nutrition Facts table (NFt) and list of
ingredients (LOI) on packaged foods easier for Canadians to use and understand.
• The transition period for these changes ended on December 14, 2021. However, in response to
industry feedback related to challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, flexibility will be provided to
support the food industry. For the first year (until December 14, 2022), the CFIA will focus its efforts on
education and compliance promotion.
• As of December 15, 2022, regulated parties must be compliant with the new regulations.
Front-of-package (FOP) nutrition labelling
• On July 20, 2022, Health Canada published FOP nutrition labelling regulations in the Canada
Gazette, Part II.
• FOP nutrition labelling aims to help reduce risks to health by providing consumers with quick
and easy-to-use information on foods high in saturated fat, sugars and/or sodium.
• Regulated parties have been given a transition period for the FOP nutrition labelling
requirements, ending on December 31, 2025.
Facilitate healthier food options
Reduce sodium in processed foods
• In 2012, Health Canada established voluntary sodium reduction targets for processed foods and
encouraged the food industry to achieve these targets by the end of 2016.
• In 2018, Health Canada released a progress report that showed that Canadians daily sodium
intake was reduced from 3400 to 2760 mg which remain above the goal of 2300 mg per day.
• In December 2020, Health Canada released revised voluntary sodium targets for processed
foods to encourage the food industry to further reduce sodium in foods by 2025.
•
Eliminating industrially produced trans fats in thefood supply
• On September 17, 2018, Health Canada prohibited the use of partially hydrogenated oils (PHOs),
the main source of industrial trans fat, in Canada. . The prohibition included a two year phase-in period;
therefore, as of September 2020 no foods sold in Canada are permitted to contain PHO.
• Health Canada’s prohibition will help achieve the public health objective of reducing total trans
fat intake by the great majority of Canadians to less than 1% of total energy intake, as recommended by
theWorld Health Organization.
264
Protect and support vulnerable populations
Restrict the advertising of certain foods to children
• Between 2016 and 2019, Health Canada engaged extensively on a policy proposal to
comprehensively restrict advertising to children of foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium,
sugars and saturated fat. Concurrently, Bill S-228, tabled in the Senate in 2016, proposed a federal M2K
prohibition, but did not come to a final vote before the 2019 federal election
• In June 2021,a cohort of industry stakeholders publicly announced a new self-regulatory Code
governing food advertising to children, to be implemented by summer of 2023.
• In February 2022, Ms. Patricia Lattanzio, M.P. (Liberal) introduced a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-
252–Child Health Protection Act) to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children.
September 28 2022, it passed Second Reading and was referred to Committee (HESA) for further review.
Interdepartmental collaboration
· In June 2019, the Government of Canada launched the first-ever Food Policy for Canada, an
investment of $134.4 million over five years. As part of the Government of Canada’s Food Policy for
Canada, the government announced its intention in Budget 2019 to work with provinces and territories
towards the creation of a national school food program. This commitment was reaffirmed in Budget
2022.
• Employment and Social Development Canada and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada are the lead
departments on school food, however other departments, including Health Canada, would provide
advice on policies and standards to ensure alignment with recommendations in Canada’s food guide.
• In 2022, the Parliamentary Secretary of Health and Sport was mandated by the Minister of
Health to work across government departments and with relevant stakeholders to encourage and
support Canadians to adopt healthier lifestyles. The main objective of this work is to help address and
reduce risk factors for chronic diseases primarily caused by physical inactivity and poor diet. A Healthy
Living Task Force was struck to support this mandate and includes representatives from Health Canada,
Public Health Agency of Canada, and Sport Canada.
265
DIABETES
Issue
Diabetes is a serious chronic disease, and one of the most common chronic diseases affecting
Canadians. It poses many challenges for those living with the disease, their families, and communities,
and has various implications for health systems. In all types of diabetes, the body either does not
produce enough insulin or is unable to use the insulin it produces effectively. Each type of diabetes may
differ with respect to its potential causes, prognosis, and recommended course of treatment. Those who
have type 2 diabetes can take steps to control the disease and lower their risk of complications.
Canadians living with type 2 diabetes may be at greater risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes. Early
intervention has the potential to prevent or delay the onset of type 2 diabetes, particularly among those
in high-risk subpopulations.
Key Facts
• Approximately 3.4 million Canadians are living with diabetes; more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year.
• There are three main types of diabetes: type 1, type 2, and gestational diabetes. Other types are
uncommon. It is estimated that approximately 90% of cases are type 2, 9% of cases are type 1, and
gestational and other types of diabetes account for less than 1% of all cases.
• Some Canadians, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African descent, and South
and East Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type 2
diabetes compared to the general population.
• Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2
diabetes and prevent negative diabetes-related health outcomes.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes the importance of helping Canadians reduce their risk of developing
chronic diseases, including diabetes,as well as manage any existing chronic diseases, and is taking action
to this end on many fronts.
• On October 5, 2022, the Framework for Diabetes in Canada was tabled in Parliament. This
Framework marks an important milestone in our efforts to better support and collaborate with those
impacted by diabetes in Canada.
• All sectors and levels are invited to use the Framework to guide actions to address diabetes and
in various domains, including prevention; management, treatment and care, and research. The
Framework will also guide our ongoing federal efforts in these areas.
• The Government is supporting community-based initiatives that address common risk factors
for chronic diseases, including diabetes, by promoting physical activity, healthy eating, and tobacco
prevention and cessation. In addition, the Government is supporting research to address causes,
prevention, screening, diagnosis, and treatment of chronic diseases, including all forms of diabetes.
• Diabetes is a complex disease, and there is still significant work ahead to ensure better health
outcomes for people living with diabetes in Canada. We look forward to continued collaboration with
the wide range of partners active in this area.
BACKGROUND
Approximately 3.4 million Canadians areliving with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year. Some Canadians, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African
266
descent, and South and East Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have
higherrates of type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and
prevent negative diabetes-related health outcomes. Evidence demonstrates that there isan increased
risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19 (both hospitalization and mortality) among Canadians with type
2 diabetes and those who are obese. COVID-19 is also having a disproportionate impact on specific sub-
groups of the population, many of whomare at greater risk of suffering from the health, social and
economic effects of the pandemic.
Government of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collection and analysis of chronic diseases
and their risk and protective factors, strengthens collaborations to better track disease trends and risks,
and supports the development of policy and program interventions and prevention guidelines for
primary care.
PHAC is also supporting community-based initiatives to improve health behaviours and address health
inequalities among priority populations at greater risk of developing chronic diseases. Inparticular,
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund invests approximately $20 million annually and
leverages additional funding from partners to support projects that focus on behavioural risk factors,
including physical inactivity, and less nutritious patterns of eating and tobacco use that are associated
with the major chronic diseases of diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer.
To help Canadians identify their risk of type 2 diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC developed
CANRISK, the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible to Canadians through
partnerships with Diabetes Canada, health authorities in provinces and territories across Canada, major
drug stores such as Loblaws, Shoppers Drug Mart, Rexall and Pharmasave, andothers.
From 2017-18 to 2021-22, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), invested approximately $250 million in diabetes research.
In Budget 2021, the Government announced $25 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for diabetes
research (including type 1 diabetes), surveillance and prevention, and to work towards the development
of a national framework for diabetes. Budget 2021 also announced $10 million over five years, starting
in 2021-22, for the Type 2 Diabetes Challenge to attract innovators to develop and implement
community designed approaches that address the barriers and determinants that may lead to an
increased risks of type 2 diabetes.
As part of these investments, the Government of Canada, through CIHR, recommitted to the JDRF-CIHR
Partnership to Defeat Diabetes, investing up to $15 million to be matched by JDRF Canada and its
donors. Stemming from this investment, CIHR and JDRF have recently launched or announced the
following funding opportunities:
• Team Grant: CIHR-JDRF Type 1 Diabetes and Precision Medicine to support projects relevant to
precision medicine and Type 1 Diabetes including genes, metabolic factors, and physiologic
characterization. Funding is expected to begin in January 2023.
• Operating Grant: Diabetes, Psychosocial Health, Prevention and Self-Management to fund
research to improve psychosocial health and associated outcomes for people living with Type 1
Diabetes. Funding is expected to begin in April 2023.
267
• CIHR-JDRF Type 1 Diabetes Screening Research Consortium: Announced recently to investigate
the feasibility of Type 1 Diabetes screening in the general population in Canada. Registration for this
competition is anticipated to begin in fall 2022.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) released its report entitled A Diabetes
Strategy for Canada. The Government Response to this report was tabled in Parliament on June 23,
2021.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173) designating the month of November as
Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal–Ontario) introduced Bill C 237,
which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with stakeholders, to develop a framework
designed to support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better health
outcomes for Canadians.
The National Framework for Diabetes Act received Royal Assent on June 29, 2021. Following an
extensive engagement period with key stakeholders and Indigenous partners, the Framework for
Diabetes in Canada (Framework) was tabled by the federal Minister of Health on October 5, 2022.
The Framework aims to provide a common policy direction to address diabetes in Canada, including for
populations at elevated risk of developing diabetes, people living with diabetes and their caregivers,
Indigenous populations, non-governmental organizations, health care professionals, researchers, and all
levels of government. It lays the foundation forcollaborative and complementary action by all sectors of
society to improve access to diabetes prevention and treatment, and ensure better health outcomes for
people living in Canada.
The Framework was derived from, and builds on, what was heard during an engagement process with
people in Canada and with key stakeholders. An Indigenous-led engagement process is underway with
Indigenous organizations, which will help identify priorities and ways forward to address diabetes
among Indigenous Peoples.
268
HEALTHY LIVING AND OBESITY
Issue
Levels of obesity in Canada, particularly among children, remain high, bringing both immediate and long-
term health risks. Rising costs of living, including food costs, have posed additional barriers to healthy
living for many families. Further, obesity-related stigma remains a concern, with negative impacts on
physical and mental health.
Key Facts
• Before the pandemic, levels of obesity in Canada remained high with one in three children and
two out of three adults considered overweight or obese.
• Initial findings suggest that youth physical activity levels fell significantly during the COVID-19
pandemic, particularly recreational and school based activity. Also, evidence points to a significant rise
in screen time for children and youth.
• Dissatisfaction with one’s weight or shape and unhealthy relationships with food and physical
activity can contribute to disordered eating (e.g., unhealthy eating behaviours, like binge eating,
restrictive eating, meal skipping to lose weight, etc.) and eating disorders (i.e., disorders which involve a
clinical diagnosis; reflects more severe or chronic disordered eating). Eating disorders, such as anorexia
nervosa, are serious mental illnesses with significant morbidity and mortality. Disordered eating and
eating disorders affect individuals of all body sizes.
• National-level Canadian Institute for Health Information data published in early May 2022 show
that hospital visits for eating disorders increased nearly 60% among girls aged10-17 years in the first
year of the pandemic, a time in which hospital care overall decreased. Those living in less-affluent
neighbourhoods had higher rates of emergency room visits and hospitalizations for mental health
overall. This was reversed for hospital care for eating disorders—those living in the most-affluent
neighbourhoods had higher hospitalization rates, suggesting greater access to treatment and care.
Key Messages
• This Government recognizes the importance of promoting healthy weights, particularly among
our children and youth, to help prevent chronic diseases and other health problems, including those
that occur later in life. Active and healthy living yields positive impacts on both physical and mental
health; conversely, obesity-relatedstigma can contribute to negative impacts on children and youths’
physical and mental health.
• The pandemic has made it more challenging for many children and families to engage in healthy,
active living. Factors like disrupted routines (for sleeping, eating, etc.), online learning context and
limited access to school and community sports and leisure programming are among the unique
contributors.
• Our Government, along with the provinces and territories, is working with the not-for-profit and
private sectors to help children, youth and families to adopt and maintain healthy behaviours, like
physical activity and nutritious patterns of eating. At the same time, we are working to curb weight-
related stigma, which is pervasive and represents a public healthproblem in its own right.
• We are also supporting community-based initiatives that promote the health of young families
and their children to improve overall child health and wellbeing, and promote healthy living and help
prevent chronic diseases of allCanadians.
269
Background
Individuals’ body sizes and weights are influenced by a wide range of individual, community and society-
level factors. Some factors are somewhat within an individual’s control (e.g., physical activity, diet, etc.),
though many are not (e.g., accessibility of healthy food, built environment features in their community,
genetics, health conditions, etc.)
Before the pandemic, one in three Canadian children and youth were overweight or obese, with rates
even higher among Indigenous children. Increasingly, obese children are being diagnosed with a range
of health conditions previously seen almost exclusively among adults, such as type 2 diabetes, high
cholesterol, high blood pressure, sleep apnea and joint problems.
Earlydata since the pandemic suggests significant changes in youth physical activity and sedentary
behaviour levels. Based on preliminary Statistics Canada data collected in fall 2020, the percentage of
youth aged 12-17 who reported meeting physical activity recommendations fell significantly from 50.8%
in fall 2018 to 37.2% in fall 2020. This is reflected in a drop of seven minutes in average daily minutes of
recreational physical activity and a drop of 12 average daily minutes of school-based physical activity.
Evidence from ParticipACTION suggests even greater increases in screen time during the pandemic. In a
national survey, ParticipACTION found that approximately one in ten children were meeting screen-time
recommendations during the pandemic. This compares to the approximately five in ten children
reported in PHAC’s Physical Activity, Sedentary Behaviour and Sleep Indicators in the 2018/19 Canadian
Health Measures Survey collected prior to the pandemic.
Further data will become available to analyse in the fall of 2022.
Relevant to discussions of healthy living and weight is weight bias, which is stigma and discrimination on
the basis of body size and weight. Weight bias is highly prevalent in our society, and impacts people of
all ages. One way that weight bias manifests for children and youth is bullying on the basis of weight,
which includes verbal abuse and social exclusion.
Healthy Living Programming
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) supports community-based initiatives to improve healthy
behaviours and address health inequalities among priority populations at greater risk of developing
chronic disease. In particular, PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund (HCCF) invests
approximately $20 million annually and leverages additional funding from partners to support projects
that focus on the behavioural risk factors, including physical inactivity, unhealthy eating and tobacco
use, associated with the major chronic diseases of diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer. Among
the many projects funded by HCCF includes 24 hour movement guidelines for the Early Years (0-4) and
Children and Youth (5-17).
PHAC also provides funding for community-based programs aimed at promoting the health of pregnant
people, young children and their families. Targeted to populations facing barriers to health equity, these
programs support a healthy start in life by promoting overall child health and wellbeing. This includes
the promotion of healthy weights through programming related to nutrition, healthy eatingand food
skills, food security, breastfeeding support, physical activity and mental health promotion.
270
• These programs include:
Community Action Program for Children (CAPC) provides $54.1 million in annual funding to community-
based groups to develop and deliver comprehensive, culturally appropriate prevention and early
intervention programs for vulnerable children aged 0-6 years. Through approximately 400 funded
projects, CAPC reaches over 225,000 participants across Canada each year. CAPC participants report
improved parental capacity, child physical and mental wellbeing, social competence and overall healthy
development.
• Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP) provides $26.5 million in annual funding to
community-based groups to improve the health of vulnerable pregnant people and their infants.
Through approximately 240 funded projects, CPNP serves over 45,000 participants across Canada each
year. CPNP participation is associated with higher rates of breastfeeding, improved prenatal vitamin
supplement intake, reduced smoking and alcohol consumption, and improved maternal and infant
physical and mental health.
• Healthy Early Years (HEY) provides $2.2 million annually to enhance early childhood health
promotion programming in Official Language Minority Communities (OLMC). The objective of the HEY
program is to support communities to develop comprehensive, culturally and linguistically appropriate
programs aimed at improving the health and development of children (0-6 years) and their families
living in OLMC. HEY funding is distributed to community organizations through two recipients, one
serving the minority francophone population outside of Quebec and the other serving the minority
Anglophone population in Quebec.
• Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities (AHSUNC) provides $32.1 million in
annual funding to Indigenous community-based organizations to deliver early intervention programs for
Indigenous children and their families living off-reserve. In addition, through recent incremental
investments in the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care initiative, the AHSUNC program will receive
an additional $122.9 million over the next five years, with an ongoing funding commitment thereafter to
bolster and expand program delivery and site conditions in urban and northern communities. AHSUNC
serves approximately 4,600 Indigenous children in 134 sites across Canada each year. Program
evaluations indicate the AHSUNC program is having a positive effect on school readiness, improving
children’s language, social, motor and academic skills. Results also indicate program effectiveness in
improving cultural literacy and health promoting behaviors, and improving access to health services for
Indigenous children and their families.
• As a complement to the Nutrition North Canada (NNC) retail food subsidy, the NNC Nutrition
Education Initiatives component provides funding to eligible northern isolated communities to deliver
culturally appropriate and community-based nutrition education activities. Funding is administered by
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) and PHAC (for the 10 non-First Nations and non-Inuit communities that
fall outside of ISC’s mandate).
• The School Health Grant for Youth provides youth aged 13-19 who are enrolled in grades 9-12
the opportunity to apply for small grant funding ($1500, $2500, or $3500) to develop and implement
projects and initiatives that promote healthy living in their schools. Youth-led projects must align with at
least one of the following four priorities:healthy eating and nutrition; physical activity; positive mental
health and well-being; substance use and related harms. Youth can also consider developing projects
that address COVID-19-related issues, as long as their project still relates to one or more of the four
priorities listed above. This program anticipates providing 20-40 youth grants during its 2022-23 cycle.
271
Improving data availability
PHAC monitors behaviours and factors that impact healthy living through the Physical Activity,
Sedentary Behaviour and Sleep Indicators Framework and the Canadian Chronic Disease Indicators. As
new data collected during the pandemic become available, including through the PHAC-funded Health
Behaviour in School-aged Children study, the Canadian Community Health Survey and other relevant
national surveys, these indicators will help better describe the impact of the pandemic, including the
loss of active travel to work/school and self-isolation restrictions, on the movement behaviours of
Canadians.
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, there were already critical data gaps related to children and youth. As
efforts are enhanced to collect timely and comprehensive data for these populations, PHAC focuses on
ensuring the data collected can adequately describethe longer-term impacts of COVID-19 and that the
information can be disaggregated for specific populations, including diverse children and youth as well
as those in vulnerable situations (e.g., low-income communities).
In partnership with Statistics Canada, the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) and the Offord
Centre for Child Studies at McMaster University, PHAC is working at developing the second cycle of the
Canadian Health Survey in Children and Youth (CHSCY). The survey will cover a broad range of topics,
including healthy living and healthy weights, as well as wider health impacts of COVID-19. This new cycle
of the CHSCY will address a critical data gap around data on children and youth and will be available in
early 2024. PHAC’s investment in the second cycle of CHSCY will be $4.55 million over three years (2021-
22 to 2023-24).
In addition, PHAC leads the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting Initiative (HIRI) to strengthen
the measurement, monitoring and reporting of health inequalities in Canada to help inform healthy
living programs and policies that target priority population groups.
Other related initiatives
The Framework for Diabetes in Canada (Framework) was tabled by the federal Minister of Health on
October 5, 2022 in response to the National Framework for Diabetes Act, which passed in June 2021.
The Framework aims to provide a common policy direction to address diabetes in Canada, including for
populations at elevated risk of developing diabetes, people living with diabetes and their caregivers,
Indigenous populations, non-governmental organizations, health care professionals, researchers, and all
levels of government. It lays the foundation for collaborative and complementary action by all sectors of
society to improve access to diabetes prevention and treatment, and ensure better health outcomes for
people living in Canada.
Announced in October 2016, the Healthy Eating Strategy aims to improve the food environment in
Canada to make it easier for Canadians to make the healthier choice. Since the launch of the Healthy
Eating Strategy, Canada has revised Canada’s Food Guide and introduced a ban on industrial trans fats.
Health Canada also developed updates to the Nutrition Facts table and ingredient list on packaged
foods.In addition, the Healthy Eating Strategy includes initiatives to improve nutrition labelling and
restrict advertising of certain foods and beverages to children.
On January 27, 2022, Infrastructure Canada opened applications for the $400 million Active
Transportation Fund, which will invest in such projects as building new and expanded networks of
pathways, bike lanes, trails, and pedestrian bridges. This funding has the potential to significantly
increase physical activity levels among Canadian children, youth and adults by improving opportunities
for active transportation.
272
In 2020, the Minister of Health launched Wellness Together Canada, a mental health and substance use
portal that provides Canadians with free physical activity resources and support,including information
on maintaining a healthy lifestyle, and access to peer support workers, social workers, psychologists,
and other professionals.
273
SENIORS AND HEALTHY AGING
Issue
The Health Portfolio works with a wide range of partners on healthpromotion, disease prevention and
research to support healthy aging as a public health priority. While chronic diseases remain the leading
cause of death among seniors, older adults are also among those most at risk of getting COVID-19 and
developing severe complications. Efforts are underway to support older adults to remain healthy and
active in their homes and communities.
Key Facts
• Seniors are one of the fastest growing age groups in Canada.
• $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years–starting in 2017–is being provided directly to
provinces and territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) invested $75 million in New Brunswick’s Healthy
Seniors Pilot Project (2018-2025).
• Budget 2022 announced:
o The intention to establish an expert panel and, on October 6, 2022, Ministers Duclos and Khera
announced that the National Seniors Council will serve as the expert panel to examine measures,
including a potential aging athome benefit, to support Canadians who wish to age in their own homes.
o $30 million over 3 years for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation to help accelerate
innovations in brain health and aging.
o $20 million over 5 years for theCanadian Institutes of Health Research to augment efforts to
learn more about dementia and brain health, improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with
dementia, and evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers as well as different
models of care.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to keeping seniors healthy, safe and socially
connected, and helping them maintain their independence and remain in their homes as long as
possible.
• This past October, Minister Khera and I announced that the National Seniors Council will serve
as the expert panel to examine measures, including a potential aging at home benefit, to support
Canadians who wish to age in their own homes.
• The government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had unprecedented consequences for older Canadians with the
majority of COVID-19 deaths occurring among adults aged 65 years and older.
• To support Canadians during the pandemic, our Safe Restart Agreement with provincial and
territorial governments included $740 million to support at-risk populations, including increasing
infection prevention and control measures to protect people living in long-term care, and those
receiving home care and palliative care.
• In addition, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR), has invested over $450 million over the pastfive years to support research in the area of seniors’
health, including projects to support older Canadians through the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s $75 million investment in the Healthy Seniors
Pilot Project in NewBrunswick, we are testing innovative solutions to support healthy aging.
274
Background
Acknowledging the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), in December 2021, the Prime Minister
mandated the Minister of Health to promote seniors’ physical and mental health to enable older adults
to live longer at home. The Minister of Health was also asked to negotiate agreements with provinces
and territories to support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and
beds.
COVID-19 Initiatives
Older adults, especially those with underlying medical conditions, and those residing in long-term care,
have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has
released guidance, information and awareness resources to support older adults during the COVID-19
pandemic, including: Infection Prevention and Control for COVID-19: Interim Guidance for Long Term
Care Homes; and awareness resources for vulnerable populations, including a website with information
specific to seniors and COVID-19.
Budget 2021 provided funding of $100 million over three years to support the mental health of
populations disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including older adults.
Aging at Home
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the desire of Canadian seniors to stay in their own homes and
communities as long as possible. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada committed $90
million over three years to the new Age Well at Home initiative. Age Well at Home will provide funding
opportunities to seniors-serving organizations to support regional and national projects that help
expand services that have demonstrated results in helping seniors stay in their homes longer.
In addition, Budget 2022 announced the Government’s intention to establish an expert panel which was
announced on October 6, 2022, by Ministers Duclos and Khera. The National Seniors Council will serve
as an expert panel to examine measures, including a potential aging at home benefit, to support
Canadians who wish to age in their own homes. The National Seniors Council, established in 2007, is
mandated to advise the Government of Canada, through the Minister of Health and Minister of Seniors,
on matters related to the well-being and quality of life of seniors.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
PHAC monitors and reports on the health of older Canadians, and promotes their health and wellbeing.
Key areas of work include:
• promoting age-friendly communities, where older adults and community leaders work tocreate
supportive physical and social environments;
• promoting fall prevention approaches by increasing public awareness, and improving the
availability of data to inform public health decision-making; and
• raising awareness of seniors’ mental health, including substance use, and working with partners
to develop resources for seniors, families and health professionals.
Healthy aging initiatives can prevent illness and injury, reduce the impact of existing health conditions,
help people recover from ill health and frailty, increase independence, and improve quality of life.
In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Budget 2019
announced $50 million over 5 years for initiatives to support key elements of the strategy’s
implementation. This is in addition to ongoing annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia Community
275
Investment to support community-based intervention research projects that optimize the health and
wellbeing of people living with dementia and family/friend caregivers, while increasing knowledge about
dementia and related risk and protective factors. In addition, Budget 2022 announced $30 million over 3
years for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation to help accelerate innovations in brain health
and aging.
In Budget 2018, the Government of Canada announced $75 million to support the Healthy Seniors Pilot
Project in New Brunswick, which is testing innovative solutions that support healthy aging. Results of
these projects are being shared withjurisdictions across Canada.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested more than $450 million to support research
on aging between 2015-16 and 2019-20, including research related to mobility, dementia, falls
prevention, late life issuesand palliative care, age-friendly communities, and technological innovations.
Since 2009, CIHR has supported the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA), a national, long-term
study to help better understand the determinants of healthy aging. In 2020,the CLSA launched a COVID-
19 research project on the experiences of older adults to generate evidence to inform the government-
wide response. In addition, in collaboration with PHAC, CIHR provided an additional $1.2 million grant to
the CLSA to support the collection of COVID-specific data to assess urgent issues and long-term impacts
of the pandemic on older Canadians. As well, CIHR, alongside national and provincial partners, including
Healthcare Excellence Canada, invested $3.4 million to support the implementation and evaluation of
promising practices and policy interventions to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care
homes. Most recently, Budget 2022 announced $20 million over 5 years for CIHR to augment efforts to
learn more about dementiaand brain health, improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with
dementia, and evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of
care.
International Initiatives
In December 2020, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 2021-2030 to be the United
Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing. Globally, the impact of COVID-19 on older adults has underscored
the importance of healthy aging.
276
DEMENTIA
Issue
Dementia is a set of symptoms affecting brain function. It is often characterized by changes in memory,
mood, judgement and other cognitive functions. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form. In
2017–2018, almost 452,000 Canadians aged 65 and older were living with diagnosed dementia. This
number is expected toincrease with Canada’s growing and aging population.
Key Facts
• In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Federal
investments in dementia research, surveillance, awareness initiatives, community-based projects, and
guidance are supporting the implementation of the strategy. The 2021 annual report to Parliament on
the strategy was tabled on January 19, 2022.
Key Messages
• In 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy. We report to
Parliament annually on the strategy, and the third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022. Tabling
of the 2022 report is expected in the coming weeks.
• Through Budget 2022, an additional $50 million is being invested to advance efforts in the areas
of dementia and brain health.
• New investments include $20 million for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support
research to learn more about dementia and brain health, and $30 million for the Centre for Aging and
Brain Health Innovation to accelerate innovations in brain health and aging.
• These most recent investments build on earlier funding including over $227 million invested
between 2017 and 2022 to advance research on dementia, and over $70 million since 2018 to support
dementia awareness raising, surveillance, guidance on diagnosis and treatment, and community-based
projects.
Background
Dementia Strategy
On June 22, 2017, the National Strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias Act came into
force and provided for the development and implementation ofa national dementia strategy. A
Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released in June 2019, and has three national
objectives: prevent dementia; advance therapies and find a cure; and improve the quality of life of
people living with dementia and their caregivers. Legislation requires an annual report to Parliament,
and the third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022. Tabling of the 2022 report is expected in
the coming weeks.
Federal Investments
Budget 2022 announced new investments of $50 million to support dementia and brain health-related
research, further contributing to the implementation of the national dementia strategy.
Budget 2019 announced $50 million over 5 years, starting in 2019-2020, to support other key elements
of the strategy’s implementation, including a national public education campaign, targeted awareness
raising projects, dementia guidance, and enhanced dementia surveillance. The first phase of the national
public education campaign took place in early 2022, and focused on reducing stigma, along with general
277
awareness about dementia. The second phase of the campaign will begin in early 2023 and continue
into 2024, and will focus primarily on risk reduction awareness, including healthy lifestyle actions that
Canadians can take to help reduce the risk of dementia. The Dementia Strategic Fund (DSF) has funded
fifteen awareness-raising projects to date.
Budget 2018 allocated ongoing annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia Community Investment
(DCI) to supportcommunity-based projects that aim to improve the health and wellbeing of people
living with dementia and family/friend caregivers, and increase knowledge about dementia and related
risk and protective factors. Funded projects undertake intervention research to evaluate the
effectiveness of their interventions and the context in which they work best. The DCI has launched 22
projects to date, including the “Canadian Dementia Learning and Resource Network” which acts as a
knowledge hub to facilitate learning,collaboration and amplification of project findings and successes.
Other federal investments are supporting improvements in health care relevant to dementia. Budget
2021 announced $3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-2023, for Health Canada to support provinces
and territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied. The government is also providing $6
billion over ten years, starting in 2017-2018, directly to provinces and territories to better support home
and community care services,including palliative care.
Dementia Research
Budget 2022 provided $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR) to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health, to improve
treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address mental health
consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
This investment will build upon the research that the Government of Canada, through CIHR, has already
supported across the country to delay the clinical progression of symptoms of dementia, and improve
the quality of life of people living with dementia and their caregivers. Between 2017-2018 and 2021-
2022, CIHR invested over $227 million in dementia research. This includes through the Canadian
Consortium on Neurodegeneration in Aging, which is Canada’s research hub on neurodegenerative
diseases that affect cognition in aging, including Alzheimer’s disease, and was renewed in 2019 for five
years with $31.6 million in federal funding and an additional $14 million from partners.
Budget 2022 also provided $30 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Centre for Aging
and Brain Health Innovation (CABHI) to help accelerate innovations in brain health and aging. CABHI was
established in 2015 and brings together health care, science, industry, not-for-profit and government
partners. PHAC provided an initial investment of $42 million over five years to launch CABHI in 2015.
Subsequently, PHAC (with funding support from Health Canada) provided bridge funding of $2 million in
2020-2021 to maintain operations and core staff after the initial five years of funding ended on March
31, 2020.
Dementia Surveillance
The Enhanced Dementia Surveillance Initiative(EDSI) funds projects that support the surveillance and
data pillar of the national dementia strategy. Ten projects were put into place to better understand how
dementia affects Canadians. This includes projects, led by academic and federal partners, exploring
innovative ways to address surveillance data gaps related to: the causes, progression stages and impacts
of dementia; the associated sociodemographic, risk and protective factors; and caregivers. In addition,
several provinces, in collaboration withPHAC, are implementing projects to enhance surveillance of
dementia through the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System. These projects are building on
PHAC's ongoing work with all provinces and territories through this system to provide updated dataon
the prevalence, incidence and all-cause mortality of Canadians with dementia by age group, sex,
278
province and territory over time. A new webpage was created onCanada.cato showcase the EDSI, and
to promote the projects being undertaken to inform public health actions with new surveillance data on
dementia.
International
Internationally, Canada endorsed the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Global Action Plan on a Public
Health Response to Dementia (2017-2025). The WHO’s Global Dementia Observatory (2017), supported
by the Government of Canada, monitors progress on the Global action plan and is actively collecting
data on 35 key dementia indicators. PHAC also represents Canada on the World Dementia Council,
which is an international charity that identifies and pursues opportunities for global collaboration on
dementia.
279
SEASONAL INFLUENZA
Issue
Canada experienced a seasonal influenza epidemic in the spring and early summer of 2022.
Influenza activity is currently within inter-seasonal levels, but cases are steadily increasing (as of Week
43-ending October 29, 2022). Trends are pointing towardsthe start of the seasonal influenza epidemic
in the coming weeks.
Key Facts
• Influenza (flu) season in Canada usually occurs from mid-November to mid-May.
• During 2020/21 and 2021/22, while COVID-19 public health measures and travel restrictions
were in place, seasonal circulation of the flu remained low both globally and in Canada.
• After the COVID-19 public health measures were reduced, Canada experienced a seasonal
influenza epidemic in the spring and early summer of 2022.
• With the easing of international and domestic public health measures arising from the
pandemic, a resurgence of influenza is anticipated in 2022 compared to the past two seasons.
• As of Week 43–the week ending October 29, 2022, trends are pointing towards the start of the
seasonal influenza epidemic in the coming weeks, more in line with typical pre-pandemic timing.
• In a typical year in Canada, seasonal influenza leads to an estimated average of 12,200
hospitalizations and 3,500 deaths.
Key Messages
• The health and safety of Canadians is the Government’s top priority.
• The flu vaccine is the most effective way to prevent the flu and flu-related complications, such
as pneumonia. That is why the Government of Canada works with the provinces and territories to
provide flu vaccines to Canadians every year during flu season.
• Getting the flu vaccine not only protects you—it also helps protect your family and friends,
young and old, your community, and especially those at higher risk of flu-related complications.
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that everyone 6 months
of age and older get the annual flu vaccine, especially people at high-risk of complications from the flu
and people who can pass on the flu virus to those at high risk.
Ifpressed on concurrent administration with COVID-19 vaccine
• NACI currently recommends that all seasonal flu vaccines may be given concurrently (i.e., same
day, or at any time before or after) with COVID 19 vaccines for individuals 5 years of age and older.
• For children 6 months to 5 years of age, out of precaution, concurrent administration of the
COVID-19 vaccine with non-COVID-19 vaccines, including the flu vaccine, is not routinely recommended
at this time.
Background
Annual SeasonalInfluenza Campaign
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) seasonal influenza campaign aims to dispel myths about
the seasonal flu vaccine and promote the uptake of the flu vaccine and other public health measures to
help Canadians protect themselves and others.
Influenza Surveillance
280
Canada participates in national and international activities to detect and monitor the spread of influenza
in humans and animals. PHAC maintains FluWatch, Canada’s national surveillance system that monitors
circulating flu viruses, activity levels, outbreaks, and hospitalizations.
Low seasonal influenza circulation occurred while stringent COVID-19 public health measures were in
place since the spring of 2020. With increased reopening, community circulation of seasonalinfluenza
occurred in the spring of 2022 and persisted until June
2022.
Influenza Vaccine Development and Supply
The World Health Organization issues recommendations each year on the composition of the influenza
vaccines for the southern and northern hemispheres. These recommendations are used by national
vaccine regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop, produce and license seasonal
influenza vaccines.
The provinces and territories (P/Ts) and some federal departments (Indigenous Services Canada,
Correctional Service of Canada, Global Affairs Canada, Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and Department
of National Defence) order the majority of their influenza vaccine through Public Services and
Procurement Canada’s Bulk Procurement Program. The P/Ts use their discretion to make decisions
regarding their influenza vaccination programs, including eligible populations, vaccine types and
quantities.
Collectively, federal and P/T orders amount to approximately 14.3 million doses of influenza vaccine for
the 2022-2023 influenza season, which is a decrease of ~19% from last year’s order (17.6 million doses),
and is ~9% lower than the total number of doses actually delivered in 2020 (16 million doses).
Similar to the past two years, PHAC has also purchased and will pay for 330,000 doses of Fluzone® High-
Dose (HD) from Sanofi Pasteur to vaccinate all eligible residents (65 years of age and above) in Long
Term Care facilities in all P/T jurisdictions. Fluzone® HD is a split virus, high-dose quadrivalentvaccine
indicated for adults aged 65 years and older, that contains four times the antigen of standard influenza
vaccines. Evidence suggests that Fluzone® HD provides better protection to older adults. PHAC’s
Fluzone® HD doses are included in the 14.3 million dose total F/P/T order.
Given the potential for a substantial influenza season, PHAC has committed to purchase an additional
715,000 doses of influenza vaccine as part of a reserve to be used by P/Ts if their ordered quantity
proves insufficient. ThePHAC reserve will increase the overall supply to just over 15 million doses.
Flu Vaccination Coverage
The Seasonal Influenza Vaccination Coverage Survey collects information every year about the uptake of
the influenza vaccine in Canada. Each flu season,this survey is used to estimate coverage among all
adults, as well as among individuals at higher risk of complications including seniors aged 65 years and
older and adults aged 18-64 years with chronic medical conditions.
In the 2021/22 flu season:
• Overall, influenza vaccination coverage among all adults (39%) was similar to the previous
seasons (42% in 209/20 and 40% in 2020/21);
• Only 38% of Canadian adults aged 18-64 years with chronic medical conditions received an
influenza vaccine;
281
• Vaccination coverage among seniors (71%) is closer to the national goal of 80%; however, no
improvement has been observed in the last 3 years.
Recommendations for Influenza Vaccination
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that everyone 6 months of age
and older without contraindications receive an annual influenza vaccine.
Receiving the influenza vaccine will not provide protection from COVID-19, but it canreduce the chances
of being co-infected with influenza and COVID-19 at the same time, a situation that can lead to serious
complications. Preventing influenza will also help to reduce stress on the health care system during the
ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
Additional PHAC guidance on the administration of seasonal influenza vaccine in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic has been developed to support influenza vaccine programs and primary care
providers in offering influenza vaccines this fall. This includes advice on who should receive the influenza
vaccine, what to do if someone seeking vaccination is showing symptoms, and simultaneous
administration of influenza vaccines with COVID-19 vaccines.
NACI currently recommends that all the seasonal influenza vaccines (including live and non-live vaccines)
may be given concurrently with (i.e., same day) or at any time before or after, COVID 19 vaccines for
individuals 5 years of age and older. This will help to facilitate influenza vaccine programs in the fall and
winter months.
Out of precaution, concurrent administration of the COVID-19 vaccine for children 6 months to 5 years
of age with non-COVID-19 vaccines, including the influenza vaccine, is not routinely recommended at
this time. This is a precaution tohelp to distinguish between adverse events that may arise due to the
COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may be circumstances when a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine
and another vaccine need to be given at the same time in children under 5–this shouldbe determined
in consultation with a healthcare provider.
NACI will continue to monitor the evidence base, including ongoing and anticipated studies investigating
influenza vaccines administered at the same time as, or any time before or after, COVID-19 vaccines and
update its recommendations as needed.
282
CASES OF MONKEYPOX IN CANADA
Issue
As of November 18, at 12:00 pm EDT, there have been 1,449 confirmed cases of Monkeypox in Canada
(690 in Ontario, 525 in Quebec, 182 in British Columbia, 41 in Alberta, 6 in Saskatchewan, 2 in Yukon, 1
in Manitoba, 1 in Nova Scotia, and 1 in New Brunswick). The Public Health Agency of Canada’s National
case counts are publicly updated weekly. Prior to the current international outbreak of Monkeypox,
Canada has neverhad any confirmed cases of Monkeypox.
Key Facts
• Monkeypox is a viral infection with a rash that may be painful and affect any part of the body,
such as the mouth, genitals, face, and hands.
• On July 23, 2022, the WHO Director-General declared the escalating global Monkeypox outbreak
a Public Health Emergency of International Concern.
• Following notification received from the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention about a U.S. traveler with Monkeypox who visited Montreal, Quebec in early May 2022, the
Public Health Agency of Canada, in collaboration with public health authorities, launched activities to
raise awareness and vigilance for Monkeypox.
• The first two cases of Monkeypox in Canada were reported on May 19, 2022, in Quebec.
• People usually develop symptoms 5 to 21 days after being exposed to the Monkeypox virus.
• Signs and symptoms of Monkeypox can typically include fever, and a rash that often appears
within a few days after symptoms such as headache, muscle aches, exhaustion, and swollen lymph
nodes.
• Current evidence suggests that Monkeypox spreads in 3 ways: from person to person, through
direct contact with contaminated objects, and from animals to humans.
• Monkeypox is spread from person to person through: contact with lesions or scabs that may be
found on the skin or mucosal surfaces of a person with Monkeypox; and direct contact with bodily fluids
of a person with Monkeypox.
• The virus may also spread through respiratory particles from a person with Monkeypox,
however, information is still being gathered on that mode of transmission.
• There are no well-established treatments for Monkeypox and limited data is available on the
clinical effectiveness of specific treatments in humans.
• Some existing treatments for smallpox, such as TPOXX® (tecovirimat monohydrate capsules)
may have a role to play in select instances. TPOXX® is an oral antiviral agent that is indicated for the
treatment of human smallpox disease in adults and pediatric patients. TPOXX® does not have an
approved Health Canada indication for monkeypox or other Orthopoxviruses.
• IMVAMUNE® is a licensed 3rd generation smallpox vaccine indicated for active immunization
against smallpox, monkeypox and related Orthopoxvirus infection and disease in adults 18 years of age
and older determined to be at high risk for exposure.
Key Messages
• Keeping people in Canada safe from threats to their health, and keeping our most vulnerable
citizens safe andhealthy is a top priority for the Government of Canada.
• Anyone can get infected with and spread Monkeypox if they come into close contact with
someone who has the virus. People in Canada should be aware of the symptoms of Monkeypox and
report any concerns to their health care provider. Additional information is available on Canada.ca.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working with public health partners to investigate
reports of suspected cases of Monkeypox in Canada.
283
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has alerted public health authorities to work with health
care providers to look for patients who have signs or symptoms consistent with Monkeypox, including
whether they have reported travel or have specific risk factors for Monkeypox.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory and jurisdictions that
have the capacity are conducting testing to confirm or rule out a diagnosis of Monkeypox for suspected
cases.
• The situation is evolving in Canada and internationally. The Public Health Agency of Canada will
continue to work with the provinces and territories to assess the risks to people in Canada, respond to
the evolving situation, and continue to provide updates to the public as new information becomes
available.
If pressed on vaccines and treatments:
• On September 23, 2022, NACI provided updated guidance on the use of Imvamune® in the
context of ongoing monkeypox outbreaks in Canada. Recommendations include pre-exposure
vaccination for priority populations considered at highest risk, given current and projected
epidemiology, as well as dose-sparing strategies for consideration if vaccine supply is constrained.
• To support the targeted public health response strategies of provinces and territories, the Public
Health Agency of Canada is deploying vaccines and therapeutics from Canada’s National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile.
• To date, Canada’s National Emergency Strategic Stockpile has deployed over 140,000 doses of
vaccine and over 160 treatment courses of therapeutics.
• At this time, and in alignment with international expert assessments, including the World Health
Organization, there is no need for the vaccine to be used for mass immunization.
If pressed on the risk to people in Canada:
• The Agency is continually assessing the possible risk of exposure to the Monkeypox virus in
Canada. At this time, person-to-person transmission is occurring in Canada.
• Anyone can get infected with and spread Monkeypox if they come into close contact with
someone who has the virus.
• People who develop symptoms of Monkeypox, such as a new rash accompanied by general
symptoms should isolate at home and immediately contact their health care provider or local public
health authority for advice on what to do.
• People can reduce their risk of becoming infected with or spreading the Monkeypox virus by:
o Staying home and limiting contact with others if they have symptoms, or as recommended by
their health care provider;
o Avoiding close physical contact, including sexual contact, with someone who has Monkeypox or
may have been exposed to the Monkeypox virus;
o Maintaining good hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette;
o Cleaning and disinfecting high-touch surfaces and objects in their home, especially after having
visitors.
• Interim Monkeypox Infection Prevention and Control Guidance within healthcare settings was
first released on May 27, 2022, and will continue to beupdated as the evidence evolves.
If pressed on the National Microbiology Laboratory’s role in testing
• Testing for Monkeypox is primarily determined at the provincial and territorial level.
• British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec are performing their own diagnostic testing for
cases of suspected Monkeypox virus infection.
284
• New Brunswick, Newfoundland, Manitoba, and Saskatchewan are in the early stages of
performing their own diagnostic testing, with support from the National Microbiology Laboratory. All
other Canadian samples of suspected Monkeypox virus infection are sent to the National Microbiology
Laboratory for further laboratory analysis and confirmation.
• The National Microbiology Laboratory continues to work on increasing provincial and territorial
capacity to test for cases of Monkeypox virus infection.
• Once a sample is received, the National Microbiology Laboratory strives to have results returned
to the requestor within 24-48 hours.
• This is an evolving investigation in Canadaand internationally. The National Microbiology
Laboratory is performing whole genome sequencing, and enhanced fingerprint analysis, on Canadian
samples of Monkeypox. This sequencing will help our experts understand the chains of transmission
occurring inCanada. The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to provide updates as new
information becomes available.
Background
Limited cases of travel-related Monkeypox were identified internationally prior to the current outbreak.
As of November 24, 2022, there have been 80,859 confirmed cases and 55 deaths reported to the WHO
across 110 countries, including Canada, with a high proportion of these cases reported from countries
without previously documented Monkeypox transmission.
To date in Canada, confirmed cases have been identified in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, and the Yukon.
Monkeypox is typically transmitted from animals to humans. However, human-to-human transmission
can resultfrom direct contact with their body fluids, respiratory droplets, or Monkeypox sores, or by
sharing clothing, bedding or common items that have been contaminated with the infected person’s
fluids or sores. Transmission via respiratory droplets usually requires prolonged face-to-face contact,
which can put health care providers and household members of active cases at greater risk.
All provinces and territories with testing capacity follow the safety guidelines required to work with the
Monkeypox virus fromthe Public Health Agency of Canada’s Centre for Biosecurity.
In June 2022, the National Microbiology Laboratory provided control material and proficiency test
panels (which verify the quality of tests) for the Monkeypox virus to nine provincial partners.For some
jurisdictions, this has eliminated the need to ship samples and has decreased turnaround times for
testing.
Currently, there is no specific treatment approved for Monkeypox, however, it is often self-limiting and
symptoms usually resolve spontaneously within 2 to 4 weeks.
Health Canada has authorized the vaccine Imvamune for active immunization against Monkeypox,
smallpox and related Orthopox virus infections and diseases in adults 18 years of age and older
determined to be at high risk for exposure. Imvamune is authorized under the Extraordinary Use New
Drugs regulatory pathway, which permits the restricted sale of the product for emergency preparedness
in Canada for use by federal, provincial and territorial, and municipal governments.
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to support provincial public health authorities to manage
this outbreak by coordinating national surveillance, providing guidance and medical countermeasures.
The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to monitor this evolving outbreak and work
collaboratively with public health authorities to protect the health of Canadians.
285
EBOLA VIRUS DISEASE IN UGANDA
Issue
On September 20, 2022, Uganda health authorities declared an outbreak of Ebola caused by theSudan
ebolavirus species or Sudan Virus Disease (SVD). As of November 22, 2022, 141 confirmed cases of SVD
have been reported across nine districts of Uganda.
Key Facts
• SVD is a severe, often fatal illness affecting humans and other primates. Case fatality rates of
SVD have varied from 41 to 100% in past outbreaks.
• Current evidence suggests that SVD is spread through person-to-person transmission via direct
contact (through broken skin or mucous membranes) with: blood or body fluids of a person who is sick
with or has died from SVD; objects that have been contaminated with body fluids (like blood, faeces,
vomit) from a person sick with SVD; or the body of a person who died from SVD.
• Symptoms usually develop between 2 to 21 days after exposure to the virus and can include
fever, fatigue, muscle pain, headache, and sore throat followed by vomiting, diarrhoea, rash, symptoms
of impaired kidney and liver function. In some cases, the patient might present with both internal and
external bleeding.
• On October 7 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada issued a Level 2 travel health notice for
Uganda. Level 2 indicates the need to practise enhanced health precautions if travelling to the area.
• Canada has no direct flights from Uganda and the volume of travelers arriving indirectly from
Uganda is low.
• There is currently no approved treatment specifically for SVD.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is closely monitoring the situation and working with international
partners to support the Ebolaoutbreak response.
• No cases of Ebola have ever been diagnosed and reported in Canada.
• Canadians should practise enhanced health precautions if travelling to Uganda.
• Enhanced screening measures are in place at Canada’s ports of entry to help identify travellers
returning to Canada who may be ill or have had close contact with or exposure to a person infected with
Ebola.
• New messaging is being put in place in airport arrival areas to educate travellers on what actions
to take if they are feeling sick, and to raise awareness of the outbreak in Uganda.
• Travellers from Uganda will receive handouts at airports with information to monitor their
health, the symptoms of Ebola, and how the disease is spread.
If pressed on Vaccination/Treatment
• There iscurrently no approved treatment specifically for Ebola virus disease.
• The sooner patients seek help, the better their chances of survival.
• In-hospital treatment would be necessary for the best standard of care, and to protect others
from potential exposure to an Ebola virus.
• In Canada, a person infected with the Ebola virus would be treated in a hospital with the highest
level of infection prevention and control measures in place and by highly trained and specialized staff.
If pressed on Risk to Canadians
• The overall risk of SVD introduction into Canada is currently assessed as low.
286
Background
Ebola disease caused by Sudan virus is named Sudan Virus Disease (SVD) is a serious and sometimes
fatal illness caused by species from the Ebola virus Disease (EVD). EVD is spread through direct contact
with the bodily fluids of a person who is symptomatic or has died from EVD, contact with objects (such
as bedding and medical equipment) contaminated with bodily fluids, or through close contact with
infected or dead animals.
Outbreaks usually begin with transmission from an infected wild animal to a human. Following this
event, SVD then spreads from person to person.
Symptoms develop between 2 to 21 days after exposure to the virus, with most cases displaying
symptoms around 7 days after exposure.
Infected individuals only become infectious after symptoms develop. There is no risk of transmission
from casual contact with asymptomatic individuals. However, the virus can survive in genital fluids for
up to 40 months, and sexual transmission via semen has been documented.
Health care workers and those with close contact with sick or dead individuals are most at risk for
contracting EVD.
EVD is initially characterized by flu-like symptoms, such asfever and aches and pains. This can progress
to gastrointestinal symptoms, and in severe cases, bleeding. EVD can be fatal, with between 25 and 90%
of cases succumbing to the disease.
The geographic distribution of EVD is limited to the African continent, however, imported cases in
Europe and the United States were reported during the 2013-2016 West African outbreak. No cases of
EVD have ever been reported in Canada.
There is currently no Health Canada-approved vaccine available to travellers to preventSVD. However,
Canada has a limited stockpile of the rVSV-ZEBOV vaccine (brand name Ervebo) for emergency use in
treating infected Canadians and front-line workers specifically against the Zaire ebolavirus strain;
however, there is no published evidence that this vaccine is effective against the Sudan virus. .
287
LYME DISEASE
Issue
Lyme disease continues to draw public, political, and media attention with particular scrutiny on the
number of human cases, risks, diagnosis, and treatment in Canada. The incidence of Lyme disease in
Canada is steadily increasing. There is increasing evidence that the emergence of Lyme disease in
Canada was driven by changes to temperature and precipitation, making Canada more suitable for the
ticks that carry the disease.
Key Facts
• Caused by the bite of an infected blacklegged tick, early symptoms of Lyme disease can include a
rash at the site of the tick bite (sometimes shaped like a bull’s eye), fever, chills, fatigue, headache,
swollen lymph nodes, and muscle and joint pain. Long-term symptoms can include neurological
problems, chronic pain, and fatigue.
• If diagnosed early, Lyme disease can be effectively treated with antibiotics.
• The number of regions with established blacklegged tick populations continue to increase across
Canada.
• Between 2009 and 2021, provincial public health units have reported 14,616 human cases of
Lyme disease across Canada.
• 92% of human Lyme disease cases from 2009 to 2019 were from Ontario, Quebec, and Nova
Scotia.
• The provinces reported 2,851 cases of Lyme disease in 2021, compared to 1,615 cases in 2020.
This is the highest annual number of cases reported since Lyme disease became notifiable in 2009.
• Public education and raising awareness is key to prevention and early detection.
Key Messages
• Our Government recognizes that cases of Lyme disease are increasing in Canada, due in part to
climate change.
• We are committed to collaborating with new and existing partners to expand our reach and
deliver new products, programs, and information for Canadians.
• We are raising public awareness of Lyme disease and other climate-driven infectious diseases
and making sure health care providers have the information they need to recognize the symptoms.
• We are fundingresearch on the diagnosis and treatment of Lyme disease to support early
detection and care.
If pressed on the Evaluation or Final Report of the Federal Framework on Lyme Disease
• We will continue to work to strengthen efforts on Lyme disease by building on the
accomplishments of the Framework and applying the lessons learned.
• We will ensure that there is continued engagement with stakeholders to provide opportunities
for them to share their expertise, input, and experience.
• We are committed to continuously improving our understanding through ongoing research and
innovative projects that address the impact of climate change on human health.
• Promoting education and awareness materials for target audiences, including health
professionals to support prevention and early diagnosis will also remain a priority.
288
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) monitors Lyme disease in Canada. PHAC provides national
information on the number of cases reported and identifies where Lyme disease is present and
emerging in Canada. Addressing Lyme disease is a shared responsibility. In partnership with public
health authorities at other levels of government, the Government of Canada is raising awareness
through public education; supporting surveillance activities and national reporting; conducting and
supporting laboratory diagnostic testing; engaging with international and domestic organizations; and
funding research. Provinces and territories (PTs) provide healthcare services to Lyme disease patients
and coordinate prevention and control activities.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
Federal Framework on Lyme Disease
The five-year Federal Framework on Lyme Disease was published on May 30, 2017. A report on the
Framework was tabled in theHouse of Commons on June 10, 2022. The Framework has focused efforts
on tracking the incidence of Lyme disease nationally, increasing awareness among Canadians and front-
line health professionals, monitoring the distribution and expansion of risk areas inCanada, and
supporting provincial laboratories and numerous science, innovation, and research initiatives.
There was no dedicated funding for the implementation of the Framework.
Audit and Evaluation
PHAC’s Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE)conducted an evaluation of PHAC’s framework activities.
OAE conducted 47 interviews with a range of key informants including representatives from
organizations for people with lived experience, researchers, government representatives, professional
associations, and subject matter experts. The online survey was completed by 91 respondents, with 53%
of them being persons with lived experience or groups representing people with lived experience.
The evaluation found that progress was made in implementing the Framework, most notably under the
Education and Awareness pillar. Many activities under the Surveillance and Guidance and Best Practices
pillars were also advanced. This work resulted in new and innovative tools and resources, which were
seen as highly valuable by the scientific community and other federal, provincial, and territorial
partners. Persons with lived experience identified continued unmet needs in the areas of surveillance,
diagnosis, and treatment for Lyme disease, particularly for individuals who do not fit the case definition.
Over the next few months, PHAC will complete the remaining items in the Framework to achieve full
implementation.
Canadian Lyme Disease Research Network
In October 2018, Canadian Institutes of Health Research and PHAC invested $4 million over 4 years in
the Canadian Lyme Disease Research Network (CLyDRN). CLyDRN brings together Lyme disease
stakeholders, including researchers, clinicians, and patients in order to facilitate national collaboration
and to generate new knowledge to improve the diagnosis, treatment, and health outcomes for people
with Lyme disease.
Infectious Diseases and Climate Change Fund
PHAC’s Infectious Disease and Climate Change Fund provides $2 million annually over 11 years (2017-
2028) to help Canadians, communities and health professionals have the information they need to
better understand their risks and take measures to protect themselves from climate-driven infectious
diseases. To date, almost $5 million in funding has been invested to support 15 new Lyme disease
289
projects focussed on enhancing surveillance and monitoring efforts, and developing new education and
awareness resources and tools for the public and health professionals.
290
MEASLES IN CANADA
Issue
The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that the number of cases of measles worldwide was
79% higher in the first two months of 2022 compared to the same timeframe in 2021.
Key Facts
• Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, there had been an increase in the number of confirmed
measles cases reported in Canada between 2017 and 2019, which coincides with the global trend of the
disease.
• No confirmed measles cases were reported in Canada between March 2020 and February 2021,
due to a combination of domestic measles elimination through vaccination and no importation of
international cases as a result of COVID-19 border restrictions.
• As of November 1, 2022, three (3) confirmed measles cases were reported in Canada. All 3 cases
were imported from outside the country and were travel-related.
Key Messages
• Vaccination is a safe and effective protection against measles. Measles is rare in Canada, thanks
to vaccination, but this is not the case in all countries.
• We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable information about vaccination and promote
vaccination to protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
If pressed
• While vaccination is not mandatory in Canada, the Government of Canada is committed to
vaccination as a safe and effective public health measure that can prevent disease and disability.
• Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programsand determine public health
requirements in their jurisdictions.
BACKGROUND
Measles is a highly contagious respiratory tract infection caused by the measles virus. Measles is spread
by contact with an infected person through coughing and sneezing. Itis a leading cause of death among
young children globally.
Measles has been eliminated in Canada since 1998. In July 2022, the National Certification Committee
re-verified Canada’s elimination status for measles, rubella and Congenital Rubella Syndrome (CRS) for
the 2020-2021 period. There was notable measles activity in the Region of the Americas in 2021,
specifically in Brazil where over 650 cases were reported.
Measles is relatively rare in Canada due to effective vaccination programs. However, it is important that
Canadians continue to be vaccinated against measles given the travel-related risks of infection and
spread to unvaccinated people.
Measles is a notifiable disease in all provinces and territories (P/Ts). When a healthcare provider
diagnoses acase of measles, notification is also made to the respective jurisdictional public health
agency. This helps P/Ts implement measles prevention and control strategies as quickly as possible.
There is no specific treatment for measles. Individuals with measles should self-isolate during the
infectious period to prevent infecting others. People should talk to their health care provider if they
think they have measles.
Measles Outbreaks Nationally and Internationally
291
As of November 1, 2022, 3 cases of confirmedmeasles cases have been reported in Canada in 2022. All
3 cases were imported. In Canada, during the COVID-19 pandemic, very few measles cases were
reported (one in 2020 and zero in 2021). In recent pre-pandemic years, an average of 62 measles were
reported between 2017 and 2019 (ranged from 29 to 113 cases).
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides monthly updates on the measles
situation in the U.S. As of October 28, 2022, there have been 33 confirmed measles cases in 5
jurisdictions this year. Since 2016, multiple large-scale measles outbreaks have been reported across
Europe, with almost all European countries reporting measles cases by 2017. According to the World
Health Organization, there was substantial decrease in measles incidence and associated mortality
worldwide during 2000–2016, followed by a global resurgence during 2017–2019, then an apparent
decline in 2020 during the COVID-19 pandemic. Despite this decline, millions more children were
susceptible to measles atthe end of 2020 than in 2019.
Mandatory Vaccination in Schools
Vaccination is not mandatory in Canada; however, some P/Ts, including British Columbia, Ontario, and
New Brunswick, require proof of vaccination for measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs)
in order to register in public schools.
Federal Role
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) works with P/Ts in the management of outbreaks of VPDs by
providing technical advice and assisting with laboratory testing when requested by a P/T. P/Ts and local
public health are responsible for delivering public health programs, including vaccination programs and
investigation and follow-up of measles cases and outbreaks.
The federal government has a role in regulatory approval of vaccines, vaccinesafety, national
surveillance for VPDs and adverse events following vaccination, bulk purchasing of vaccines, national
leadership, and coordination in knowledge development, innovation, and sharing of best practices.
Each week, PHAC receives measles surveillance data from P/Ts and reports cases to the Pan American
Health Organization. Weekly measles surveillance reports are publicly available on theCanada.ca
website.
Measles Vaccination Coverage Rates
PHAC estimates vaccine coverage through the Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey,
conducted every two years. The latest survey completed in 2019 estimated that 90% of Canadian
children had received at least one dose of measles vaccine by two years of age. This is below the 95%
coverage target formeasles vaccines.
292
HIV AND STBBI FUNDING IN CANADA
Issue
The Government of Canada invests $33.4 million annually in grant and contribution funding to support
community-based organization initiatives to address HIV and other sexually transmitted and blood-
borne infections (STBBI) in Canada. In 2022, federal investments towards STBBI amount to $106.4
million, including funding from Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) and the Canadian Institutes for Health
Research (CIHR). However, community organizations andother domestic STBBI stakeholders have been
vocal in their requests to increase annual funding.
Key Facts
• The Government of Canada Five-Year STBBI Action Plan (2019) outlines an integrated approach
to the prevention of all STBBI.Stakeholders accept the integrated, community-focused approach and
appreciate its increased efficiency; however:
o HIV stakeholders are critical about the use of HIV-specific funds to support an expanded number
of infectious diseases; and
o Hepatitis C stakeholders are concerned that the uniqueness of the public health response
required will be lost among the broader HIV response.
• In 2022, the Government of Canada invested $106.4 million to address STBBI across Canada,
including: $72.6 million for the Federal Initiative (FI) ($41.5 million for PHAC, $4.2 million for
Correctional Service Canada, $22.4 million for CIHR, and $4.5 million for ISC); $8.9 million for Public
Health responses to addressing Hepatitis C; $7 million for the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
Harm Reduction Fund; and $17.9 million to improve access to HIV self-testing and diagnostic services in
northern, remote, and isolated communities.
• On August 1, 2022, at the 24th International AIDS Conference, the Government of Canada
announced $17.9 million in time-limited funding (2022-2023) to improve access to HIV self-testing. This
includes $8 million to community-based organizations to support their capacity to distribute and
promote HIV self-tests and link people to care, $8.7 million to the National Microbiology Laboratory to
expand community-based and led testing in northern, remote, and isolated communities, and $1.2
million to the BC-Communicable Disease Center (CDC) and BC’s First Nations Health Authority to build
on previous initiatives by identifying testing potential for other infectious diseases, including STBBI.
• Community partnerships help the Government of Canada advance the work of our Action Plan
and achieve global STBBI targets by providing innovative, tailored approaches to address STBBI that are
free of stigma and discrimination.
• PHAC invests $26.4 million annually to the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (CAF),
which supports community-based responses to STBBI in order to prevent new infections, reduce stigma
and discrimination and increase access to testing and treatment. From this investment, $4 million
annually is dedicated to projects led by Indigenous organizations.
• PHAC also invests $7 million annually to the Harm Reduction Fund (HRF) to support community-
based projects across Canada that will help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share drug-
use equipment such as needles and pipes. These funds complement existing investments under the CAF
by focusing on a population that is particularly at-risk of STBBI.
• In addition to the funding they receive from the FI, CIHR also funds HIV and hepatitis C research.
From 2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over $228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63
million on hepatitis C research.
• In additionto the FI, from 2017-2022 ISC allocated $37.5 million with an $11 million ongoing
commitment for prevention, testing, treatment, and care for STBBI, including HIV, for First Nations and
Inuit communities.
293
• The global 90-90-90 HIV targets stated that by 2020, 90% of all people living with HIV know their
status, 90% of those diagnosed receive antiretroviral treatment, and 90% of those on treatment achieve
viral suppression. Canada's 90-90-90 estimates for 2020 lie within the range reported by other
comparable countries such as the United States of America, France, Germany, Australia, the
Netherlands, and Finland.
Key Messages
• We remain committed to ensuring that Canadians have equitable access to prevention, testing
and care for sexually transmitted andblood-borne infections (STBBI), whereby $106.4 million was
invested by the Government of Canada in 2022 to address STBBI.
• We recognize the critical role that community-based organizations play in Canada’s ability to
achieve the global targets, reduce barriers, and address systemic inequities affecting Canadians living
with or affected by HIV.
• Annual investments of $33.4 million in community-based projects continue to be a pillar of the
Government of Canada response through the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund and Harm
Reduction Fund, and an additional investment of $8 million to increase access to HIV self-testing for
2022-2023.
• Community organizations will play a central role in distributing HIV self-test kits, particularly
among populations most affected by HIV. The new $8 million investment will support broader
distribution of self-test kits in an effort to reduce the number of undiagnosed in Canada.
• Canada proudly hosted the 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS 2022) in Montreal from
July 29th to August 2nd. The Government of Canada participated in multiple conference events and
advanced several key initiatives including endorsing the global Undetectable = Untransmittable (U=U)
declaration, announcing $17.9 million in funding on HIV self-testing, announcing consultations on the
criminalization of HIV non-disclosure, and committing $15 million for renewed funding to UNAIDS.
If pressed on funding
• In 2022, the Government of Canada invested $106.4 million to address HIV and other sexually
transmitted and blood-borne infections initiatives in Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada invests $26.4 million annually through the HIV and Hepatitis
C Community Action Fund to support community-based programs across Canada to address HIV,
hepatitis C and other sexually transmitted.
• Through the Harm Reduction Fund, the Agency also invests $7 million annually to support
projects that help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share inhalation and injection drug-use
equipment.
Background
In 2003-04, funding levels for the Canadian Strategy on HIV/AIDS were $42.2 million per year. In 2005,
the Government of Canada (GoC) launched the Federal Initiative (FI) to address HIV/AIDS in Canada, and
committed to doubling funding to $84.4 million by 2008-09. Expenditure Review Committee Cabinet
Cuts (2005), which took effect in 2007-08, and Budget 2012 reductions brought HIV funding levels down
to $72.6 million, where funding remained stable until 2017/18. During this period, in 2007, the Canadian
HIV Vaccine Initiative was launched as a time-limited partnership between the GoC and the Bill and
Melinda Gates Foundation. As part ofthis partnership and over a 10-year period, the GoC dedicated $26
million from the FI and invested an additional $82 million to support HIV vaccine research, for a total of
$108 million.
294
PHAC, in consultation with stakeholders, made a strategic shift totake an integrated approach to the
prevention of all STBBI rather than siloed disease specific approaches, given the common routes of
transmission and prevention behaviours, and the over-representation of common populations in rates
of infection. Interventions and programs are designed to address the complexity and interrelated nature
of risk factors and transmission routes for STBBI while recognizing that disease-specific approaches may
be appropriate in some cases.
Community Funding
Part of PHAC’s funding is investing $33.4 million annually in grants and contributions to support
community-led responses to HIV, Hepatitis C and related STBBI. The HIV and Hepatitis C Community
Action Fund (CAF) receives $26.4 million annually to support community-led integrated approaches to
disease prevention initiatives and responses to addressing common transmission routes, risk
behaviours, affected populations, and stigma associated with STBBI. Of which, $4 million annually is
dedicated to projects led by Indigenous organizations.
Through the Harm Reduction Fund (HRF), PHAC invests $7 million annually to support projects across
Canada that help reduce HIV and hepatitis C among people who share injection and inhalation drug-use
equipment. These funds complement existinginvestments under the CAF by focusing on a population
that is particularly at-risk for STBBI. The funding helps community-based organizations implement or
enhance harm reduction measures by providing: education resources for people who use drugs; support
for peer-based outreach and navigation initiatives; and training for health providers. Investments in the
HRF also support objectives within the Canadian Drug and Substance Strategy.
Time-Limited HIV Self-Testing Initiative
Despite the availability of testing services for HIV, there remains an estimated 6,590 people in Canada
living with HIV who are not aware of their status. Laboratory testing can be inaccessible to certain
populations due to the lack of access to a healthcare provider, travel and wait times, and concerns
about confidentiality and stigma. An $8 million time-limited investment (2022-2023) will support
community-based organizations in the purchase and distribution of HIV self-test kits, which will be
useful for reaching the undiagnosed by offering greater accessibility, privacy and convenience and by
reducing the stigma associated with accessing traditional HIV testing.
National Microbiology Laboratory Testing (northern, remote, and isolated communities)
Through the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML), PHAC will invest an additional $8.7 million in
2022-2023 to expand community-based and community-led testing initiatives in northern, remote, and
isolated (NRI) communities. The NML will also support training, verification and ongoing quality
oversight for these community-based testing programs. For people living in NRI communities, access to
culturally appropriate, community-owned and led testing options for infectious diseases can be key to
improving their overall health. With these funds, organizations and communities will be able to
purchase diagnostic tests for screening, confirmatory testing and ongoing monitoring in the community.
This way specimens can be tested on location and not have to be sent elsewhere, leading to faster
diagnostics. The NML also receives $5 million over five years under the new Innovative Diagnostics
Program for developing novel approaches to support community-based testing for reaching the
undiagnosed.
The British Columbia Centre for Disease Control (BC-CDC) and First Nations Health Authority along with
agency and community partners will receive $1.2 million in 2022-2023 to implement a range of
295
community-based testing innovations that will provide a broader range of testing services for a series of
rural, remoteand isolated communities. These efforts will help inform a series of shared priorities and
next steps for the scaling up of community-based STBBI testing approaches in the province of British
Columbia based on the evidence generated through this project.
Funding to Support Researchers
Canada also recognizes the importance of funding research that creates new knowledge and resources
that improve the health of Canadians that are affected by HIV and STBBI. Understanding how the social
determinants of healthaffect those impacted by HIV and other STBBI will allow Canada to create more
equitable approaches that help us reach our global targets. From 2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over
$228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63 million on Hepatitis C research. Examples of
2019-2020 investments include:
• $6 million over five years to support research to investigate the introduction of new HIV/AIDS
and STBBI testing technologies in Canada, including the HIV self-test kit approved for use in Canada in
2020.
• $12.5 million over five years to three Centres for HIV/AIDS, hepatitis C and other STBBI
Population Health and Health Services Research. The Centres aim to improve health and access to
effective programs and services for people living with and at riskof HIV/AIDS and STBBI, particularly for
populations most affected. Two of these Centres focus exclusively on Indigenous populations and are
grounded in Indigenous knowledge and methodologies.
• $19.9 million over five years in six Biomedical and ClinicalHIV/AIDS Research Team Grants to
develop effective prevention, treatment and care strategies to improve the health of Canadians affected
by STBBI. Projects will explore issues such as gaps in testing, using anti-retroviral medications, and
finding new approaches to eliminate persistent HIV infection.
• $22.85 million over five years for the Canadian HIV Trials Network, which aims to accelerate the
translation and uptake of new knowledge into clinical applications, interventions and guidelines for
HIV/AIDS care.
296
CANCER
Issue
Cancer continues to be the leading cause of death in Canada. The Canadian Cancer Society, in
conjunction with the Public Health Agency of Canada and Statistics Canada, estimates that
approximately two in five Canadians will develop cancer in their lifetime and one in four Canadians will
die of the disease.
Key Facts
• In 2022, an estimated 233,900 new cancer cases will be diagnosed in Canada.
• Four cancers-breast, lung, colorectal, and prostate–are expected to account for 46 percent of
new cancer cases diagnosed in 2022. Canada continues to see an increase in the number of individuals
diagnosed with cancer. This is primarily due to the aging and growing population.
• Cancer also occurs in children, with children under the age of five being twice aslikely to be
newly diagnosed with cancer than children 5-14 years old.
• Approximately 1,000 children are diagnosed with some form of cancer every year. Close to 84
percent of children survive a cancer diagnosis after five years, and this survival rate isexpected to
improve with new and better treatments.
Key Messages
• Our Government recognizes that cancer is a health issue that impacts nearly all Canadians,
either through a personal diagnosis or that of a loved one at some point in their lives.
• OurGovernment continues to fund the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer at close to $50
million annually. The Partnership is having an impact on the lives of Canadians through its work on
cancer prevention, early detection, treatment and support for those living with cancer.
• We are also committed to supporting cancer research in these various domains. Through the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), we invested more than $1 billion over the last five years
toward cancer research and CIHR continuesto implement the $30 million investment announced in
Budget 2021 to fund targeted research on pediatric cancers.
• Additionally, the federal government conducts ongoing cancer-focused surveillance and
research, and invests in community-based interventions that address the common risk factors for
chronic disease, such as physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use.
Background
The federal health portfolio undertakes a range of activities related to cancer, including those led by
Health Canada, thePublic Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is a not-for-profit corporation that was created in 2006.
CPAC is fully funded by the Government of Canada to provide a pan-Canadian perspective to cancer
control and specifically to accelerate the implementation of the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control
(the Strategy). The Strategy was built on the notion that enhanced cancer control could be achieved by
providing governments, non-government organizations and Canadians access to research, information
and decision-making tools in a coordinated fashion. Budget 2016 confirmed ongoing funding for CPAC
at $47.5 million per year.
297
In 2018 and 2019, CPAC engaged with over 7,500 stakeholders to refresh the Strategy so that it would
reflect the current cancer control and health system landscape. Released in June 2019, the refreshed
Strategy, entitled the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control 2019-2029:Doing together what cannot be
done alone, was endorsed by the Conference of Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) Deputy Ministers of
Health. It focuses on five priorities spanning the entire cancer journey: (1) decrease the risk of people
getting cancer;(2) diagnose cancer faster, accurately and at an earlier stage; (3) deliver high-quality care
in a sustainable, world-class system; (4) eliminate barriers to people getting the care they need; and (5)
deliver information and supports for patients, familiesand caregivers. Additionally, it focuses on three
priorities specific to First Nations, Inuit and Métis: (1) culturally appropriate care closer to home; (2)
peoples-specific, self-determined cancer care; and, (3) First Nations, Inuit, or Métis governed research
and data systems.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund (HCCF) invests approximately $20 million annually to
support healthy living among Canadians who face health inequalities and are at greaterrisk of
developing chronic diseases, including cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The HCCF supports
projects and leverages funding from partners across various sectors to address the common risk factors
(i.e., physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use) for chronic disease, while aiming to create
physical and social environments that are known to support better health
PHAC works with Health Canada to advance Canada’s Tobacco Strategy through the HCCF to fund
projects that focus on tobacco cessation and prevention, with a particular emphasis on priority
populations that have significantly higher prevalence rates of tobacco use. The HCCF is investing $4.25
million annually to support tobacco cessation and prevention projects under this strategy. Between
2016 and 2021, PHAC also invested nearly $6 million in the “Walk/Run to Quit” initiative to support the
Canadian Cancer Society, in partnership with the Running Room, to help smokers quit by incorporating
physical activity into their daily lives.
PHAC analyzes national data to monitor trends in cancer incidence and mortality over time (e.g.,
Canadian Cancer Statistics). PHAC leads the Cancer in Young People in Canada Program surveillance
system and is a member of several CPAC advisory committees.
PHAC also supports the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care, an independent arms-length
organization, to develop guidelines for primary care practitioners in Canada. The Task Force has
produced evidence-based screening guidelines for breast, lung, cervical, colorectal and prostate cancers.
The guidelines support clinicians in identifying cancers early and reducing morbidity and mortality.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, CIHR invested over $1 billion in cancer research, including $227 million
in 2021-22.
Examples of recent investments include:
• In January 2021, CIHR and partners invested $4 million to fund 27 Spark Grants in Novel
Technologies in Cancer Prevention and Early Detection. These high risk, high reward proof of principle
grants seek to accelerate the development of novel approaches to cancer prevention and early
detection, including in the sectors of artificial intelligence and digital solutions;
• $2.5 million in March 2020 for the development of research support infrastructure to facilitate
multi-site studies for enhanced and expedited pediatric cancer research; and
298
• In April 2019, CIHR launched a Cancer Survivorship Team Grants funding opportunity in
partnership with the Canadian Cancer Society. It represents a joint commitment of $10 million for at
least 4 research teams that will address recently identified gaps in cancer survivorship research.
Budget 2021 committed $30 million dollars over two years to CIHR to support targeted research on
pediatric cancer. With this new investment, CIHR has recently launched a research initiative on pediatric
cancer, leveraging its Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and through a
new funding opportunity, to catalyze the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium. The Consortium will
advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform policy and practice
predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve the lives of pediatric
cancer patients and their families and caregivers. The announcement of the Consortium is anticipated in
the coming weeks.
299
PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL C-224 (NATIONAL FRAMEWORK ON CANCERS LINKED TO FIREFIGHTING ACT)
ISSUE
• On January 31, 2022,Liberal MP Romanado (Longueuil—Charles-LeMoyne, Quebec) introduced
Private Member’s Bill C-224.
• Bill C-224 calls on you, as Minister of Health, to develop a national framework designed to raise
awareness of cancers linked to firefighting and to support improved access for firefighters to cancer
prevention and treatment; table in Parliament a report on the framework one year after the Act comes
into force, and prepare a report on the effectiveness of the framework five years thereafter; and
designate themonth of January as “Firefighter Cancer Awareness Month”.
KEY FACTS
• Firefighters are exposed to higher levels of chemicals and have a higher incidence of cancer, as
compared to the general population. 86% of occupational fatality claims by firefighters are linked to
cancers.
• The International Association of Fire Fighters has voiced concerns related to higher cancer
incidence and mortality related to occupational chemical exposures.
• In August 2021, the Government of Canada announced a comprehensive action plan to protect
firefighters from harmful chemicals released during household fires.
• Bill C-224 was introduced on Jan 31, 2022, unanimously supported at Second Reading and
referred to HESA on June 22, 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has heard concerns about the higher rates of cancer experienced by
firefighters, who every day put their lives on the line to keep Canadians safe.
• We are taking the necessary action to protect these first responders in their lifesaving work.
With the Firefighter Action Plan, we are working to better protect firefighters from harmful chemicals
released during household fires.
• The Government of Canada welcomes Bill C-224 to further strengthen our efforts and we look
forward to working with our provincial and territorial partners, as well as firefighters and other
stakeholders, to continue to protect firefighters’ health.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCIAL/TERRITIORIAL JURISDICTION …
• In Canada, protecting firefighters from occupational cancers is a shared responsibility across
federal, provincial and territorial governments. Amendments to the Bill are needed to respect the
provincial and territorial government’s mandate for health care delivery and occupational health and
safety.
IF PRESSED ON GOAL OF FRAMEWORK ...
• Through a national framework, the Government would aim to raise awareness of cancers linked
to firefighting with the goal of improved access to information on cancer prevention and treatment for
firefighters throughout Canada.
BACKGROUND
Firefighters in Canada
There are 32,000 career firefighters and 100,000 volunteer firefighters in Canada.
300
Most firefighters fall under provincial/territorial (P/T) regulations. Of the 32,000 career firefighters, over
1,000 firefighters arefederally regulated employees.
Federal firefighters work for the Department of National Defence, Public Safety Canada, Transport
Canada, Parks Canada and Indigenous Services Canada.
Cancers Linked to Firefighting
Firefighters are exposed to higher levels of chemicals and have a higher incidence of cancer, as
compared to the general population. The higher exposures to potentially harmful chemicals experienced
by firefighters are incurred while responding to fire suppression situations, but also from their personal
protective equipment and fire stations.
Between 2006 and 2015, cancer was the leading cause of occupational fatality claims among firefighters
in Canada, representing over 86 percent of total claims.
Firefighters develop nine percent more cancers of all types and are 14 percent more likely to die of
cancer than age-matched controls in the general population.
On July 1, 2022, the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), part of the World Health
Organization, confirmed the human carcinogenicity of “occupational exposure as a firefighter”, meaning
that there is sufficient scientific evidence to conclude that firefighters’ occupational exposure causes
cancer (IARC Group 1 classification).
The IARC evaluation found that:
• firefighters’ exposure is particularly linked to mesothelioma (a type of lung cancer) and bladder
cancer; and,
• there is limited evidence that firefighters’ exposure causes five other types of cancer: colon,
prostate, testicular, melanoma, and non-Hodgkinlymphoma.
Bill C-224
On January 31, 2022, a Private Member’s Bill (C-224) was introduced that proposes a national
framework for the prevention and treatment of cancers linked to firefighting.
On June 22, 2022, the Bill was unanimously adopted at Second Reading and referred to HESA.
Government of Canada Action Plan to Protect Firefighters
In August 2021, the Ministers of Health and Environment and Climate Change Canada established an
Action Plan to help protect firefighters from harmful chemical exposures released during household
fires. The Action Plan includes regulatory, communications, and research actions within federal
jurisdiction, notably to:
• assess flame retardants to determine whether they are harmful to human health or the
environment;
• ban or risk manage harmful chemical flame retardants;
• support product innovation to protect the health of Canadians, by encouraging regulated parties
to use safe flame retardants as well as non-chemical alternatives to meet consumer product
flammabilityperformance requirements;
• conduct research and monitoring to better understand levels of exposure;
301
• identify practices for firefighters to reduce harm, such as improvements to personal protective
equipment; and,
• share information and raise awareness.
The Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter from December 16, 2021, committed the Department to
implement an action plan to protect Canadians, including firefighters, from exposure to toxic flame
retardants found in household products.
Federal Leadership in Cancer Research and Prevention
The Government of Canada supports and undertakes research activities on cancer prevention, including
specifically pertaining to cancers linked to firefighting. Notable examples include:
• Health Canada conducts collaborative scientific studies to better characterize firefighters’
exposure to chemicals, including flame retardants and combustion-derived carcinogens, and the
potential effectiveness of interventions to mitigate exposure, such as dermal decontamination (skin-
wiping) after exposure to a fire-suppression scene.
• Health Canada also provides funding to CAREX Canada, a team of researchers and specialists
that develop, maintain and communicate occupational and environmental carcinogen exposure
estimates in the workplace, including among firefighters:
• Health Canada is the sole funder of the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer. This organization
leads the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control to reduce the burden of cancer on all Canadians,
including firefighters, witha focus on prevention, more timely and accurate screening, delivering world-
class care, eliminating barriers, and survivorship care.
• The Canadian Institutes of Health Research funds research conducted by scientists in academic
institutions across the country on cancer prevention, including some focused-on firefighters.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada supports work on cancer prevention for the general
population, including surveillance of chronic diseases and their risk factors, by supporting the
development of preventative care guidelines for primary care practitioners, and by supporting
community-based programming aimed at preventing chronic diseases.
302
FOOD SAFETY
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has made key investments to itsinspection activities in an effort to
enhance food safety in Canada. At present, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has the resources it
needs to deliver on its mandate for food safety, animal and plant health.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 provided the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with an additional $31M over two
years to maintain its inspection activities and to strengthen and modernize its food safety inspection
system.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the best food safety systems in the world.
• The Safe Food for Canadians Act and the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations, which came into
force in 2019, provides a new approach for food safety and improves the ability to respond to non-
compliances.
• Budget 2021 invested $31M over two years in renewed funding to allow the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency to continue to apply and strengthen its risk management approach to food safety.
The funding will allow for improved risk targeting for both domestic and imported foods and guide
preventive and targeted food safety activities.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 …
• Food safety and consumer protection are key priorities of the Government of Canada.
• There is currently no scientific evidence that food or food packaging is a source or transmitter of
theCOVID-19 virus and there have been no reported cases.
• The government has taken steps for the ongoing delivery of critical Canadian Food Inspection
Agency services during the pandemic to do its part to maintain Canada’s food supply, including
prioritizingits meat inspection work.
IF PRESSED ON FOOD SAFETY IN MEAT PROCESSING PLANTS …
• This Government takes food safety seriously.
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency conducts daily inspections at federally licenced meat
processing establishments. The inspection approach is different for licence holders who produce foods
other than meat, where daily inspection presence is not a requirement.
BACKGROUND
All food sold in Canada is expected to be safe, and it is industry’s responsibility to produce safe food.
When there is reason to believe that a food is contaminated or does not follow federal regulations, the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) may employ various compliance approaches and will typically
initiate a process to investigate and recall products, if necessary.
The number of inspection staff changes due to seasonal requirements and is adjusted based on demand.
The type and frequency of inspections done by CFIA vary by commodity, by risks, and mirror what is
done in other countries (for ex., CFIA staff do full-time slaughter inspection and daily meat processing
shift inspections just like USDA staff in US meat plants).
303
The CFIA does on-site visits once a day or more in meat processing plants in order to make them eligible
for export to the US under the terms of a long-standing equivalency agreement. The CFIA delivers
inspection activities in other food plants at a lower risk-based frequency that reflects the type of
product being made, the type of consumer it is being made for, and the food business` compliance
history.
On January 22, 2021, the federal government announced $162.6M for CFIA over the next 5 years, and
then $40M per year of ongoing funding. These funds will augment CFIA's oversight and surveillance
capacity in its domestic programsby dedicating resources to areas of highest risk.
The investment is critical to alleviating the resource pressures CFIA is facing due to increased demand
and operational risks, which are a result of rapid growth in international trade, technology
developments, changing consumer preferences and new food safety threats.
As part of its normal business, CFIA has been undertaking a series of initiatives to improve inspection
delivery, achieve greater industry compliance with food safety requirements, and better protect
consumers.
The Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFCA) and Safe Food for Canadians Regulations (SFCR), which came
into force on January 15, 2019, is an example of this Government’s commitment to strengthen an
already strong food safety inspection system. The regulations apply to imported, exported or inter-
provincially traded food.
The new regulations are also consistent with international food safety standards, they strengthen
Canada’s food safety system and enable industry to innovate and creategreater market access
opportunities for Canadian food products exported abroad.
These regulations help Canadian food businesses continue to have access to trading partners like the
United States, who have already adopted similar regulations.
Budget 2021’s funding of $31M over two years will allow the CFIA to continue to strengthen its risk
management approach to food safety through improved understanding of the dynamic risk landscape,
both domestic and foreign, and to guide preventive and targeted food safety activities. This will be
achieved through sustained verification activities of industry compliance with legislation and improved
offshore preventive activities for all exported and imported food products.
304
