Created: 2021-03-26T13:50:53.449629
Name: Committee_of_the_Whole_of_all_votes_under_Health_in_the_Main_Estimates_2020-2021
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/52492775-9cd8-4b51-81d0-16013e4539e3/resource/be73d0bf-99f2-4393-befd-810fd940e43a/download/disclosure-qp-notes-en.pdf
Package ID: 52492775-9cd8-4b51-81d0-16013e4539e3
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances on the Main Estimates 2020-2021
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
COVID-19, PANDEMIC, CORONAVIRUS, PARLIAMENTARY
COMMITTEE APPEARANCE ACCOMPLISHMENTS RELATED TO
COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented situation with an equally
unprecedented response. Since Canada received its earliest warning of an illness
originating in Wuhan, China at the end of December 2019, the Government has been
working collaboratively with provinces and territories as well as leveraging international
partnerships to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What are the key accomplishments related to the COVID-19 response in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented
situation with an equally unprecedented response – with our
Public Health Agency of Canada driving critical parts of our
response.
 Canada is recognized internationally as a model example of
working across jurisdictions to support a collaborative, whole-
of-government response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 Canada has effectively leveraged domestic and international
partnerships to share technical expertise, exchange
information, and learn from the experiences of other countries.
 This has helped us build a robust and agile response to the
exceptional challenges that we are facing.
 None of these accomplishments would be possible without the
strong partnerships that exist at all levels of governments,
across jurisdictions and with key stakeholders, who are equally
invested in protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SPECIFIC ACCOMPLISHMENTS
 To reduce the risk of imported cases, the Public Health
Agency of Canada enhanced screening measures at
Canadian airports, and implemented travel restrictions and
mandatory quarantine.
 Also, for the first time in our history, we undertook large-scale
and controlled repatriation of Canadians from overseas and
established temporary housing at designated quarantine sites.
 We offered public health guidance on how to protect the
health and safety of Canadians and reduce the spread of
COVID-19.
 We have worked with provinces and territories and other
stakeholders to accelerate diagnostic testing capacity in order
to detect cases of COVID-19 more quickly.
 We have also established a coordinated approach to the bulk
purchase and distribution of personal protective equipment, to
ensure that the right supplies get to the right places in Canada.
 We have developed a national approach to data collection and
surveillance, to support the continued monitoring of COVID-19
across the country.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada, along with partners, is
also working to support the development of a vaccine and
treatment.
IF PRESSED ON COMMUNICATIONS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has been proactive and
transparent in its communications with Canadians.
 We have directly addressed the questions and concerns of
tens of thousands of Canadians on various aspects of COVID-
19 since the beginning of January.
 We have also initiated new ways to connect with Canadians,
including the Canada COVID-19 App, an information phone
line, and a centralized website.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians. The
overall response to the COVID-19 pandemic is based on the
Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for Biological Events, with
the goal to support collaboration and engagement amongst federal/provincial/territorial
public health, health care delivery and emergency management authorities.
ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
Following a period where many businesses and services across the country were
closed to help minimize the spread of COVID-19, restrictions are being gradually lifted,
allowing the economy and society to re-open. The Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), along with provincial and territorial partners, is continually evaluating and
adjusting the response based on the most recent evidence and the current
epidemiological situation. Given the recent increase in cases in Canada, we are seeing
some health authorities respond accordingly by reinstating stricter public health
measures.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government adjusting public health measures to address the current
situation in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
The recent increase in the number of COVID-19 cases in

Canada is concerning.
Even a single person with mild symptoms can start a chain

reaction of exposures and infections, both at private
gatherings and in public settings.
We can all do our part to reduce the impact and severity of a

fall surge by:
o Following public health guidelines;
o Practising physical distancing;
o Avoiding large gatherings; and
o Limiting in-person close contacts to a small and
consistent circle.
We are continually evaluating the impact of relaxing and

reintroducing public health measures, in collaboration with
our provincial and territorial partners.
We continue to use all evidence and models available on an

ongoing basis to help us identify which combinations of
public health measures are most likely to help us control the
pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC UPDATE ON SELF-ISOLATION REQUIREMENT (10
DAYS) OR OTHER PROVINCIAL/TERRITORIAL-SPECIFIC MEASURES
Provinces and territories also develop guidance and

approaches for their own jurisdictions which may differ,
reflecting differences in the pandemic across the country.
BACKGROUND
Public health measures (PHM) are the non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented
by federal/provincial/territorial and local public health authorities to control COVID-19
transmission. Measures focus on helping individuals to protect themselves and others,
such as personal hygiene, physical distancing, and self-monitoring. Public health
organizations also aim to prevent transmission by undertaking testing programs to
detect and isolate cases, tracing people exposed to cases and quarantining them so
they cannot transmit COVID-19 to others. Community measures such as public
education campaigns, restrictions on gatherings and school and workplace measures,
help to protect groups and the community at large.
With limited options for treatments and no vaccine available at this time, core PHM
(case detection, contact tracing and efforts of individuals such as personal hygiene and
self-isolating when sick) will need to be sustained in order to maximize our ability as a
society to control the spread of the virus over the long term. Public health authorities will
need to continue to rapidly identify and respond to new cases and outbreaks to reduce
community-spread, prevent large increases in case numbers and associated
hospitalizations. It is important to consider how to reduce the impact of seasonal
respiratory infections this fall, so that public health resources and health care system
capacity are not overwhelmed when dealing with COVID-19 cases occurring at the
same time.
A series of models are being used to identify the potential impact of different
combinations of control measures on infection rates in the Canadian population. On an
ongoing basis, these models help to identify which combinations of public health
measures, applied with what intensity, are most likely to reinforce pandemic control.
PHAC is continually evaluating the impact of PHM on the number of cases reported
through surveillance systems, and is adjusting guidance as needed in collaboration with
provincial and territorial partners. Community-based PHM are most effective when
implemented as early as possible in response to epidemiological triggers of concern
(e.g. increases in unlinked cases). Therefore, preparations for the fall include being
ready to re-implement restrictive community PHM by the provinces and territories or at
the municipal public health level. It is important to remember that it takes about two
weeks before the impact of PHM can be seen in our surveillance data. This is because
of the time lapse between when a person is infected, when they are tested and
subsequently reported to PHAC as a confirmed case.
On August 28, 2020, Quebec updated the required isolation period for individuals who
have COVID-19, or who came into contact with a confirmed case. Quebec’s instructions
now dictate that individuals can end their isolation period when they meet all of the
following conditions:
 10 days have passed since symptoms started;
 The individual has not had a fever for at least 48 hours, without using fever
medication; and
 Symptoms have improved for at least 24 hours, except for cough and loss of smell,
which can last longer.
On July 3, 2020, the Atlantic ―travel bubble‖ came into effect. For Atlantic Canada
residents, travel within Nova Scotia, New Brunswick, Prince Edward
Island and Newfoundland and Labrador is permitted without the requirement to self-
isolate. Everyone who travels from outside Atlantic Canada into the bubble
(including post-secondary students and those travelling through Atlantic Canada to
another destination) must self-isolate for 14 days when they arrive, or for the duration of
their stay if it’s less than 14 days. If a person from the region travels outside Atlantic
Canada they also must self-isolate for 14 days from the day they return, even if they
don't have symptoms.
AEROSOL TRANSMISSION OF COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
Scientific information on COVID-19 continues to be produced rapidly and the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) continues to evaluate new evidence regarding
aerosol transmission, as it becomes available, to inform our intervention and mitigation
strategies. CDC changed its website to acknowledge this route of transmission on Oct
5, 2020. PHAC has engaged in a wide consultative process and is actively engaged on
the issue of aerosol transmission.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What does the best available evidence say about the role of aerosol transmission?
KEY MESSAGES
 COVID-19 spreads mainly by close person-to-person contact
with an infected person who is coughing, sneezing, talking or
singing.
 The risk of aerosol transmission from small droplets that
linger in the air continues to be studied.
 Mitigation measures, such as optimal ventilation, physical
distancing and face masks, both for community settings and
in healthcare, decreases the risk of aerosol transmission.
IF PRESSED…
 Aerosol transmission means that very small droplets
containing the virus – released when an infected person
breathes, talks, sings, coughs or speaks – remain infectious
even while suspended in the air for a period of time.
 The amount of exposure and circumstances under which
infection can occur with aerosols is not well defined.
Common characteristics of clusters attributed to aerosol
transmission include that they took place in closed indoor
settings, the infected person was pre-symptomatic or had
just developed symptoms and there was an extended
duration of exposure.
BACKGROUND
Airborne transmission in infection transmission literature refers to small infectious
particles (<5um) that are referred to as ―aerosols‖ or ―droplet nuclei‖ that can remain
suspended in the air for some time and may travel a distance from the source. Large
and small respiratory droplets can be inhaled, however larger droplets fall to the ground
faster and may not travel as far as small aerosols. In healthcare, ―IPC airborne‖ refers to
airborne precautions, an additional layer of protection used when working with obligate
or preferential airborne pathogens. (At this time SARS-CoV-2 has not been
recommended for airborne precautions.) Emerging epidemiological and experimental
evidence indicates there is some risk of airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
Scientific information on COVID-19 continues to be produced rapidly and PHAC
continues to evaluate new evidence as it becomes available to inform our intervention
and mitigation strategies.
At present, the best available evidence supports that infectious SARS-CoV-2 virus is
present in aerosolized particles. There are simulation experiments, biological monitoring
studies from around COVID-19 patients in hospitals and animal transmission
experiments that support airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2.
However, the current evidence has not quantified COVID-19 infection risk from aerosol
transmission and the infectious dose of SARS-CoV-2 is currently unknown.
Investigators have demonstrated that infectious virus laden aerosols can be expelled
from COVID-19 cases when breathing, talking, singing and coughing.
The virus has been identified in air samples at distances greater than 2 meters from the
source.
Experimental evidence had demonstrated that it is feasible for SARS-CoV-2 within
aerosols to remain suspended in the air and viable for hours.
Epidemiological investigations of six COVID-19 clusters in different real-world settings
(e.g. meat processing plants, indoor choir practice, restaurant, fitness and dance
facilities) have concluded that the only explanation for transmission is that airborne
transmission occurred. Common characteristics of these clusters is that the event took
place in a closed indoor environment, the
infectious index case was pre-symptomatic or had just started exhibiting symptoms, and
there was an extended duration of exposure. Suboptimal ventilation, a lack of air
circulation and indoor air currents risk factors in some clusters that explained the pattern
of secondary cases.
Fluid dynamic evidence from simulations and theoretical models indirectly supports
airborne transmission of SARS-CoV-2. Respiratory droplets have been shown to
remain suspended for more than 8 minutes and can travel >7 meters.
ARRIVECAN
SYNOPSIS
ArriveCAN is a mobile application supporting the digital collection of information from
travelers entering Canada. The application is designed to increase digital uptake,
facilitate data collection and enable early traveler engagement, supporting the
Government of Canada’s ability to manage increased traveler volumes, improve public
health measures and facilitate information sharing with provinces and territories.
The ArriveCAN application launched in April 2020 and is the preferred method for
travelers to submit mandatory information to the Government of Canada. An accessible
website exists that mimics the functionalities of the mobile app, and information is
currently also accepted via paper form.
KEY MESSAGES
ArriveCAN is a digital alternative to the Traveler Contact

Information paper form.
The ArriveCAN mobile application allows travelers coming

into Canada to submit information quickly, easily, and
securely to meet Government of Canada requirements upon
entry.
It speeds up processing at the border, which reduces

crowding.
It also allows for faster sharing of information with provincial

and territorial governments.
After entering into Canada, travelers can use the ArriveCAN

app to confirm their quarantine location.
They can also provide updates on any COVID-19 symptoms

they may develop.
The Government of Canada is promoting the ArriveCAN app

to ensure travelers are aware of the benefits of using it.
IF PRESSED…
In addition to ArriveCAN, The Government of Canada has

also set up an accessible website travelers can use to
submit their information.
In situations where needed, travelers have the option of

completing the paper form or of providing their information
verbally to a Border Services Officer at the point of entry.
Post-border, there is a toll-free number available to complete

the voluntary check-in and report on symptoms.
Exempt travelers must still provide their travel and contact

information, and their symptom self-assessment.
BACKGROUND
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put in place successive border
measures in response to COVID-19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government doing to encourage the restart of the Canadian economy while
continuing to prevent imported cases of COVID-19?
How is the Government protecting Canadians at the border?
KEY MESSAGES
In response to COVID‑19, Canada has established robust

border measures including quarantine and travel restrictions.
These border measures have been effective in helping to
protect the health and safety of Canadians, while continuing
to permit essential workers to enter the country.
On October 30, the Government extended the Mandatory

Isolation Order and temporary travel restrictions for foreign
nationals travelling from non-U.S. countries, unless their
travel is for non-discretionary reasons, to November 30,
2020.
The Government also made some practical adjustments to

the Mandatory Isolation Order to exempt groups from
quarantine to enable limited Canada-U.S. cross-border
travel, specifically:
persons in identified border communities when crossing

the border to access the necessities of life from the
nearest Canadian or American community;
children who are subject to shared custody arrangements,

along with one adult driver;
students from the U.S. who regularly cross the border to

attend school, along with one driver, conditional on
support from provincial and local public health authorities
and if they are attending an institution on the designated
list of institutions (DLI) with Immigration, Refugee and
Citizenship Canada (IRCC); and
Students from Canada who regularly cross the border to

attend school in the U.S., along with one adult driver.
 The Government also introduced new mandatory
requirements, beginning November 20, for the digital
submission of information through the ArriveCAN app or
website. This will allow traveler information to be shared
quickly and securely with provinces and territories to contact
travelers for public health follow-up, and with law
enforcement to verify compliance with the Mandatory
Isolation Order.
 To inform potential alternative border measures in the future,
the Government is providing an exemption to mandatory
quarantine to enable specific border COVID-testing pilots
developed in concert with provincial and territorial
governments. The Government will continue to monitor
international alternatives to quarantine closely and will
continue to review the evolving science, including the role,
timing, and type of COVID-19 testing, in determining any
changes to our current border measures.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
Travelers are responsible for arranging a suitable place to

quarantine or isolate prior to their arrival in Canada.
If this is not possible, travelers should make other

arrangements for quarantine accommodations within their
own financial means prior to their arrival in Canada.
If no other suitable arrangements to quarantine are possible,

individual travelers may be referred to a federally designated
quarantine facility, if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WE SCREEN TRAVELLERS
Prior to boarding a flight to Canada, travelers undergo a

health screening by the airline.
Anyone showing signs and symptoms of COVID-19 is not

allowed to board the plane. All travelers must also wear
masks during flights, and at airports.
Upon arrival in Canada, Border Services Officers conduct

preliminary screening of all travelers, based on criteria and
questions developed by the Public Health Agency of
Canada.
Travelers must acknowledge they understand and will follow

the 14-day quarantine requirement, and provide contact
details for follow-up.
Those who show signs and symptoms of COVID-19, or who

indicate that they do not have a suitable plan for quarantine,
are directed to a Public Health Agency of Canada official for
further assessment and possible referral to a federally
designated quarantine site.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH PROVINCES TO DATE
The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with

partners to digitize the collection of health-related
information from passengers pre-arrival through the
ArriveCan app. This will allow traveler information to be
shared quickly and securely with provinces and territories to
contact travelers for public health follow-up, and with law
enforcement to verify compliance with the Mandatory
Isolation Order.
 To inform potential alternative border measures in the future,
the Government is providing an exemption to mandatory
quarantine to enable specific border COVID-testing pilots
with provincial and territorial governments. The Government
will continue to monitor international alternatives to
quarantine closely and will review the evolving science,
including the role and timing of COVID-19 testing, in
determining any changes to our current border measures.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the

RCMP and provincial law enforcement agencies to verify
compliance with the Mandatory Isolation Order.
Officials provide handouts at the border, and contact

travelers by e-mail and phone throughout their isolation or
quarantine period, to remind them of the requirements.
If travelers cannot be reached, or appear non-compliant with

isolation or quarantine requirements, they are referred to
local law enforcement for follow-up.
Under the Quarantine Act, penalties for failure to comply with

an order can include a fine of up to $1 million or
imprisonment for 3 years, or both.
To provide additional tools to Quarantine Officers and law

enforcement, fines can be issued for non-compliance,
typically ranging from $275 to $1000. Local law enforcement
may choose to issue warnings prior to issuing a ticket.
Alberta, Saskatchewan, and the territories issue fines under
their own legislation.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
Public Health Agency of Canada’s Designated Officers are

present at 31 Canadian points of entry that receive
international travellers.
As international travel resumes, the Public Health Agency of

Canada will increase its public health presence to 36 points
of entry across the country.
All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7

access to support from the Public Health Agency of
Canada’s Quarantine Officers through the remote Central
Notification System.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL EXEMPTIONS FOR IMMEDIATE FAMILY MEMBERS
In response to concerns expressed by Canadians, the

government has taken additional steps to reunite Canadians
with their family members.
On October 8, the government introduced new processes to

extend the definition of family in order to support family
reunification.
IF PRESSED ON U.S. TRAVELLERS
U.S. citizens are permitted to travel directly from the United

States to Alaska and vice-versa for non-discretionary
purposes, such as going for work, and returning home.
They must respect Canada’s public health measures,

including provincial and territorial requirements, such as
staying in a hotel room and wearing a non-medical mask.
Some U.S. citizens are also permitted to enter Canada for

legitimate work purposes, including providing an essential
service as specified under the Orders in Council.
U.S. citizens should not be taking the opportunity to travel

within Canada for personal or discretionary reasons. This is
an enforceable offence, with monetary penalties.
New amendments to the Mandatory Isolation Order now

enable specific travelers to be exempt from quarantine to
facilitate travel for cross-border students, children in shared
custody arrangements, and those in specific remote
communities who need access to the necessities of life.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S APPROACH TO TRAVEL ADVISORIES AND EASING
OF BORDER MEASURES
We continue to evaluate the evolving COVID-19 pandemic to

inform our travel advice to Canadians.
The experiences of countries around the world with easing

border measures has been mixed.
As we explore a gradual approach to reopening international

travel, we must consider our domestic situation, including:
o The capacity of our public health system;
o Provincial and territorial perspectives;
o Our capacity at the borders; and
o The epidemiological situation within Canada and other
countries.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and

territories to ensure that learning institutions are able to
safely welcome international students.
The learning institutions designated by provinces and

territories are expected to provide information to international
students on health and travel requirements before they
arrive in Canada, help students with their quarantine plans,
and provide guidance or assistance in acquiring the
necessities of life, such as food and medication, during their
quarantine.
Like any other traveller arriving in Canada, international

students need to have suitable quarantine plans in place
before they arrive, and will be required to quarantine for 14
days.
BACKGROUND
Between February 3, 2020 and October 30, 2020, the Governor in Council has made 33
Emergency Orders under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to
COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians,
and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and
provincial partners to facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods
and services, while continuing to protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
 Foreign nationals entering from the United States (U.S.), across all modes, for
non-essential travel including recreation and/or tourism purposes;
 Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than
the U.S., with some exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
 Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of
respiratory illness.
Canada has updated its temporary border agreement with the U.S. until November 21,
2020 .
On October 30, the Government extended the Mandatory Isolation Order and temporary
travel restrictions for all travelers from non-US countries, unless their travel is for non-
discretionary reasons, to November 30, 2020.
The Government also made some practical adjustments to allow limited Canada-U.S.
cross-border travel. Effective October 31st, 2020, residents of Campobello Island, New
Brunswick, Stewart, British Columbia, Northwest Angle, Minnesota, and Hyder, Alaska
are exempt from mandatory 14-day quarantine to access the necessities of life (e.g.,
food, medical services) from the nearest Canadian or American community. In addition,
students from Canada and the U.S. who regularly cross the border to attend school,
along with one driver, and children who are subject to shared custody arrangements,
along with one parent, are exempt from mandatory 14-day quarantine. The new
provisions to ease pressures related to cross-border students is conditional upon
support from provincial and local public health authorities.
In addition, the Government is providing an exemption to mandatory quarantine to
enable specific border COVID-testing pilots with provincial and territorial governments.
The Government of Canada will continue to monitor international alternatives to
quarantine closely and will review the evolving science, including the role, timing and
type of COVID-19 testing, in determining any changes to our current border measures.
All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no matter their country of origin
or mode of entry - are required to isolate or quarantine for 14 days in a suitable location.
There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine/isolation, which permit
essential workers to enter Canada, including truck drivers, firefighters and medical
workers.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including
food and medical supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services
Agency (CBSA) is working with other federal partners to share information with
commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that commercial traffic is not impeded.
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4
commercial marine ports, and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical
presence of its designated officers, including quarantine officers, at 31 points of entry
across Canada, including major land borders.
On October 8, 2020, new processes were also introduced to extend the definition of
family in order to support family reunification.
On October 8, 2020, the Government of Canada implemented a new process to allow
foreign nationals to come to Canada for compassionate reasons, in limited
circumstances, and with limited exceptions from quarantine.
Effective October 20, 2020 international students are able to enter Canada to attend
school if
their learning institution has a COVID-19 readiness plan that has been approved by
their respective provincial or territorial government and the local health authority, and
posted on a website managed by Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada.
Enforcement:
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement to ensure that travelers are abiding by
the requirement to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where compliance
cannot be confirmed, PHAC refers these travelers to the RCMP for compliance follow-
up. Maximum penalties for failing to comply with the mandatory isolation/quarantine
order include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person,
while willfully or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be
liable for a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
The Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial
and local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to people who do not comply
with the Quarantine Act, with fines ranging from $275 to $1000 (this does not apply in
AB, SK and the territories, as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the
contraventions regime).
Travel Advisories
The Government of Canada’s current travel advice to all Canadians is to avoid all non-
essential travel outside of Canada (Level 3) and to avoid all cruise ship travel (Level 3).
Although this travel advice is not binding on Canadians choosing to travel abroad, some
travel insurance providers no longer cover travel booked on or after March 13, 2020,
when these advisories came into effect.
Using a gradual and phased approach to updating travel health advisory levels for
countries that are at a decreased relative risk may reduce the risk of transmission and
importation to Canada but will not fully eliminate it. For example, travelers can be
exposed while in transit and/or in areas reporting low or no COVID-19 transmission.
U.S. PROPOSAL TO ALLOW BULK IMPORTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FROM
CANADA
SYNOPSIS
 On October 1, 2020, the United States published the final rule on the Importation
of Prescription Drugs. The rule comes into effect on November 30, 2020, and
creates a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers to import in bulk
certain prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market. The rule could
worsen the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada and put the health of
Canadians at risk.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to protect Canada’s drug supply from U.S. bulk
importation schemes?
KEY MESSAGES
Ensuring that Canadians have access to the medicines they

need is a top priority for our Government.
Canada’s drug market is too small to meet the demand for

prescription drugs of both Canadian and American
consumers.
Our government will employ all necessary measures to

safeguard the drug supply, preserving access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FOR CANADIANS DUE
TO THE U.S. RULE
 We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased
drug prices for Canadians. The Government of Canada is
committed to improving Canadians’ access to, and the
affordability of, necessary prescription medicines.
 Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented
medicines through the Patented Medicine Prices Review
Board. This protection will remain in place and we will
continue to work with key partners to ensure all Canadians
have access to the medicines they need.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On September 24, 2020, the final rule for the U.S. regulatory proposal on the
Importation of Prescription Drugs was published. When the rule comes into effect on
November 30, 2020, it will create a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or
wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored program approved by the U.S. Food and
Drug Administration (US FDA), to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for
the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be FDA- and HPFB-approved
drugs labeled for sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The Canadian
seller must be licensed by Health Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a
provincial authority, and must also be registered with the FDA. The importer must
submit a pre-import request to the FDA at least 30 days in advance of product entry and
arrival into the U.S. The program allows only a direct supply chain of one manufacturer,
one Canadian seller and one importer for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S.
in bulk, it could further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada,
putting the health of Canadians at risk.
On March 9, 2020, the Government of Canada submitted comments during the U.S.
consultation process to publicly document Canada’s opposition to the proposed rule,
given that it is not deemed to be an effective solution to high drug prices in the U.S. and
that it could exacerbate drug shortages in Canada. The comments also made it clear
that the Government of Canada will take the necessary measures to safeguard
Canada’s drug supply.
There is state support for bulk importation programs of prescription drugs from Canada.
Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have already
enacted legislation to authorize such a program, and 18 other states have similar
legislation in progress. The Department of Health and Human Services confirmed that,
as of September 24, 2020, no state had submitted a formal importation plan for U.S.
FDA review, but that there had been expressions of interest.
There are two key limitations to prescription drug importation in the U.S. rule. First, the
U.S. legislation excludes certain categories of drugs from importation under these
programs (e.g., controlled substances, biologics, infused drugs, intravenously injected
drugs, and drugs inhaled during surgery). Second, the legislation only allows drugs to
be imported if there will be a cost savings to U.S. consumers. The variance in price
differences between both countries, as well as between states in the U.S., makes it
difficult to predict which drugs would be imported until individual states propose their
pilot programs.
Industry and patient advocacy groups are calling on the Government to ―act swiftly,
firmly and publicly‖ in response to U.S. plans. Large industry players, representing 90-
95% of pharmaceutical distribution in Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to
participate when the U.S. proposal is in place. However, there is the potential for
smaller players in the market to participate, and any industry uptake could have an
impact on the Canadian drug supply.
COVID Alert app and Privacy
SYNOPSIS
 In response to the global pandemic, the Government of Canada turned to digital solutions to help
reduce the spread of the virus. Specifically, an exposure notification app (COVID Alert) was
developed to help address the pandemic in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to ensure COVID Alert will protect Canadians’ privacy?
KEY MESSAGES
 The government is committed to protecting the privacy of Canadians,
while taking appropriate steps to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
 COVID Alert has been thoroughly reviewed to ensure it is privacy
protective.
 The Privacy Commissioner of Canada indicated that he support the
use of COVID Alert.
 As provinces onboard and functionalities are added, the privacy
analysis is adjusted and updated. We also ensure that the Office of
the Privacy Commissioner is continually updated and briefed on any
changes being considered.
…
IF PRESSED
 The COVID Alert app does not disclose the identity of users, nor is
location data or personally identifiable information collected.
 Strong governance and oversight is being put in place for this
collaborative initiative, which will help to promptly address any issues
as they arise to ensure broad adoption of the app by Canadians.
…
IF PRESSED ON ANDROID LOCATION TRACKING
 Android 11 no longer requires the location setting to be on for
Bluetooth technology to work.
 To use Bluetooth scanning, Android phones 6 to 10 need the
Location setting on for all apps. However, COVID Alert has no way of
knowing where you are, and does not use location tracking.
BACKGROUND (NOT FOR PUBLIC USE)
COVID Alert Exposure Notification App
 In an effort to reduce the spread of the COVID-19 virus, while also gradually
easing restrictions on individuals and allowing the economy to being to re-open,
the Government of Canada committed to launching a single national COVID-19
exposure notification app (COVID Alert).
 Health Canada, with support from the Canadian Digital Services and Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada, developed the COVID Alert
exposure notification app as a minimally intrusive approach intended to be used
in combination with and in support of current public health measures.
 COVID Alert serves to notify app users if they have been near someone who has
tested positive for COVID-19 and is also using the app, and to encourage them
to take appropriate steps and adjust their behaviour to avoid putting others at
risk.
 The COVID Alert app has undergone a privacy assessment in line with the Office
of the Privacy Commissioner’s (OPC) Framework for the Government of Canada
to Assess Privacy-Impactful Initiatives in Response to COVID-19. The OPC was
consulted on the app and published their review of the app on their website.
 Ontario began providing the one-time keys on July 31, 2020 followed by
Newfoundland and Labrador on September 3, 2020, New-Brunswick and
Saskatchewan on September 18, 2020, Manitoba on October 1, 2020, Quebec
on October 5, 2020, Prince Edward Island on October 8, 2020 and Nova Scotia
on October 15, 2020. Health Canada is working with the other provinces and
territories to have COVID Alert implemented in all jurisdictions.
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B) 2020-21
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
 As a result of Supplementary Estimates (B) 2020-21, CIHR’s overall available
authorities for 2020-21 will increase by approximately $250 million to a total of
approximately $1.6 billion.
QUESTION
 Why is CIHR seeking an increase in its authorities for 2020-21?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Supplementary Estimates (B) 2020-21 include a
proposed increase of $250 million for the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research—or CIHR.
 The government is making a total investment of $144.2
million in medical countermeasures, funding meritorious
research proposals which were submitted through CIHR’s
Phase II COVID-19 Rapid Response competition, as well as
to launch a Phase III funding competition to address current
and emerging knowledge research gaps.
 The government’s commitment to students and youth
impacted by COVID-19 includes an investment of $87.5
million for eligible recipients of CIHR funding to ensure the
continuity of the research enterprise and the health research
pipeline during the disruptions caused by the COVID-19
pandemic.
 On behalf of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, PHAC
provided $12.4 million to support meritorious research
projects aligned with its mandate.
 PHAC is transferring $3.2 million for the Canadian
Immunization Research Network (or CIRN) to support urgent
activities related to COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and to
provide vaccine-related research outcomes that will inform
effective, equitable and timely COVID-19 public health
decision-making.
 As part of the Safe Restart Agreement, PHAC is providing
$1.2 million to collect data through a COVID-19 module by
the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging, adding to federal
investments in testing, contact tracing and data management.
BACKGROUND
(In $ millions) Vote 1 Vote 5 Subtotal Statutory Total
Items2
Operating Grants
Expenditures
1
Authorities to Date 61.0 1,188.6 1,249.6 119.6 1,369.2
Supplementary Estimates 0.2 27.4 27.6 222.5 250.1
(B)
Proposed Authorities to 61.2 1,216.0 1,277.2 342.1 1,619.3
Date
1 Includes salary and other operating.
2 Includes statutory authorities pursuant to the Public Health Events of National Concern Payments Act and
Contributions to employee benefit plans.
Supporting research for medical countermeasures (votes 1b and 5b)
The Government of Canada, through the CIHR, is invested approximately $144.2 million
in order to continue delivering an immediate and scientifically rigorous research
response to the remaining key research gaps. From this investment, a total of $133.7
million must be expensed by December 31, 2020 under the Public Health Events of
National Concern Payments Act.
The remaining $10.5M is distribute between $10M through vote 5b and $500K through
Vote 1b.
Supporting students and youth impacted by COVID-19
To lessen the impact due to COVID-19 on students funded through research grants,
CIHR will has provided $87.5 million in additional funding to eligible grant recipients.
This additional funding to support trainees (students, postdoctoral fellows) and research
support personnel paid through grants recognizes the need to continue supporting their
salaries and stipends. This funding will contribute to the continuity of the research
enterprise and the health research pipeline during the disruptions caused by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
This was accessed through the statutory authorities under the Public Health Events of
National Concern Payments Act.
Supporting projects aligned with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force (vote 5b)
$12.4 million is being provided to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to
support 22 meritorious projects submitted to its May 2020 rapid response funding
opportunity which are aligned with the mandate of Canada’s COVID-19 Immunity Task
Force. By providing a more precise picture of immunity in the country and by
collaborating within networks, Canadian researchers will contribute to make important
contributions to understanding and responding to the SARS-CoV-2 virus.
Supporting the Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) (vote 5b)
$3.2 million was allocated to CIRN through PHAC. With this funding, CIRN will address
four research areas including COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials, population prioritization
and modeling, vaccine hesitancy and uptake, and coordination and information sharing.
Supporting the Safe Restart Agreement
$1.2 million is being provided in statutory funding to support the implementation of a
COVID-19 module to collect data using the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging
(CLSA) platform. This module and the CLSA platform will provide a unique opportunity
for researchers to access data relevant to COVID-19 that can help assess urgent issues
and the long-term impact of the pandemic on older Canadians.
This will be accessed through the statutory authorities under the Public Health Events of
National Concern Payments Act.
Other Transfers Included in the Supplementary Estimates (B)
To CIHR (Vote 5b):
 $1.0 million from NSERC and SSHRC to increase innovation through
partnerships between Canadian colleges, universities and local companies.
 $1.0 million from the Department of Health for research to support the
assessment of the impact of supervised consumption sites on public health.
 $94,000 from the Department of Indigenous Services to support Indigenous
Gender and Wellness Development Grants.
Internal Transfer:
 $250,000 in internal reallocation of resources from Grants for Research Projects
and Personnel Support program to the Institute Support Grant program.
From CIHR:
 $377,553 from CIHR to the Department of Veterans Affairs to support research
on the potential therapeutic benefits and harms associated with cannabis.
 $169,000 from CIHR and various organizations to the Treasury Board Secretariat
to support the Government of Canada Financial and Materiel Management
Solution Project (vote 1b).
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to
oversee the coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys and research
that will tell us how widely the virus has spread in Canada and provide reliable
estimates of potential immunity and vulnerabilities in Canadian populations.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Who will be doing the testing?
 When will the results become available?
 Who will be part of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force Leadership Group?
 How will privacy and confidentiality concerns regarding the results of these blood
tests be addressed?
 How will research projects be chosen for funding under the COVID-19 Immunity
Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada established the COVID-19
Immunity Task Force to determine how widespread COVID-
19 infection is in the Canadian population.
 We are allocating up to $300 million for this work over the
next two years.
Our understanding of the potential levels of immunity in our

population and in groups at higher risk of infection, such as
health care workers and older Canadians, supports our
public health response.
On September 8, initial results from a study of blood donors

showed very low rates of exposure to the virus.
This indicates that, overall, Canadians remain susceptible to

COVID-19 infection.
As cases occur across the country, we will use this data and

evidence to inform our work to prevent the spread of COVID-
19 in Canada.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is also actively

contributing to, and benefiting from, international research
and evidence.
IF PRESSED …
The membership of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force

includes partners from provincial and territorial Ministries of
Health, as well as experts from across the country.
The Task Force website hosts a web portal called ―Sero-

Tracker‖, that summarises serological studies from around
the world.
Other organisations across the country are all actively

contributing their testing results to the larger national data.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing scientific

expertise, and is collaborating with Public Services and
Procurement Canada to purchase thousands of serological
test kits for researchers and provincial laboratories.
BACKGROUND
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of
large numbers of people will provide the data needed to understand the scale of
infection in the Canadian population. This approach helps determine the extent of
COVID-19 infection among those who did not seek health care either because they
were asymptomic or had mild symptoms that did not require health services.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific
groups can help to direct proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-
modifying or even disease-preventing therapies should they become available, and
inform targeted surveillance efforts to contain and stop further outbreaks.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19
serology surveillance and targeted research studies, has been established to catalyze,
support, and harmonize the design and rapid implementation of population-based
studies that will generate reliable first estimates of SARS-CoV-2 immunity, overall and
in vulnerable and unique populations across Canada.
This work will also contribute to what is happening globally, for example, as part of the
World Health Organization’s Solidarity II Studies, a global initiative that provides
standardized protocols and pools findings from large-scale antibody studies around the
world.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website provides details of activities and findings,
connects and engages scientists within Canada and globally, and links with CanCOVID
Network, a platform mandated by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor to expedite
communication and collaboration between the scientific, healthcare and policy
communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is actively interacting with various groups to
ensure representation and input, including an Indigenous Advisory Circle, Federal,
Provincial and Territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health, and the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
EARLY HISTORY (WARNINGS AND STEPS TAKEN) IN COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
Canada first became aware of a respiratory illness originating in Wuhan, China via a
GPHIN report received on December 31, 2019. Precautionary steps were taken as
Canada sought additional information, and progressive escalation followed Canada’s
first presumptive case.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What warnings did the Government of Canada receive regarding COVID-19, and what
steps were taken in response?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada was alerted to an illness in

Wuhan, China on December 31, 2019.
Within two days the Chief Public Health Officer alerted

Medical Officers of Health across the country.
Between that point and Canada’s first presumptive case of

COVID-19 in late January, the Government took several
steps to respond:
o Canadian Ministers of Health and Chief Medical Officers
of Health were convened;
o Screening processes were implemented at airports; and
o A travel alert was issued.
Timely intelligence gathering, in collaboration with domestic

and international partners, allowed early and coordinated
action by the Government of Canada to protect the health
and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
The Public Health Agency of Canada has taken many steps

to give Canadians the information they need quickly
The Public Health Agency of Canada has directly addressed

the questions and concerns of tens of thousands of
Canadians on various aspects of COVID-19 since the
beginning of January.
In January, the Agency launched a website and opened a 1-

833 number for the public to ask questions about COVID-19.
As the situation evolves, we will continue to provide

Canadians with accurate and up-to-date information.
BACKGROUND
Canada first became aware of a respiratory illness originating in Wuhan, China via a
Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) report received on December 31,
2019. This information was shared by the Chief Public Health Officer on January 2,
2020 with all provincial and territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health.
The World Health Organization (WHO) posted its first event notification on January 5,
2020 regarding a cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology reported in Wuhan, China.
The WHO found there was limited information to determine overall risk and advised
against the application of any travel or trade restrictions against China. Precautionary
steps were taken as Canada sought additional information from the WHO. On January
7, 2020, PHAC issued a Travel Health Notice, and on January 9, 2020, PHAC issued a
Public Health Alert on the Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence, an online
platform for communication with public health partners.
Confirmation of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China was announced by the WHO on
January 12, 2020. On January 14, 2020, Dr. Tam convened a special teleconference of
the Council of Chief Medical Officers of Health to discuss domestic preparedness.
PHAC activated its Health Portfolio Operations Centre (HPOC) on January 15, 2020 to
Level 2 to actively monitor early warning signs and to prepare for possible containment
and mitigation of a possible outbreak. On January 22, 2020, screening processes were
implemented in international airports in Toronto, Montreal, and Vancouver for travelers
arriving from China.
Progressive escalation followed Canada’s first presumptive case (January 25, 2020).
On January 28, 2020, PHAC escalated the HPOC from Level 2 to Level 3 to further
support effective coordination of federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) preparedness
and response. Critical public health emergency management infrastructure was
mobilized for the COVID-19 response, including:
- First meeting of FPT Ministers of Health on January 24;
- First meeting of FPT Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19 on January 28,
2020; and
- First meeting of G7 Ministers of Health on February 3, 2020.
In addition, the following travel measures were implemented:
- Travel advisory against non-essential travel to China (January 29, 2020); and,
- Enhanced screening measures at major international airports including all travelers
from the Province of Hubei, China (February 9, 2020).
Canada reached its 100th confirmed case on March 11, 2020.
EVOLUTION OF COVID-19 SCIENCE
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada recognizes the continually evolving evidence and
understanding related to COVID-19, and develops guidance based on the best current
scientific knowledge, expert opinion and public health practices.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How does the federal government evaluate emerging scientific evidence related to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and how does it decide when to change guidance provided to
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our understanding of the virus evolves as new scientific
evidence becomes available.
 Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 will
also evolve, based on new evidence.
 The Government of Canada continually reviews and
evaluates the latest scientific evidence as it becomes
available, working with scientific experts and other partners
across the country and around the world.
 When we determine that the body of evidence has gained
sufficient credibility, and is accepted by the scientific
community, we update our advice and guidance as quickly
as possible, often in collaboration with provinces and
territories.
 Provinces and territories also develop guidance for their own
jurisdictions which may differ, reflecting regional
circumstances in response to the pandemic across the
country.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, and around the world, researchers are actively investigating all aspects of
the novel coronavirus causing COVID-19. Although our knowledge of COVID-19 is
continually growing, it is incomplete, and we will keep learning more as the science
continues to evolve. Canada’s public health advice will continue to be based on science,
which will help ensure the health and safety of the Canadian population in the face of
this unprecedented pandemic.
To support the global pandemic response, Canada’s research and scientific
communities have been mobilized to advance research and technology development.
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) Rapid Research Response
program, the Government of Canada has invested a total of $54.2 million to support 99
research teams from across the country.
Furthermore, CIHR, in partnership with Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), is
leveraging the existing Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) to address
the COVID-19 pandemic. CIRN has received $1 million through a direct grant to gather
data related to COVID-19 symptoms, as well as possible treatments and risk factors,
which will inform Canada’s public health response to COVID-19.
PHAC is an active participant in a number of expert groups that are examining how the
disease is transmitted, developing models to predict how it may spread, and developing
guidance for infection prevention and control based on the most recent information.
PHAC continues to liaise with international partners, including the World Health
Organization (WHO), to better understand the epidemiology of this disease.The WHO
continues to update and modify its recommendations to public health decision-makers
based on emerging evidence and data. PHAC, along with provincial and territorial
counterparts and dedicated experts, are reviewing the WHO’s recommendations to
consider how they can further support Canada in providing the best and latest evidence-
informed advice to Canadians so that they can protect themselves and each other. The
WHO guidelines are only one of many resources that inform Canada’s guidance.
We are also closely following the emerging scientific literature and the experiences of
other jurisdictions. Their work enables Canada to continue doing risk-based analysis
and making evidence-informed decisions.
Exposure Notification Mobile App
SYNOPSIS
On July 31, 2020, the Prime Minister announced that COVID Alert, a voluntary national
exposure notification app, is available for download. The app uses Bluetooth and mobile
technology to notify users that they have been in close contact with someone who later
tested positive for COVID-19.
COVID Alert is a collaboration between Health Canada, the Canadian Digital Service,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the Ontario Digital
Service. It builds upon an exposure notification solution developed by Shopify
volunteers in coordination with the non-profit Linux Foundation Public Health. It is also
the work of a team of developers from across the country.
While the app is national in scope, provincial and territorial health authorities are
responsible for providing the one-time keys to users who test positive for COVID-19.
The one-time keys can then be entered into the app to notify users of a possible
exposure. Eight provinces have onboarded and are able to issue one-time keys:
 Ontario on July 31, 2020
 Newfoundland and Labrador on September 3, 2020
 Saskatchewan and New Brunswick on September 28, 2020
 Manitoba on October 1, 2020
 Quebec on October 5, 2020
 Prince Edward Island on October 8, 2020
 Nova Scotia on October 15, 2020
Health Canada is working with the other provinces and territories to have COVID Alert
implemented in all jurisdictions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why did the Government of Canada develop and implement an exposure
notification app?
KEY MESSAGES
The COVID Alert app is part of a suite of tools and guidance

developed by the Government of Canada to help slow the
spread of COVID-19.
Since its launch, more than 4.9 million Canadians have

downloaded the app and more that 2,876 users who tested
positive for COVID-19 have notified others of a possible
exposure.
The app uses strong measures to protect the privacy and

confidentiality of any data it collects.
We encourage Canadians to use this app, as it will keep our

friends, neighbours, and communities safe.
IF PRESSED ON APPROACH CHOSEN
A national approach supports cross-border towns and

interprovincial travel.
The approach chosen was an exposure notification app as

opposed to contact tracing as it allows for user to be notified
of a possible exposure without using personally identifiable
data or location tracking.
The decision to develop the app using Apple and Google’s

Exposure Notification Framework was based on international
experiences and advice from IT and security and privacy
experts.
Several other countries that used different frameworks have

run into technical (e.g., battery drain), security and privacy
issues.
IF PRESSED ON UPTAKE
Evidence has shown that exposure notification apps can

have a positive impact at all levels of uptake.
The more people who use the app, the more effective it will

be.
As Canadians begin to move more freely across Canada, we

are confident they will see the value in this app in helping
them to modify their behaviour and limit the spread of
COVID-19.
We are continuing to implement a robust public awareness

campaign with the goal of increasing the number of
downloads.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
The protection of Canadians’ privacy is a priority for the

Government of Canada.
The Office of the Privacy Commissioner of Canada

continues to be engaged on COVID Alert, and supports its
use by Canadians.
The app uses Bluetooth technology, does not record users’

locations and does not collect identifiable information.
The app has undergone a thorough privacy assessment, and

all data provided to the app will be securely stored and
protected.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN THE APP WILL BE AVAILABLE IN ALL JURISDICTIONS
COVID Alert is available for download to all Canadians.

We are pleased to report that we have eight provinces

onboard COVID Alert including Saskatchewan, Manitoba,
Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick, Nova Scotia, Prince
Edward Island, and Newfoundland and Labrador.
The government is working with the remaining provinces and

territories to have COVID Alert implemented in all
jurisdictions so that all Canadians can benefit from the
exposure notification app.
IF PRESSED ON B.C. DECISION NOT TO ONBOARD AT THIS TIME
 B.C. is requesting functionality changes to COVID Alert that
could have privacy implications.
 While we are continuing our discussions with British
Columbia to implement COVID Alert, at this time, we are
unable to commit to changes that would affect the privacy of
the app.
 The Government of Canada’s approach is to proceed with
an exposure notification app rather than a contact tracing
app. Contact tracing involves using phone numbers,
addresses and known locations to track down individuals
who were in contact with someone who tested positive for
COVID-19.
 The app is designed to complement manual contact tracing
by provincial and territorial public health authorities, which
will continue to be an important part of Canada’s COVID-19
response.
IF PRESSED ON NOTIFICATION EXPOSURE WINDOW
 As of Oct 30, COVID Alert was updated to more closely align
with current public health guidance on manual contact
tracing.
 The app will now ask users who have tested positive for
COVID-19 to provide the date of their symptom onset or their
testing date to provide a better estimation of the period when
they may have been most infectious to others.
 This means that the app will notify other app users who were
in close contact with the case while they were most likely to
be most infectious.
 The new features - to report testing date
or symptom onset date -are optional and not required to use
the app.
 COVID Alert will be continually re-
assessed and updated as it rolls out across the country
based on public health guidance, provincial needs and
participation, user research, analysis and updates to the
underlying framework by Apple and Google.
IF PRESSED ON COST
The Government of Canada has benefited from the

volunteer efforts of Shopify, which has developed the code
at its own cost, and from Blackberry, which is reviewing the
security of the source code on a pro bono basis.
The bulk of the cost of this app will be to work with provinces

and territories to support the integration of the app within
their existing systems, and to set up the necessary systems,
such as technical support, so that Canadians can use the
app with confidence.
This will be a very important tool to support Canadians as we

continue restart the economy and manage increased case
counts.
IF PRESSED ON EQUITY/AVAILABILITY FOR CANADIANS WITHOUT
SMARTPHONES OR OLDER SMARTPHONES
COVID Alert uses the Exposure Notification Framework

(ENF) developed by Apple and Google, which requires the
phone to be running Android 6.0 or later, or iOS 13.5 or later.
With existing specifications, the app can help protect those

who don’t have a smartphone or who own older technology.
For example, if a user receives a notification, they may
decide not to visit a friend or relative.
This means that friend or relative will be protected from

potential exposure, even if they do not have the app.
BACKGROUND
On June 18, 2020, the Prime Minister announced a national exposure notification app.
On July 31, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced that the app, called COVID
Alert, is available for download by all Canadians.
The app, originally developed by the Government of Ontario, will help Canadians and
public health officials identify and isolate the spread of the virus more quickly. Use of the
app will be
voluntary. If someone tests positive for COVID-19, a health care provider will give them
a one-time key they can enter into the app. Other users who have downloaded the app
and come in close contact with that person will then be notified, through the app, that
they may have been exposed to the virus. The app will provide users with information
on steps they can take to keep themselves and others safe. Health Canada is working
with the provinces and territories so they can customize public health information based
on their jurisdictions context.
It builds upon an exposure notification solution developed by Shopify volunteers in
coordination with the non-profit Linux Foundation Public Health. It is also the work of a
team of developers from across the country. The app underwent a security review by
BlackBerry and the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. It incorporates Bluetooth
technology provided by Apple and Google to log instances where users have come into
close contact without collecting personally identifiable information or tracking a user
location. The Office of the Privacy Commissioner has been engaged on the app and the
Commissioner has indicated they support the use of the app by Canadians.
Ontario began providing the one-time keys on July 31, 2020 followed by Newfoundland
and Labrador on September 3, 2020, New Brunswick and Saskatchewan on September
18, 2020, Manitoba on October 1, 2020, Quebec on October 5, 2020, Prince Edward
Island on October 8, 2020 and Nova Scotia on October 15, 2020. Health Canada is
working with the other provinces and territories to have COVID Alert implemented in all
jurisdictions.
HEALTH PRODUCTS MAKING FALSE OR MISLEADING CLAIMS
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada has identified health products making false or misleading claims to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19 through proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received. This activity is illegal and Health Canada continues to take actions
to stop this.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing about health products on the market claiming to
treat, prevent or cure COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
The health and safety of all Canadians is our Government's

top priority and we are taking measures to protect
consumers from illegal, false or misleading advertising of
products claiming to mitigate, prevent, treat, diagnose, or
cure COVID-19.
Selling health products that make false or misleading claims

to prevent, treat or cure COVID-19 is illegal in Canada.
As a result of proactive monitoring of online sites and

complaints received, Health Canada has identified health
products making false or misleading claims related to
COVID-19 and has issued compliance letters to multiple
companies directing them to immediately stop selling such
products and remove references to these products from their
websites.
To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a

table which lists products and corresponding companies or
advertising media found to engage in non-compliant
marketing, which are currently under review or have been
resolved. Health Canada took compliance and enforcement
action against these organizations, as required.
IF PRESSED…
Health Canada has followed up on numerous cases

regarding health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19 identified through proactive monitoring
activities or complaints received.
Various compliance and enforcement options are available

to manage the risk posed to public health and safety by false
or misleading claims related to COVID-19, including on site
inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public
communications or product seizures.
In certain circumstances, when the regulatory enforcement

responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance, Health
Canada may refer its findings to the Public Prosecution
Service of Canada for potential prosecution.
BACKGROUND
Selling or advertising health products making false or misleading claims is illegal in
Canada under Sections 9 (1) and 20 (1) of the Food and Drugs Act . Health products
that have been authorized for sale by Health Canada will have an eight-digit Drug
Identification Number (DIN), Natural Product Number (NPN) or Homeopathic Drug
Number (DIN-HM).
Health Canada’s Actions in Addressing Products Making False or Misleading
Claims
Health Canada has followed up and taken action on numerous cases regarding health
products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 identified through
proactive monitoring of online sites or complaints received.
Companies have been sent compliance letters and directed to immediately stop selling
such products and to remove references to these products from their websites. Health
Canada has been actively monitoring websites and working with major online retailers
to ensure products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 are removed
from their sites.
On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a Public Advisory to warn Canadians about
the risks associated with products making false and misleading claims related to
COVID-19. Canadians were encouraged to report any information on potential false and
misleading advertising or the sale of products that have not been approved by Health
Canada. To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a table which lists
products and corresponding companies or advertising media found to engage in non-
compliant marketing, which are currently under review or have been resolved. Health
Canada took compliance and enforcement actions against these organizations, as
required. This list is updated bi-weekly.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of potential non-compliance with the Food
and Drugs Act or its associated regulations, it takes steps to confirm whether non-
compliance has occurred and takes action based on the risk to the health of Canadians.
A number of compliance and enforcement options are available to manage the risk
posed to public health and safety by false or misleading claims related COVID-19
including on site inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public communications or
product seizures. For example, in April 2020, Health Canada inspectors, in collaboration
with the RCMP, seized over 1500 unapproved COVID-19 test kits from a resident in
British Columbia, who had acquired and sold some of them online without authorization.
Health Canada determined that these kits were not authorized for sale in Canada,
meaning that the Department has not evaluated their safety and effectiveness.
In certain circumstances, when the regulatory enforcement responses are not
appropriate to achieve compliance Health Canada may also refer its findings to the
Public Prosecution Service of Canada for potential prosecution.
The Department will continue to monitor and take action as needed to ensure that
health products making false and misleading claims to diagnose, prevent, treat, or cure
COVID-19 are removed from the market.
FEDERAL/PROVINCIAL/TERRITORIAL PUBLIC HEALTH RESPONSE
PLAN FOR ONGOING MANAGEMENT OF COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
On August 25, 2020 the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for
Ongoing Management of COVID-19 was published on the Canada.ca website to
promote a long-term approach to the COVID-19 response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is new or different about this Plan?
KEY MESSAGES
Canada’s COVID-19 response has been unprecedented,

with rapid implementation and public adoption of public
health measures.
The Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response

Plan for Ongoing Management of COVID-19 was developed
to help federal, provincial and territorial public health
officials, Indigenous partners, and other stakeholders plan
for the long-term management of COVID-19 in Canada.
The plan reflects the need to manage this pandemic in a

balanced way to support a long-term, sustainable response.
It is intended to stimulate active planning, and the review of

current response efforts and our system capacity.
This plan may be adjusted as our scientific knowledge

increases, the epidemiological picture evolves, and new
technologies and treatments become available.
IF PRESSED ON REASONABLE WORST CASE SCENARIO
The plan includes a ―reasonable worst case scenario‖ for

planning purposes in order to prepare for different possible
scenarios, including those that are less likely.
It is provided as a possible scenario, and is not a prediction.

BACKGROUND
The Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) Public Health Response Plan for Ongoing
Management of COVID-19, drafted by the Public Health Agency of Canada and
approved by the FPT Special Advisory Committee, acknowledges jurisdictional roles
and responsibilities, identifies when national approaches are anticipated and when
provincial/territorial (P/T) flexibility and customization are expected.
Key elements of this F/P/T plan include: goals and objectives that are aimed at
mitigating both the health and societal impacts of the pandemic, planning assumptions,
a reasonable worst case scenario and summaries of current and planned response
activities for each main component of the public health response (which include:
surveillance, laboratory response activities, public health measures, infection prevention
and control and clinical care guidance, vaccination, international border and travel
health measures, health care system infrastructure, risk communications and research).
There is also content specifically addressing planning with Indigenous Communities,
planning for high-risk settings and populations, and the role of modelling in the
response.
Much like other technical guidance, this document may require updating as our scientific
knowledge of the SARS-CoV-2 pathogen increases, the epidemiological picture evolves
in Canada and globally, pandemic control measures change, and new medical
countermeasures become available (e.g., a vaccine, effective treatment).
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
SYNOPSIS
The Globe and Mail has published a series of articles critical of the Public Health
Agency of Canada’s early response to COVID-19, and focussed on what it describes as
the decline of the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). In response, the
Minister of Health has ordered an independent review of GPHIN.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Government of Canada doing to respond to concerns about
Canada’s pandemic warning system?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to scientific
excellence and I am committed to ensuring this country has
an effective early warning system for potential emergencies
– including pandemics.
That is why, in the coming weeks, I will launch an

independent review of Canada’s global public health
monitoring system.
To be clear, the Global Public Health Intelligence Network

was never shut down, and GPHIN continues to play an
important role in the response to COVID-19.
The results of the review will help inform future decisions

around Canada’s global public health monitoring system.
IF PRESSED FOR DETAILS ON THE INDEPENDENT REVEW
 We are establishing a diverse panel of professionals with the
appropriate experience and expertise to conduct this review.
IF PRESSED ON THE ISSUANCE OF ALERTS
 The issuance of alerts will be examined as part of the
independent review of Canada’s global public health
monitoring system.
 While the number of alerts decreased in recent years, at no
time has GPHIN been directed to cease or slow its
information gathering and sharing activities.
 Canadian users continue to receive timely information about
public health issues through a daily GPHIN report and have
ongoing access to the GPHIN database. This includes
federal, provincial, and territorial government officials.
IF PRESSED ON SOURCES OF INFORMATION
 GPHIN source information includes a global news database
and research platform that contains nearly 33,000 sources.
This includes newswires, media, publications, government
sources, and medical expert forums.
BACKGROUND
GPHIN: KEY FACTS
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence
Network (GPHIN) is an early-warning and situational awareness system for potential
chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including
outbreaks of infectious disease. GPHIN users include non-governmental public health
agencies and organizations, as well as government authorities who conduct public
health surveillance. GPHIN requires a free subscription from eligible users. GPHIN is a
significant contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic Intelligence
from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
 a professional multidisciplinary team of life science analysts conducting rapid risk
assessments to detect public health threats; and
 an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural
language processing to facilitate the work of the analysts.
Every day, GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of, on average, 7,000 articles in
nine languages (Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and
simplified and traditional Chinese) to validate and assess the data for inclusion in
reports, including the GPHIN Daily Report published each morning. This report goes
directly from GPHIN to Canadian public health practitioners at the federal, provincial
and territorial levels, including senior management at the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) and other government departments.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
 Management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns
about the health care system’s capacity to cope with future waves of the virus.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health
care system?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is investing more than $19

billion to support provinces and territories as they safely
restart their economies, including funding to help ensure
health care systems are ready for possible future waves of
the virus.
This funding includes support for vulnerable Canadians –

including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19,
and support and protection for people experiencing
challenges related to mental health, substance use, or
homelessness.
The Government is also supporting virtual care services and

online screening assessments to take pressure off of
emergency departments and to support physical distancing.
The Government has invested $240 million to expand virtual

care and mental health tools to support provinces and
territories in their work.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health
system capacity
 Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have
worked with provinces and territories to model potential
pressure points related to the availability of beds and
ventilators, which in turn is informing decisions on how to
allocate resources.
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model
demands on health systems under different modelling
scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national
level with support from the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
 We know that in our worst case scenario models, our
systems would be severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
 That is why governments are now thinking very carefully
about how best to balance public health restrictions with
available capacity and careful tracking of resource use in
hospitals (like intensive care bed use), and why the
Government of Canada committed additional funding to
support the safe restart of economies and health care
systems.
BACKGROUND
 Provinces and territories took a range of actions to increase system capacity and
meet projected needs in the early days of the pandemic. This included cancelling
elective surgeries, physically reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more
isolation areas, and transferring patients to other settings. These measures may be
revisited if capacity issues become a concern again.
 Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care
services and online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on
emergency departments and is also complementing physical distancing measures.
Provinces and territories are also running training exercises and simulations, and are
hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
 Governments have been sharing best practices for when and how best to ease
restrictions in a way that will best balance the needs of COVID-19 and non-COVID-
19 patients. While provinces and territories continue to protect capacity for COVID-
19 patients, they have been reintroducing previously postponed services (e.g.
elective surgeries and procedures) to make progress against the backlogs built up
during the early weeks of the pandemic. Some estimates suggest that it could take
up to 24 months to address the backlogs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion
to help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country
more resilient to possible future waves of the virus. New federal funding will address
seven priority areas:
 enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and
information sharing to mitigate future outbreaks;
 investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for
Canadians experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or
homelessness;
 support for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long-term care, home care,
and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
 funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment, and to recover
some of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial
governments;
 support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support
parents’ gradual return to work;
 joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front
lines of restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public
spaces and essential services to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a
dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
 a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid
sick leave with access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international
partners bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), to help inform
our domestic response and to contribute to global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
We remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government

and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19.
I have been engaging with my G7 counterparts on a regular

basis to share information on public health measures, to
learn from others’ experiences and best practices and
identify possible joint actions to tackle this outbreak.
Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international

counterparts, including Germany, the United States and the
United Kingdom, to discuss our respective COVID-19
responses. These discussions are valuable opportunities to
learn from each other and strengthen our domestic and
international responses.
We remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government

and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the U.S. Terminating its Relationship with the WHO
 Canada remains strongly committed to constructive
engagement in multilateral institutions, including the WHO
and PAHO, which are now, more than ever, essential to help
us accomplish together more than any one country can do
alone.
 We will continue to work with other Member States to ensure
that the WHO and PAHO are strong, accountable and well-
governed institutions.

Canada has no plans to cut funding to the WHO.
IF PRESSED on U.S. Allegations of Undue Chinese Influence in WHO
 We have valued the WHO’s global leadership and
coordination during this pandemic, and have confidence that
the organization is working with all Member States, for all
Member States.
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest
in making it a strong, accountable, inclusive and well-
governed institution, whose actions and recommendations
are guided by Member States, and the best available
science and evidence.
 We will continue to participate in oversight and accountability
processes to help reinforce transparency, confidence, and
trust in the organization.
 As the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve around the
world, Canada will continue to work closely with its
international partners, including the WHO and China, to
reduce risks to Canadians and the global community.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global
response
 As highlighted in the Resolution adopted at the World Health
Assembly in May, a comprehensive post-crisis review of the
global response should be undertaken when the time is right
– as soon as feasible.
 We welcome the establishment by the WHO of the
Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and
Response, who will lead an impartial and independent
evaluation of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We
are pleased that a prominent Canadian, Dr. Joanne Liu, will
be contributing her significant global health expertise and
experience.
 We look forward to engaging in the process to identify
important lessons learned.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
 I have engaged regularly with my U.S. counterpart,
Secretary Azar, through the G7 forum.
 I have also held bilateral calls with him to discuss our
respective COVID-19 responses, including testing, guidance
for essential workers, supply chains, research and recovery
planning.
 Technical staff of Public Health Agency of Canada have also
been engaged with their technical counterparts at the CDC
since early in January to exchange information and best
practices.
If pressed about the Government of Canada working with
international partners on access to vaccines for all….
 Equitable, timely, and affordable access to vaccines,
therapies, and diagnostics is critical for controlling and
ending the pandemic. For this reason, Canada supports the
work of the Access to COVID-19
 Tools Accelerator – a global collaboration to accelerate their
development and deployment.
 In June 2020, Canada co-hosted the launch of the pledging
event, with a commitment of $120 million. Canada is also a
member of the Accelerator’s Facilitation Council in order to
continue advocating for and supporting its work.
 The Government of Canada is working closely with its
international partners to protect the health and safety of
Canadians and the global community.
If pressed on the failure to reach G7 consensus on the WHO
Roadmap
 Canada is disappointed that a consensus
could not be reached on discussions toward a G7 roadmap
to strengthen the WHO’s role in global health emergency
preparedness and response.
 Canada values the WHO’s leadership and coordination role
in the COVID-19 response. Our continued commitment to
the WHO includes our interest in making it a strong,
accountable, and well-governed institution.
 We will continue to work collaboratively with G7 partners and
others around the world, as we prepare for a possible
second wave of infections and to coordinate recovery
efforts.
BACKGROUND
Since February, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to
discuss COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key
countries such as the U.S. Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s impact across
sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers are engaging regularly with their
international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and
Employment.
In addition, technical staff of PHAC have engaged with their counterparts in a variety of
fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally (e.g. WHO, CDC, GHSI, GOARN), to exchange
information and best practices, that have informed and enhanced Canada’s response to
COVID-19.
Research and Development
Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role
in establishing the World Health Organization (WHO) global research and innovation
roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is also supporting the Canadian Treatments for COVID-
19 Trial (CATCO), which is contributing to the WHO SOLIDARITY trial seeking to find
effective treatments for COVID-19. Further, CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of
Infection and Immunity currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for
Infectious Diseases (GloPID-R), which continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-
moving collaboration that is needed across a multiplicity of players domestically and
internationally.
On May 4, Canada joined the European Union, France, Germany, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Japan, Saudi Arabia as the current G20 presidency and Italy as the future
G20 presidency in co-hosting an international online pledging event, the launch of the
Coronavirus Global Response. At the initial event, Canada pledged over $850 million
towards the fundraising target of $8 billion USD to support the development of rapid
coronavirus diagnostics, treatments and vaccines. At the closing event of the campaign
on June 27, Canada pledged an additional $120M for the Access to COVID-19 Tools
Accelerator – a global collaboration between governments, scientists, businesses,
philanthropists and global health organizations to accelerate development, production,
and equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. As of July 12, 2020
$17.9 billion USD, more than twice the original target amount, has been pledged.
Canada is also a member (represented by Minister Gould) of the recently launched
Facilitation Council for the Accelerator, which will provide support for its work through
political leadership, advocacy, and mobilization of additional resources.
World Health Organization (WHO)
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the WHO,
averaging over $70 million annually for the past 10 years in assessed and voluntary
contributions to support the work of the organization.
The WHO has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the
COVID-19 response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their
preparedness and response efforts. Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and
evidence-based guidance during this rapidly evolving pandemic. With the Region of the
Americas at the epicenter of the pandemic, Canada continues to support the WHO
regional office of the Americas (PAHO)’s critical coordinating and technical role in
responding to the health challenges that the region is facing.
On April 14, 2020, U.S. President Donald Trump announced that the U.S. would
temporarily suspend funding to WHO while the U.S. Administration conducts a review of
the organization due to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the pandemic and a
perceived bias towards China. This did not apply to the U.S.’ assessed contributions
due to PAHO.
Subsequently on May 29, 2020 President Trump announced that the U.S. was
terminating its relationship with the WHO and would look to divert the funding allocated
to the organization elsewhere. On July 7, 2020, the White House provided the
Secretary-General of the United Nations with formal notice of its intention to withdraw
from the WHO. The withdrawal will become effective as of July 6, 2021, barring any
further developments.
Canada has consistently expressed support for an independent, comprehensive review
of the global response post-crisis, which would consider the actions of all actors and
partners, including the WHO, to be undertaken at an appropriate time.
At the 73rd session of the World Health Assembly (WHA), which convened virtually on
May 18-19, 2020, Canada co-sponsored a resolution on COVID-19, which provides a
consensus-based foundation for next steps in the global COVID-19 response and
includes a call to initiate, at the earliest appropriate moment, an independent,
comprehensive review of the WHO-coordinated international health response to
COVID-19.
As follow up to the resolution on July 9, 2020, the Director General of the WHO
announced the creation of the Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and
Response (IPPR), co-chaired by former New Zealand Prime Minister and UNDP
Administrator Helen Clark, and former President of Liberia Ellen Johnston Sirleaf. The
IPPR will be responsible for taking forward the independent evaluation called for in the
WHA resolution. Terms of reference will be developed in the coming months. Canadian
physician and former president of MSF International, Dr. Joanne Liu, was selected as
one of the eleven panelists by the IPPR co-chairs in September 2020.
On August 3, 2020, the Director-General announced that the WHO advance team that
traveled to China to work with Chinese counterparts to prepare plans for identifying the
zoonotic source of the SARS-CoV-2 virus had concluded their preliminary mission. As a
result, WHO and Chinese experts have drafted the Terms of Reference for the studies
and programme of work that will be undertaken by a WHO-led international team.
In May 2020, the Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO
Health Emergencies Programme, which provides oversight and monitoring of the
development and performance of the Programme, published an Interim report on
WHO’s response to COVID-19: January-April 2020.
The Interim report is a compilation of observations of how various structures and
processes functioned during the early months of the pandemic. It provides an overview
of the first months of the pandemic before issuing a series of recommendations on the
International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005), the WHO’s Health Emergencies
Programme and the WHO Incident Management System, leveraging of the WHO
Collaborating Centres, access to therapeutics and vaccines, ongoing public health
measures support and independent review of the COVID-19 response.
Dr. Theresa Tam is a member of the IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity
and exercise their responsibilities with full regard for the paramount importance of
independence.
INTERSECTION OF COVID-19 AND SUBTANCES USE
SYNOPSIS
 Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating long-standing challenges
regarding substance use and the overdose crisis, with many communities now
reporting increases in overdose deaths and harms, to record breaking levels in
some cases. In addition to the dangers of COVID-19, people who use drugs are
also facing additional barriers and risks related to the toxicity of the illegal drug
supply and reduced access to health and social services, including life-saving
harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to support people who use drugs
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES:
 Tragically, over the past few months, the COVID-19 pandemic has
exacerbated long-standing challenges regarding substance use and the
opioid overdose crisis, with devastating impacts for people, families, and
communities across the country. Many jurisdictions are reporting
increases in overdose deaths and harms, including record breaking
levels in British Columbia and other jurisdictions.
 At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government took action to
enable the health system to better meet the needs of people struggling
with problematic substance useand avert the harms associated with the
increasingly toxic supply of street drugs that has been made even worse
by the impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 To date, we have made it easier for people with substance use disorder
to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for
overdose prevention sites to be established rapidly in temporary
community shelters and other locations.
 By providing for these new measures, vulnerable people will be better
able to get the supports they need, while respecting public health
directives for physical distancing and self-isolation. We remain
committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and
municipal partners, along with other key stakeholders, to advance
innovative solutions to address this devastating dual crisis.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER ACTIONS
 Building on these early efforts, the Government is also supporting
community-based projects funded under the Substance Use and
Addictions Program that address the dual crises of COVID-19 and
substance use, including those that provide safer, pharmaceutical grade
alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply.
 Given the deeply worrying data about the surge in overdose deaths and
growing concerns about the impact of the pandemic, the Government is
identifying additional areas where federal actions, including exemptions,
guidelines or funding, could help mitigate and reverse the current trend,
including ways to address urgent needs and strengthen the continuum
of care.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON OVERDOSE DEATHS
 The Government of Canada remains deeply concerned about the
devastating impact that the opioid overdose crisis continues to have on
people, families and
 communities across the country. There is further concern that the
response to the COVID-19 pandemic may have unintended negative
consequences, including as it relates to opioid-related overdose deaths
and problematic substance use in Canada more broadly.
The British Columbia Coroners Service has reported alarming data

showing record numbers of illicit drug toxicity deaths in the province.
There were over 170 illicit drug toxicity deaths per month from May to
July, with a record 183 in June. Deaths have remained high into the fall,
with 127 deaths recorded in September 2020, compared to 60 deaths in
September 2019. In total, from March to September 2020, there were
1,048 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths in B.C. To put this in
perspective, this is approximately four times the total number of persons
who have tragically died in B.C. from COVID-19. B.C. paramedics
responded to over 1,603 overdose calls in August. Tragically, overdose
deaths among First Nations people in B.C. have also surged, almost
doubling between January and May 2020 compared to 2019.
 Other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar trends. For
example, Alberta reported a record high 301 opioid poisoning deaths
from April-June 2020, more than double the number that occurred from
January-March. Saskatchewan is reporting 296 suspected/confirmed
drug toxicity deaths so far in 2020, breaking the record total in 2018,
and, in Quebec, July saw the highest number of overdoses in Montreal
in over five years.
 The Government of Canada remains committed to addressing the crisis
of opioid-related overdoses and continues to work to identify ways to
maintain lifesaving supports, including treatment and harm reduction
services for people who use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH FUNDING
 On April 23, our Government announced new funding for COVID-19
research, including $10 million for the COVID-19 and Mental Health
Initiative, led by the CIHR. Under this research initiative, CIHR is
supporting rapid research on mental health and substance use to ensure
that COVID-19 responses are based on the latest evidence. Last month,
CIHR granted funding to 45 research teams across the country to
conduct rapid knowledge synthesis of current evidence on mental health
and substance use, with a focus on priority and vulnerable populations.
Preliminary results from this research are now available and provide
timely, high quality, and relevant evidence to decision makers at
municipal, provincial, territorial, and federal levels.
 Under the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative, CIHR also launched –
in partnership with four provincial research agencies – a funding
opportunity to better understand mental health and/or substance use
needs of individuals and communities due to the pandemic, and support
the development of innovative adaptations of mental health and
substance use services.
 Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM), national
guidance documents have been produced and disseminated that
address the needs of people who use drugs, services providers, and
decision makers in relation to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-
19 IN COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE IS CHRONIC OVERCROWDING,
INCLUDING A SHORTAGE OF HOUSING
 We understand the unique challenges associated with containing the
spread and protecting homeless Canadians from COVID-19.
 On September 2, 2020, we proactively took steps and extended the
exemptions to make it easier for overdose prevention sites to be rapidly
established in temporary community shelters for vulnerable individuals
(e.g., homeless/housing unstable) exposed to COVID-19, and to allow
existing supervised consumption site operators to adjust their services to
support physical distancing and respect public health directives. These
exemptions have been extended to September 2021.
 We have also developed a set of resources to help frontline service
providers understand and comply with existing regulations associated
with medications for substance use disorder or as a safer,
pharmaceutical grade alternative to the street supply.
 These measures will not only make it easier for people who are staying
at shelters to respect public health directives to distance and isolate,
they will also protect them from the risks and harms of overdose.
 These efforts will help ensure vulnerable Canadians have access to the
health services they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL INVESTMENT TO ADDRESS ISSUES AT
THE INTERSECTION OF SUBSTANCE USE AND COVID-19
 On July 16, 2020, the Government of Canada committed to providing
$500 million to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and
protection of people experiencing challenges related to mental health,
substance use, or homelessness.This investment is part of the more
than $19 billion invested through the Safe Restart Agreement to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and ensure
Canadians have the support they need in these challenging times.
 Budget 2019 committed $30.5 million over 5 years, starting in 2019–20,
with $1 million in ongoing funding, to address persistent gaps in harm
reduction and treatment in their response to problematic substance use.
In July 2019, we announced an additional investment of $76.2 million to
scale up key life-saving measures, help circumvent the toxic illegal drug
supply, and identify and address emerging drug threats.
 Recent investments made through Health Canada’s Substance Use and
Addictions Program (SUAP) are helping to relieve some of the
extraordinary stresses placed on people, communities and health
organizations struggling to deal with the dual demands of overdose
crisis harm reduction and pandemic response.
 For example, in February of this year, our Government announced
funding of over $32 million over five years to support 26 projects across
the country that will address a range of harm reduction and treatment
needs, including:
o $10 million to support 13 projects relating to Harm Reduction,
Community-led and Front Line Initiatives;
o $16 million in support of 5 projects aimed at Increasing Access to
Pharmaceutical-Grade Medications (also referred to as ―safe
supply‖); and,
o $6 million to support 8 projects aimed at finding Approaches to
Problematic Methamphetamine Use.
 Furthermore, we are supporting community-based projects funded under
SUAP by allowing funds to be re-directed to support immediate COVID-
19 related needs, and are funding six additional projects that will provide
access to safer, pharmaceutical grade medications as an alternative to
the toxic illegal drug supply for people with severe opioid use disorders.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY
 We know that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous
illegal drug supply, even while services to people who use drugs are
being limited, and we have seen the tragic increases in overdose deaths
in British Columbia and elsewhere.
 The Government of Canada has taken actions to reduce barriers to
providing people who use drugs with a safer, pharmaceutical-grade
alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
 For example, we have issued class exemptions to pharmacists, and
eased restrictions on the transportation of controlled substances, to
make it easier for people to access the medications they need during the
pandemic while following public health advice, such as physical
distancing.
 In addition to the five safer supply pilot projects that we were funding
through Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program, we
have now committed to providing short-term funding to an additional six
sites to address immediate needs.
 These innovative projects will be independently evaluated and this
assessment will contribute to building the evidence base to support the
scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED ON THE OPEN LETTER CALLING FOR THE
DECRIMINALIZATION OF THE PERSONAL POSSESSION OF DRUGS
 The Government of Canada is committed to a comprehensive public
health approach to the overdose crisis that is focused on reducing
harms, saving lives, and getting people the supports they need.
 We encourage cross-disciplinary collaboration, including the formation of
partnerships between law enforcement and health and social services to
help divert people who use drugs away from criminal sanctions and
towards health and social services.
 The Government is not considering the decriminalization or legalization
of illegal drugs at this time. We will continue to work with civil society
organizations to assess options that could better support the needs of
people who use drugs, during this difficult time.
 Our government’s response has also included significant actions to
improve access to treatment, harm reduction and social services and
strengthen the public health response, such as:
o Investing $150 million in the Emergency Treatment Fund, through
Budget 2018, for provinces and territories to improve access to
evidence-based treatment services; and
o Making legislative changes to streamline the application process
for supervised consumption sites, and reducing regulatory barriers
for accessing a safe supply of pharmaceutical-grade medications
to improve treatment.
o Issuing guidance to public prosecutors to pursue suitable
alternative measures and diversion from the criminal justice
system for simple possession cases.
THE RELEASE OF THE CANADIAN ASSOCIATION OF CHIEFS OF
POLICE REPORT ON DECRIMINALIZATION
 As we fight the COVID-19 pandemic, we cannot forget the opioid
overdose crisis has exacted a heavy toll on thousands of families in
communities throughout the country. This crisis, now intensified by the
pandemic, continues to be one of the most serious public health threats
in Canada’s recent history, and our Government remains committed to a
comprehensive and compassionate approach to address it.
 Problematic substance use is first and foremost a health issue. That is
why the actions we have taken have focused on advancing a public
health approach to addressing substance use and expanding the
accessibility of vital health and social services for people who use drugs.
 These actions include passing the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act,
funding programs like drug treatment courts for those whose substance
use contributes to their offending, supporting enhanced access to harm
reduction services such as supervised consumption sites, access to
pharmaceutical-grade medications, also known as safer supply, and an
expanded range of treatment options.
 In July, the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police released a report
that recognizes substance use as a public health issue and examines a
range of alternatives to criminal sanctions in response to the offence of
simple possession. We welcome their endorsement of a holistic
approach including harm reduction and diversion, and thank them for
their recommendations.
BACKGROUND
In September 2020, jointly with the provinces and territories, the Government of Canada
released updated data indicating that at least 16,364 Canadians lost their lives between January
2016 and March 2020 to apparent opioid-related overdoses. This most recent national data
indicated that, from January to March 2020, 77% of accidental apparent opioid-related deaths
involved fentanyl or fentanyl analogues, compared to 54% in 2016. The presence of fentanyl
and its analogues in the illegal drug supply is therefore the main driver of recent overdose
deaths.
In many regions of the country, the COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing public health crisis
related to high rates of overdoses and deaths as well as acute substance use harms. In British Columbia
in September 2020, there were 127 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths. This is more than double the
number of deaths seen in September 2019 (60). The June 2020 total represented the highest number of
illicit drug toxicity deaths ever recorded in a month in B.C (183). Postmortem toxicology results suggest
that there has been a greater number of cases with extreme fentanyl concentrations in April-September
2020, compared with previous months. During that time period, approximately 15% of cases had extreme
fentanyl concentrations as compared to 8% from Jan 2019 to March 2020. Ontario, Alberta,
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Quebec, P.E.I., Yukon, and Northwest Territories are also reporting increases
in toxicity of the illicit drug supply, overdose deaths and/or emergency medical service (EMS) calls.
These crises are exacerbated in communities where there is chronic overcrowding, including a shortage
of housing or other shelters. At the intersection of these public health crises, people who use drugs
(PWUD) are experiencing a number of increased risks:
• Mortality due to COVID-19 given higher prevalence of underlying health conditions (respiratory
illnesses, immune comprised, etc)
• Spread of COVID-19 due to multiple close contacts, including in the community to support drug-
seeking behaviours and/or within primary care system for harm reduction/treatment
• Other severe health risks such as drug withdrawal for those who must self-isolate or quarantine
• Overdose and other harms related to an increasingly toxic illicit supply
Substance use, mental health, and pain are inter-connected and it is often challenging to manage one
without attending to the others. Many people who live with pain are coping with underlying health
conditions or receiving pain treatments (ongoing use of opioids and other medications, steroid injections
used in pain interventions), which are immune suppressing, placing people living with pain at higher risk
of contracting and experiencing severe illness due to COVID-19. Public health measures required to
respond to the pandemic have also increased the risk of social isolation, mental illness, and suicidality,
which are already prevalent among people with chronic pain. Health and social services that help
maintain function and keep disability at bay, such as psychological supports, physical therapies, and self-
management options are more difficult to access. Canadians living with pain are therefore reporting
decreased functional capacity and quality of life, fear and anxiety, cancellations of needed in-person care,
surgeries and diagnostics, and drug shortages of certain pain medications (i.e., opioids).
On May 13, 2020, the Ministers of Health, Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, and Justice,
received an open letter from Richard Elliott, Executive Director of the Canadian HIV/AIDS Legal Network,
on behalf of more than 50 civil society organizations from across Canada. The letter highlights a series of
factors that increase people’s vulnerabilities during the pandemic and calls on the Government to
decriminalize personal use drug possession as a public health measure to mitigate harms from the
parallel public health emergencies caused by COVID-19 and the ongoing crisis of overdoses and deaths.
On July 9, 2020, the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police (CACP) released their Findings and
Recommendation Report entitled ―Decriminalization for Simple Possession of Illicit Drugs: Exploring
Impacts on Public Safety and Policing.‖ The report positions substance use as a public health issue, and
examines and endorses current best practices in harm reduction, including supervised consumption sites
and safer supply projects. In the report, the CACP endorses alternatives to criminal sanctions for simple
possession of illegal drugs, and recommends a national task force to recommend alternatives to criminal
sanctions for the simple possession of controlled substances.
Federal actions to date on this issues have been:
Increasing the reach of health system, including enabling Opioid Agonist Treatment (OAT)
Issued on March 19, 2020 exemptions that, if permitted within the applicable provincial/territorial scopes
of practice, permit pharmacists to extend and/or transfer prescriptions; permit prescribers to issue verbal
orders to extend or refill a prescription; and permit pharmacy employees to deliver prescriptions of
controlled substances to patient’s location. These measures facilitate self-isolation or quarantine to
prevent the spread of COVID-19.
 Fully implemented in BC, AB, SK, ON, QC, NB, NS; partially implemented (no verbal
prescriptions) in PEI, NL; being considered in MB, YU, NU; No information NWT
Flexible access to harm reduction services
Issued on April 6, 2020 class exemptions for all provinces and territories, for a duration of 6 months,
allowing them to modify the operations of existing supervised consumption sites and establish new
temporary spaces for the safe consumption of drugs, without having to apply to Health Canada. This
saves valuable time for local officials who want to establish temporary overdose prevention services
within shelters or other temporary sites to house homeless or housing unstable people.
 Health Canada has received formal notice from British Columbia and Quebec that they have
adopted the class exemption and Saskatchewan has indicated its intention to do so. No
other formal notices of implementation by provinces or territories have been received to
date. Health Canada has requested to be informed if there is a decision to implement.
Disseminating information and guidance
Developed and disseminated new ―tool kit‖, on May 5, 2020, to support service providers and PWUD to
socially distance and self-isolate, and the web link was made available as of June 11, 2020:
 Providing an easy-to-understand summary of the various exemptions now in place for health
care practitioners (HCP) and allied HCP, which facilitate flexible models of care during the
pandemic;
 Consolidating prescribing and practice guidelines for HCP to foster an increase in
prescribing of medications to address symptoms of withdrawal experienced by PWUD,
including Suboxone, methadone and medications considered ―safer supply‖
(hydromorphone, prescription grade heroin); and
 Assisting PWUD, harm reduction advocacy groups and families who support PWUD to
understand how to effectively navigate the changing healthcare environment to secure
medications and treatment supports as well as educate on harm reduction measures.
Increasing access to mental health supports, including those for problematic substance use, and
provide advice for overall well-being during the pandemic to reduce the risk of overdose death
and prevent the spread of COVID-19
Leveraging the existing mental health as well as crisis lines and services, including the Federal COVID-19
– Mental Health and Substance Use Portal, to provide support for substance use and people
experiencing chronic pain, including referrals to community services.
Since April, CIHR has launched three funding opportunities under the COVID-19 and Mental Health
Initiative to support rapid research on mental health and substance use in the COVID-19 context:
 CRISM Operating grant: CIHR is currently providing support to CRISM to undertake
urgent activities related to challenges faced by people who use drugs (PWUD), service
providers and decision makers in relation to COVID-19. This includes the development
of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of the issues PWUD are
experiencing during the COVID-19 crisis, and the health service interventions to support
them. All six CRISM national guidance documents are now available (telemedicine for
addiction services; supervised consumption and safer supply in emergency shelters;
acute care services for PWUD; harm-reduction worker safety; supporting recovery
services; supporting patients to self-isolate).
 Knowledge synthesis grants: CIHR is supporting 45 research projects to support rapid
knowledge synthesis and mobilization of current evidence on mental health and
substance use services, delivery, and related guidelines, in the COVID-19 context.
These include projects with a focus on priority populations, including people who use
drugs. Preliminary results from the knowledge syntheses are now available online.
 Operating grants: On June 4, 2020, CIHR launched a new funding opportunity to support
implementation science and population-level intervention research to address the
impacts of the
COVID-19 pandemic and its containment measures on mental health and substance use. Four
provincial health research funding agencies are partnering with CIHR on this funding
opportunity: the Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research (BC), the New Brunswick Health
Research Foundation, the Ontario Ministry of Health and Long Term Care, and the
Saskatchewan Health Research Foundation.
LABELLING ON CERTAIN IMPORTED PRODUCTS
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
health care system, and there is an urgent need for products to help limit the
spread of COVID-19, such as hand sanitizers and disinfectants, household and
workplace cleaners, and hand and body soaps in support of the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why did Health Canada temporarily allow English-only labelling and safety
information on some imported and domestically manufactured products during
the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians, and the
Department has been doing everything possible to facilitate access to products
needed to slow the spread of COVID-19
 In light of the unprecedented demand and urgent need for products to help limit
the spread of COVID-19, in March 2020, Health Canada began facilitating
access, on a temporary and emergency basis, to allow certain products labelled
in only one official language to increase access to products in high demand.
 Health Canada proactively ended the use of unilingual labelling and require
bilingual labelling:
o As of June 8, 2020, all importers of household cleaners, cleaning products
used in the workplace, hand and body soaps, hard-surface disinfectants
and hand sanitizers are required to have bilingual labelling text available
to consumers, employers and workers.
o As of June 8, 2020, all Canadian manufacturers of hand sanitizers who
previously used unilingual labelling are required to use bilingual labelling.
 Health Canada is aware of the concerns expressed in
the recent report by the Commissioner of Official Languages and is reviewing the
report’s findings.
 The Department is committed to upholding the Official
Languages Act and fostering linguistic duality.
IF PRESSED…
Bilingual Language Requirements for Domestic and Imported Products
 The Department is committed to upholding the Official
Languages Act and fostering linguistic duality.
IF PRESSED….
Use of Unilingual Labelling During COVID-19
 In light of the unprecedented demand and urgent need for products to help limit
the spread of COVID-19, in March 2020, Health Canada began facilitating
access, on a temporary and emergency basis, to allow certain products labelled
in only one official language to increase access to products in high demand.
 This emergency measure was in effect until June 8, 2020. The objective was to
alleviate supply issues so that Canadians had access to products that help limit
the spread of Covid-19.
 This has included facilitating the importation of products from countries with
similar regulatory frameworks as well as the expedited approval of domestic
products.
 While Health Canada facilitated access to products labelled in only one official
language on an interim basis, the Department still strongly encouraged the use of
bilingual labels.
 As supply of these products began to improve, and in
response to Canadians’ concerns about the risks associated with unilingual
labelling and safety information, Health Canada proactively required all importers
of these products to have bilingual labelling text available to consumers and
employers and all domestically manufactured hand sanitizers to have bilingual
labelling by June 2020.
IF PRESSED
Proactive removal of the Interim Policy on Unilingual Labelling
 Following the temporary and urgent need for these products, Health Canada
proactively required all importers of these products to have bilingual labelling text
and safety information, where required, available to consumers, employers, and
workers. As of June 8, 2020, all importers were required to have bilingual label
and safety information text available on their websites and a means for sellers to
inform consumers, workers and employers of this website at the time of sale.
 Health Canada proactively communicated the end of
this interim measure both on its website and directly to regulated parties.
 Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians, and the
Department has been doing everything possible to facilitate access to products
needed to slow the spread of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED….
Commissioner of Official Languages’ Report on Unilingual Labelling
 Health Canada is aware of the concerns expressed in
the recent report by the Commissioner of Official Languages and is reviewing the
report’s findings.
 The Department is committed to upholding the Official
Languages Act. Due to the unprecedented demand for products to limit the
spread of COVID-19, Health Canada enacted temporary and emergency
measures to ensure a sufficient and consistent supply of these products.
 Health Canada acknowledges the seriousness of the official language complaints
received.
BACKGROUND
Interim measures
In March and April 2020, Health Canada implemented a number of interim measures to
facilitate expedited access to products that do not fully meet regulatory requirements
(e.g., labelling) set out in regulations under the Food and Drugs Act, Hazardous
Products Acts, and Canada Consumer Product Safety Act. These measures have
enabled access to the Canadian marketplace, health care settings, and commercial and
industrial settings.
The interim policies included:
 facilitating the importation of products that are not fully compliant with Health
Canada requirements (e.g., English-only labelling, different packaging from
what was authorized).
 allowing domestic manufacturers of alcohol-based hand sanitizers in
unilingual regions to use unilingual labelling to expedite Canadians’ access to
these products
Importers of these products must have bilingual labelling text and safety information,
where required, available to consumers, employers, and workers. This could be made
available through a sticker applied directly to the products, or posters or signage with
take-away pamphlets at the point of sale.
Given the increase in availability of hand sanitizers, as of June 8, 2020, all Canadian
manufacturers of hand sanitizers who previously used unilingual labels under the
interim measure are required to use bilingual labelling.
Domestic manufacturers of cleaning products and hand and body soaps were not
included in this interim measure. As such, Canadian companies of these products were
always required to manufacture products with labels and, if required, safety data sheets
in both official languages.
Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing any non-compliance
identified.
Health Canada will lift the interim measures for imported products when the regular
supply chain stabilizes.
Stakeholder Engagement
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders to proactively identify, engage
and provide support to manufacturers, packagers, labelers and/or importers of hand
sanitizers and disinfectants in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Health Canada brought together industry partners to facilitate the supply of key
ingredients and to maximize the domestic production of hand sanitizers and
disinfectants, and companies who do not typically operate in health product
manufacturing such as distilleries, breweries and refineries.
International Collaboration
Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships and working with the
United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive and the United States Food and Drug
Administration, and United States Environmental Protection Agency to share
information on best practices and evidence-based approaches for hand sanitizers and
disinfectants.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
SYNOPSIS
Long-standing issues in supportive care, particularly long-term care, have been starkly
revealed by the COVID pandemic. Tragically, in the first 7 months of the pandemic,
long-term care and retirement home residents and staff represented 25% of all COVID-
19 cases. Approximately 80% of all COVID-19 deaths in the country were connected to
long-term care and seniors’ residences.
In Fall 2020, outbreaks in long-term care facilities are on the rise. The proportion of
long-term care homes with outbreaks in Ontario has tripled since early September. In
Quebec, according to Montreal's regional director of public health, seniors 65 and older
accounted for 6% of COVID-19 cases in mid-September, but that proportion had
increased to 15% of all positive tests in October.
As of October 27, Québec and Ontario remain the most affected provinces and
territories, with at least 120 known active outbreaks in LTC/assisted living facilities in
Québec and 87 in Ontario, followed by Alberta (30), British Columbia (19), Manitoba
(19), and New Brunswick (1). Additional outbreaks may be active across provinces and
territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the federal government doing to support provinces and territories in
addressing major issues in long-term care facilities and avoiding the results seen
in the spring in long-term care facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
The federal government is taking a number of steps to

respond to the significant challenges faced by long-term care
facilities across the country in order to help avoid a repeat of
the experience of Spring 2020.
The Government of Canada and provincial/territorial

governments have reached a Safe Restart Agreement,
supported by over $19 billion in federal investments, to help
provinces and territories restart the economy, while making
Canada more resilient to waves of the virus.
This includes $740 million in funding to support our most

vulnerable populations, including incremental infection
prevention and control measures to protect those in long-
term care, and those receiving home care and palliative
care.
The government also continues to work with the Canadian

Red Cross to support provinces and territories facing
outbreaks in long-term care. The Red Cross is already
working closely with local authorities in order to provide
assistance in outbreak situations in long-term care homes.
We will continue taking any action we can to address

challenges in long-term care institutions and support seniors
while working alongside the provinces and territories. (cid:7)
IF
PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT…
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL
GOVERNMENT…
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided guidance
on the care of residents in long-term care, as well as
infection prevention and control guidance to help prevent
COVID-19 infections among residents and workers in long-
term care and assisted-living facilities, as well as in home
care. This guidance was developed with the National
Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control and
endorsed by the Pan-Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
 Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to
support provinces and territories to increase the wages of
low-income essential workers, which could include front line
workers in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
 The Government of Canada adapted the Investing in
Canada Infrastructure program to respond to the impacts of
COVID-19. A new temporary COVID-19 Resilience stream
has been created to provide provinces and territories with
added flexibility to use existing resources to fund quick-start,
short-term projects, including health infrastructure such as
long-term care homes.
 In collaboration with partners, the Health Canada-funded
Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement and
Canadian Patient Safety Institute have launched an initiative
to spread promising practices in preventing and mitigating
the impact of COVID-19 on long-term care and retirement
homes. The goal of the initiative is to better position
participating facilities to prevent and manage any future
outbreaks.
IF PRESSED ON THE SAFE RESTART AGREEMENTS…
The Government of Canada is working to ensure that

Canada has the resources it needs to restart the economy
safely, while protecting the health of Canadians.
In partnership with the provinces and territories, federal

efforts will focus on priorities to address Canadians’
immediate needs within the next six to eight months,
including vulnerable populations.
Canadians receiving long-term care, home care and

palliative care are at an increased risk of more severe cases
of COVID-19. As the economy restarts, it is important to
have continued protections and supports in place for these
vulnerable populations.
Under the Safe Restart Agreement, the Government of

Canada has invested $740 million to help provinces and
territories to support one-time costs for measures to control
and prevent infections. This can include addressing staffing
issues and providing personal protective equipment in long-
term care, home care, and palliative care facilities and
services. Funding can also be used to support other
vulnerable populations.
To support the restart of the economy, the Government of

Canada also continues to work with provinces and territories
to support procurement of personal protective equipment.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE…
 The Government announced its intention to work with the
provinces and territories to set new national standards for
long-term care so that seniors get the best support possible.
 The Government will also look at further targeted measures
for personal support workers, who do an essential service
helping the most vulnerable in our communities. Canada
must better value their work and their contributions to our
society.
 The Government of Canada will work with Parliament on
Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize those who
neglect seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
BACKGROUND
Reports and recommendations
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of
Canada, Ontario Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association
of Ontario, have released reports calling for action from the Government of Canada to
improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC facilities. Recommendations for the
improvement for LTC include:
 increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
 addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources
strategy, improved pay/benefits)
 providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
 developing national standards,
 enhancing data collection
 planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
 Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement
(CFHI) and Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI) released a report in summer 2020
outlining promising practices in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term
care and retirement homes prepare for possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate
their effects:
 Preparation;
 Prevention;
 People in the workforce;
 Pandemic response and surge capacity;
 Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and
 Presence of family.
During Fall 2020, CHFI and CPSI are leading an initiative called LTC+ to spread these
promising practices among participating long-term care and retirement homes.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Several provinces and territories have launched inquiry processes related to long-term
care facilities, including Alberta, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia and Prince Edward
Island. The majority of the ongoing investigations do not have set timelines for reporting
results.
On September 21, 2020, Nova Scotia released its review into Halifax’s Northwood
nursing home, following a deadly COVID-10 outbreak in the spring. The findings and
recommendations include a focus on improving infection prevention and control,
reviewing and updating pandemic plans, addressing staffing challenges, and improving
governance and accountability. NS will invest $26M this fiscal year and $11M over the
next two years to implement the recommendations, including a robust infection
prevention and control program.
On October 23, 2020, Ontario’s Long-Term Care COVID-19 Commission released five
initial recommendations, including: 1) increasing the supply of personal support workers
and LTC staff; 2) providing more full-time positions for those workers, 3) making
permanent investments for a comprehensive human resources strategy; 4) creating a
minimum daily average of four hours of direct care per resident through better staff to
resident ratios; and 5) ensuring that families and caregivers have ongoing, safe and
managed access to LTC residents.
Families of residents in long-term care facilities have publicly reported their frustration
and concern regarding how their loved ones are cared for, as well as the poor
conditions in the residences. Families are calling for increased accountability and
systematic changes in how long-term care facilities are operated. A number are bringing
legal action against facilities over their COVID-19 response.
Government of Canada Actions
While long-term care is primarily a provincial and territorial responsibility, including the
oversight of publicly and privately operated long-term care homes, the federal
government is taking a number of steps to respond to the significant challenges faced
by long-term care facilities across the country in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
These actions are laid out in the Key Messages and If pressed sections.
LTC+: Acting on Pandemic Learning Together” initiative: To help the long-term care
sector share learnings and strengthen pandemic preparedness, The Canadian
Foundation for Healthcare Improvement CFHI partnered with the Canadian Patient
Safety Institute to launch the LTC+: Acting on Pandemic Learning Together initiative. It
is based on the findings captured in their report ―Reimagining Care for Older Adults:
Next Steps in COVID-19 Response in Long-Term Care and Retirement Homes‖, and
focuses on promising practices in six key areas that have shown potential to help
organizations prepare for possible future outbreaks or mitigate their effects. The six
areas are preparation; prevention; people in the workforce; pandemic response and
surge capacity; planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and, presence of
family. Participating teams receive seed funding from CFHI to support needed
improvements, access to training sessions and materials, and coaching on the
implementation of the program’s key components.
To date, there have been over 90 teams that have registered/are in the process of
registering to participate.
In the Speech from the Throne delivered on September 23, 2020, the Government
announced its intention to work with the provinces and territories to set new national
standards for long-term care so that seniors get the best support possible. The
Government will also look at further targeted measures to support personal support
workers.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On September 24, CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly
funded LTC homes offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of
these facilities can be public or private. Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided
into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory.
Overall, 54% of LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (28% for-profit, 23% not-for-
profit and 3% no breakdown) and 46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
Neither Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC) and Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) own
any long-term care facilities,.
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was
transferred to the province in April 2016.
VAC now supports about 4000 Veterans in over 1150 provincially and privately owned
and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an
enhanced level of services and specialized programs for veterans. VAC has
agreements with private and public long term care facilities for the placement of
veterans.
MASK-WEARING
SYNOPSIS
Current evidence supports that wearing a non-medical mask is effective in limiting the
transmission of COVID-19. Scientific information on COVID-19 continues to be
produced rapidly and the Public Health Agency of Canada continues to evaluate new
evidence as it becomes available to inform our intervention and mitigation strategies.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government of Canada’s position on mask-wearing?
KEY MESSAGES
 Evidence indicates there are benefits to wearing non-
medical masks, particularly in enclosed or crowded public
spaces, or when physical distancing cannot be maintained.
 Masks are not a substitute for physical distancing – every
effort should be made to maintain 2 meter physical
distancing
 The Federal, Provincial, and Territorial Special Advisory
Committee on COVID-19 has recommended that people
wear non-medical masks or cloth face coverings as an
additional layer of protection in settings where physical
distancing might not be possible.
 Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, masks have
been recommended for symptomatic people suspected of or
confirmed to have COVID-19, to prevent transmission to
others.
 Additionally, medical masks are recommended for those who
are required to have direct contact with someone suspected
or confirmed to have COVID-19, to protect against exposure.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, and around the world, researchers are actively investigating all aspects of
the novel coronavirus causing COVID-19. Though our knowledge of COVID-19 is
continually growing, it is incomplete, and we will keep learning more as the science
continues to evolve. Canada’s public health advice will continue to be informed based
on science that will ensure the health and safety of the Canadian population in the face
of this unprecedented pandemic.
Guidance related to the use of masks has evolved with emerging evidence that the virus
can be transmitted by infected people before they develop symptoms of COVID-19 (pre-
symptomatic transmission), and by people who never develop symptoms of COVID-19
(asymptomatic transmission).
Current evidence supports the wearing of non-medical masks or cloth face coverings in
specific community situations and settings as part of a comprehensive approach to
suppress SARS-CoV-2 transmission.
Studies suggest that community-wide mask wearing may contribute to the control of
COVID-19 by reducing the amount of saliva and respiratory droplets emitted from
infected individuals, including those who may be pre- or asymptomatic, thus reducing
the risk of a healthy individual coming into contact with virus laden droplets.
COVID-19 MEDICAL DEVICE AUTHORIZATIONS
SYNOPSIS
 As an emergency public health measure, the Interim Order for Medical Devices
has allowed expedited access to COVID-19-related medical devices in Canada
since March 18, 2020. Health Canada has also expedited the process for issuing
Medical Devices Establishment Licences in the fight against COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the devices
needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada understands the need to have a variety of

medical devices, including test kits to meet Canadians’
public health needs.
Health Canada will continue to leverage all regulatory tools

to ensure Canadians have access to safe and effective
health products to fight COVID-19.
To date, we have authorized 443 COVID-19 medical devices

including:
o 43 testing devices; and
o 400 devices including personal protective equipment,
decontamination devices for NIOSH N95 respirators,
ventilators, reagents, and swabs.
A medical device is authorized after Health Canada

completes a scientific assessment, ensuring that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness.
Early diagnosis is critical to fighting the spread of COVID-19.

Health Canada is making it a priority to review all types of
COVID-19 tests including new innovative testing options.
Health Canada also continues to expedite applications for

medical device establishment licences for products such as
masks, gowns, respirators and ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on mobilizing manufacturing capacity
Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders who are

scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to
provide much needed tests or medical supplies.
Across the federal government, we are mobilizing industry

and providing support for research, market approval,
manufacturing and supply.
We are working closely with provinces and territories to

ensure that they have the medical devices that they need.
IF PRESSED … on NIOSH N95 respirators decontamination
Extending the use of personal protective equipment through

decontamination is one way of helping Canada meet supply
needs.
Health Canada is looking at ways to safely and effectively

decontaminate single use NIOSH N95 respirators.
Health Canada has authorized nine devices to

decontaminate NIOSH N95 respirators under the Interim
Order for Medical Devices.
IF PRESSED … on issue with KN95 respirators filtration performance and US FDA
actions
On May 7, US FDA issued a revised guidance indicating that

certain respirators from China may not provide adequate
respiratory protection.
Health Canada will ensure that any companies that have

distributed impacted products in Canada take appropriate
action to stop selling these respirators, notify customers and
relabel existing stock as ―face masks‖ instead of
―respirators‖.
Should additional safety concerns be identified, Health

Canada will take appropriate action and inform Canadians,
as necessary.
IF PRESSED … on investigational testing and special access
As of October 28, 2020, Health Canada has authorized:

o 12 investigational testing authorizations, and four
applications are under review; and
o 42 Special Access Program applications for COVID-19
test kits, ultrasonic systems, endotracheal tubes and
ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on exceptional import and sale of COVID-19 devices
The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and

Foods for a Special Dietary Purposes helps prevent or
alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19.
Under this IO, as of October 28, Health Canada has added

240 medical devices to the List of Medical Devices for
Exceptional Import and Sale.
Importers with medical device establishment licences can

import these medical devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
BACKGROUND
Streamlined regulatory processes
The Interim Order (IO) for medical devices signed on March 18, 2020, allows expedited
access to COVID-19-related medical devices, including diagnostic test kits. Health
Canada can also consider approvals granted by foreign regulatory authorities in
deciding whether to approve an application for the importation or sale of COVID-19-
related medical devices. Use of existing devices, where the approved, intended use was
not originally COVID-19-related, can also be expanded under this Interim Order. In
2020, Health Canada has received over 3,034 IO applications, this amount is fivefold
the volume of non-COVID related applications. Average processing time of IO
applications is significantly shorter under the IO process than under the regular process
for higher risk devices (e.g. Class III (ventilators) 32 days vs 154 and Class IV (testing
devices) 88 days vs 138).
The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in relation to COVID-19 helps prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
directly or indirectly related to COVID-19. Under the Interim Order, the Minister can
permit the exceptional importation and sale of products that do not fully comply with
Canadian requirements, but are manufactured according to comparable standards.
We have:
• addressed shortages by permitting the importation and sale of medical devices
that are not approved in Canada, subject to certain requirements;
• amended the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent Act to support efforts to help
prevent and alleviate shortages.
Health Canada continues to monitor and assess the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
products allowed for import and sale under these special measures.
Guidance for new manufacturers of COVID-19 medical devices
Health Canada has published guidance on several topics, including serology tests,
ventilators, , swabs, PPE including face coverings and respirators. Webinars were held
with provincial and territorial healthcare partners, industry and healthcare professionals
to provide information and guidance on the safety, effectiveness and quality
requirements for these medical devices. Several new Canadian manufacturers have
received IO authorization for these medical devices.
Decontamination of NIOSH N95 respirators
Health Canada has authorized nine decontamination systems. The Department
continues to evaluate new decontamination method applications submitted under the
Interim Order for medical devices. Webinars were held with provincial and territorial
healthcare partners, industry and healthcare professionals to provide information and
guidance on the decontamination and re-use of NIOSH N95 respirators.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING
COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The Government remains committed to increasing access to
mental health and substance use resources and supports for
Canadians whose regular services are not accessible.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address the increased
stress, worry, and anxiety that Canadians are experiencing
due to COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19

continues to create stress and anxiety for many Canadians,
particularly those who do not have ready access to their
regular support networks. That is why the Government has
launched a new online portal that provides access to a
virtual network of psycho-social supports.
Wellness Together Canada is the first national program of

its kind, providing 24/7 access to free evidence-based tools
and resources.
Through Wellness Together Canada, Canadians across

the country can access supports ranging from self-
assessment and peer support, to confidential sessions with
social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
Wellness Together Canada is meant to support existing

provincial and territorial services, not replace them.
All services are available in both official languages, and

phone counseling sessions are supported by instantaneous
interpretation in 200 languages and dialects.
To date, the Government of Canada has invested $46M in

Wellness Together Canada.
Wellness Together Canada adds to the suite of virtual

tools, such as the Canada COVID-19 mobile app, ensuring
that Canadians have access to information, resources, and
other supports during this difficult time.
The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for

families who may be especially vulnerable to stress given
the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
Our Government is quickly mobilizing efforts to develop and

disseminate reliable and timely public health resources to
help families, including parents caring for children with
Autism Spectrum Disorder, navigate through these difficult
times.
Our government recognizes that the mental health of young
people are particularly vulnerable during these difficult times,
and their access to needed supports are often limited. As a
part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together
Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is providing support to
young people via phone, text and live chat.
In addition to this actions, the Government of Canada is

investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and
territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them
expand access, which includes community-based mental
health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCESS
THAT HEALTH CANADA UNDERTOOK TO AWARD THE
CONTRACT FOR WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
 Health Canada with Public Services and Procurement
Canada launched a competitive process to provide funding
through a targeted request for proposals (RFP).
 A targeted approach was necessary due to the scope and
complexity of services required and the urgency to provide
mental health and substance use supports to Canadians
during COVID-19.
IF PRESSED FOR INFORMATION ON THE CONSORTIUM OF
ORGANIZATIONS MANAGING WELLNESS TOGETHER
CANADA
 Wellness Together Canada is the result of the work of a
broad consortium of organizations:
 Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-
sector team of clinician-researchers, leaders and pioneers in
the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
 Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service
offering support to young people via phone, text and live
chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering
virtual mental health solutions. Maintaining good mental
health during this time is a priority for our government. That
is why we are investing an additional $7.5M in Kids Help
Phone – a leader in responding to the needs of young
Canadians.
 Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development
and delivery of national, evidence-based mental health,
trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
 Greenspace Health is a leader in mental healthcare
technology.
 Wellness Together Canada receives support from
additional partners and stakeholders, such as Bell Let's Talk,
Canada Health Infoway, Mental Health Commission of
Canada, Canadian Psychological Association, and Medavie.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL
INFORMATION...
 The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health
information legislation and standards to maintain the security
and confidentiality of personal information.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO
DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
 Wellness Together Canada provides culturally appropriate
services to Canadians that are designed to meet the needs
of varying age groups and specific populations, including
those in isolation or remote areas, sexual minorities, youth
and Indigenous people.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for
virtual services, such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and
provinces/territories are not able to absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their
mental well-being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when
deemed necessary. Canadians need to be re-assured that there are supports available
to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Address Impact Of Covid-19 On
Canadians’ Mental Health
Increasing Mental Health System Capacity
Health Canada has invested $25 million in Wellness Together Canada, a free 24/7
portal for mental health and substance use supports. An amendment had been finalized
that will augment supports, expand the portal’s reach and capabilities in needed areas,
and extend free access to the portal until December 2020.
The funding for the portal is part of the $240.5M investment (described below) to
increase access to virtual services and digital tools to support Canadians’ health and
well-being during COVID-19:
 $25M for Wellness Together Canada
 $15M to support the growing family of digital products that includes the Canada
COVID-19 app
 $200M to expand virtual care services across Canada in partnership with
provinces, territories and other federal partners, such as Canada Health Infoway.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’
access to mental health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces
and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access to
community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth,
integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven models of
community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion
Innovation Fund, the Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to
address multiple risk and protective factors to promote mental health for children, youth,
young adults and populations susceptible to mental health inequities (e.g., low-income
families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, LGBTQ2+, people living
with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC is providing $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to respond to the increased demand
for mental health services for children and youth.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical
services for seniors.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is currently leading a COVID-19
and Mental Health Research Initiative in collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada.
This initiative currently supports 101 research projects, representing a total investment
of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel
composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New
knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform
policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the ―Canadian
Perspectives Survey Series‖. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10
provinces have been responding to the new iteration of the survey. The Canadian
Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is providing $21 million over five years to the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-
Canadian suicide prevention service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health
Association and Crisis Services Canada. This service will provide people across
Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using
the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness,
reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research
and evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available on
Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s
first Federal Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in
Parliament on January 22, 2020 and made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the
development of the framework, in accordance with the Act, the Minister of Health
convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers of National
Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners
and stakeholders, including people with lived-experience.
COVID-19 MODELLING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture. Modelling
is used for planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The Government
uses data and modelling to guide Canada’s response to COVID-19, and to help inform
public health and policy decisions to control Canada’s COVID-19 epidemic. Some
provincial and territorial public health authorities are also conducting their own modelling
to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19 related cases and deaths to aid in
their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and
provincial governments?
KEY MESSAGES
Modelling is one of the tools that supports planning our

response to the COVID-19 epidemic.
Models tell us the number of COVID-19 cases that could

occur nationally depending on how effective we are in
controlling the epidemic.
 Current modelling results, as well as the experience with this
epidemic to date, underscore the need to follow all
recommended public health measures to bring the epidemic
under control.
Data shared with federal officials by the provinces and

territories supports national COVID-19 models. Provinces do
their own modelling to reflect their unique situations.
The methods used by the Public Health Agency of Canada

to develop national models are being published in peer-
reviewed journals, and the models are
being made publicly available via the National Collaborating
Centre for Infectious Diseases.
IF PRESSED…
 Many factors contribute to regional differences in the
epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
These include differences in the timing and patterns of

community spread, changes in laboratory testing practices,
and differing timelines for the introduction of a range of
public health measures.(cid:7) Restrictive closures mostly
controlled the epidemic of COVID-19, but as Canada re-
opens, increasing cases are occurring in many jurisdictions,
and in these places enhancement of public health measures
will be required to control transmission.
 Restrictive closures mostly controlled the epidemic of
COVID-19, but as Canada re-opens, increasing cases are
occurring in many jurisdictions, and in these places
enhancement of public health measures will be required to
control transmission.
BACKGROUND
The COVID-19 epidemic in Canada comprises a number of different epidemics in the
different provinces and territories. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
regularly uses data to
update models for guiding public health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates
in the short-term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing
of public health measures to control the epidemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic
models. Forecasting models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in
Canada to estimate forward on how many new cases might be expected in the coming
week.
Dynamic models use knowledge of how COVID-19 is transmitted from the emerging
literature, and case data. Dynamic models permit a longer-term view based on our
knowledge of how the virus behaves – this helps us to visualize potential epidemic
growth scenarios and impacts of control measures that mitigate growth over time.
Multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) temporally
linked with COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
Reports of multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) associated with
COVID-19 infection have been issued in the U.K., Italy, the U.S. and elsewhere around
the world.
In Canada, there have been media reports of children with MIS-C at Ste. Justine
Hospital in Montreal, at Sick Kids Hospital in Toronto, and in the provinces of Quebec
and Alberta. Several provinces had made MIS-C a reportable condition to be able to
quantify the numbers of cases.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
 Multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children is being
reported in Canada and abroad, and we are working with our
provincial and territorial public health partners and our
network of pediatricians to support detection of cases and
care of children.
 We are advising Canadians to contact their healthcare
provider if their child shows symptoms of COVID-19 infection
or of multi-system inflammatory syndrome, such as fever,
gastrointestinal illness or if their child seems very unwell.
 We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable
information about COVID-19 to prevent further spread and to
protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
BACKGROUND
An acute inflammatory illness has been reported in a small number of children
worldwide, temporally associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In Canada, there have
been media reports of children with the syndrome including at Ste. Justine hospital in
Montreal, in Quebec, at SickKids hospital in Toronto, and in Alberta.
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include persistent fever, inflammation, poor function in one or more
organs, and other clinical and laboratory features not attributable to other infections.
Many affected children were hospitalized and some required intensive care. To date, all
children affected in Canada have done well and recovered.
Linkage to COVID-19
Many children with multi-system inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) did not test positive for
COVID-19. Globally, nasal tests for the COVID-19 virus were often negative, however
blood tests for antibodies were sometimes but not always positive. While the tests
themselves may have had varied accuracy, the fact that patients who tested negative
for COVID-19 virus and sometimes test positive for antibodies suggests that
inflammatory complications were delayed, occurring when the virus was no longer
detectable on nasal swabs.
Clinicians in Canada are aware of this syndrome and must maintain a high index of
suspicion to identify cases. The cause of MIS-C is unknown. It is suspected an immune
response to COVID-19 activates an inflammatory process in genetically susceptible
children. However, other mechanisms are also possible.
The global pediatric medical community is rapidly studying this issue. Canada and
PHAC have representation on the WHO expert group that is now looking at this issue.
So far, children have had far less COVID-19 disease than adults. However, even young
people can have serious outcomes or potentially death, so it is important that everyone
take precautions to prevent infection.
Surveillance
As part of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the PHAC monitors for MIS-C
activity in three different ways:
 most provincial and territorial public health authorities report all cases of MIS-C
to PHAC;
 a network of Pediatric Emergency Department physicians in Children’s hospitals
who report on COVID-19 cases; and
 the Canadian Pediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a collaboration between
PHAC and the Canadian Paediatric Society.
The CPSP COVID-19 surveillance protocol has been modified to capture cases of MIS-
C, even in the absence of a positive test for COVID-19 to increase available data
concerning this emerging condition.
As of October 24th, 2020, 25 MIS-C cases were reported to PHAC by provincial and
territorial public health authorities. Two of these cases tested positive for COVID-19,
and one case was epidemiologically linked to a laboratory confirmed COVID-19 case.
Note that some provinces and territories are in various stages of implementing their
MIS-C reporting systems; therefore, data are preliminary and are subject to change as
PHAC receives updates on cases.
Although the CPSP began implementing their MIS-C surveillance study protocol in May
2020, PHAC has since identified several data quality issues, including issues affecting
case classification. PHAC is working to address these issues with the CPSP so that
reporting can continue.
Federal Role
PHAC continues ongoing monitoring, intelligence gathering and international
engagement to inform Canadian public health action. Canada also continues to
collaborate with federal, provincial, and territorial partners to share information about
COVID-19 in Canada. PHAC has a number of systems in place to monitor community
spread and severe outcomes related to COVID-19 in pediatric populations.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT
AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT AND MEDICAL DEVICE
PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
The global COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented shortage of personal
protective equipment (PPE),medical equipment, and supplies. To support the needs of
Canada’s frontline healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination
with the provinces and territories, launched a significant bulk procurement and
additional pandemic stockpile, engaging a diverse number of new suppliers and
manufacturers both internationally and through the Government of Canada’s domestic
―Call to Action‖ to increase domestic production.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of PPE and other
medical supplies?
 How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare
workers with the PPE required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of
COVID-19?
 What is the Government of Canada doing to prepare for resurgence and/or mass
vaccination campaign scenarios?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is continuously working to

secure critical personal protective equipment, or PPE, as
well as medical equipment and supplies.
We are also working to expedite the delivery of this

equipment to our frontline healthcare workers.
Canada is receiving a steady supply of PPE with shipments

arriving daily, and we rapidly allocate the inventory to the
provinces and territories.
We allocate PPE and medical equipment and supplies

based on an 80/20 formula, with 80% being allocated to
provinces and territories to distribute within their jurisdiction.
This formula has developed in consultation with provinces
and territories.
In response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces

and territories, we are also deploying PPE, medical
equipment and supplies from the National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile, or NESS.
The NESS was designed to provide health emergency

assets when provincial, territorial and local resources are
exhausted.
 With the unprecedented nature of the current pandemic, the
role of the NESS has evolved to include more proactive
procurement of PPE, medical equipment and supplies.
 Lessons learned will inform the future of our approach to the
NESS
IF PRESSED ON STOCKPILING OF PPE AND THE CANADIAN PANDEMIC
INFLUENZA PLAN
The Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan is a federal,

provincial, and territorial guidance document for the
healthcare sector.
Its purpose is to assist jurisdictions with their emergency

planning, including their requirements to stockpile PPE,
medical equipment and supplies.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for

providing medications, supplies and equipment required for
healthcare services.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS WORKING TO
SECURE A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY OF PPE IN CANADA
The Government of Canada has supported Canadian

industry to increase domestic manufacturing capacity,
including re-tooling facilities to produce PPE, medical
equipment and supplies.
As of August 28, Public Services and Procurement Canada

has confirmed contracts for a variety of PPE, medical
equipment and supplies including:
o over 153 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g.,
KN95 respirators; FFP2);
o 396 million surgical masks;
o 60.3 million face shields;
o 1.1 billion pairs of gloves;
o 132 million protective gowns; and,
o 40 thousand ventilators.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has established

additional pandemic supply of PPE to increase resurgence
capacity.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving staggered

delivery of shipments, and allocating them to provinces and
territories.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Health

Canada, provinces and territories to review the supply and
demand of PPE, medical equipment and supplies, based on
worst-case epidemiological scenarios, to determine
maximum needs.
The Public Health Agency of Canada also continuing to work

with provincial and territorial partners in identifying supply
gaps and ongoing bulk procurement needs.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ENSURING THE
QUALITY OF PPE SUPPLIES
Due to intense global competition for PPE, medical

equipment and supplies, countries have needed to engage
with new suppliers and manufacturers.
As a result, PPE, medical equipment and supplies received

by the Public Health Agency of Canada – whether procured
internationally or domestically – are verified to meet the
technical specifications for healthcare settings before they
are distributed to provinces and territories. To date, a large
majority of the products received by the Government of
Canada have met the technical specifications for healthcare
settings for the COVID-19 response.
As a result of the Public Health Agency of Canada’s

stringent review process, approximately 10 million KN95
respirators were assessed as not meeting the specifications
for health care workers.
Supplies that do not meet specifications are then assessed

for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
IF PRESSED ON THE MADE-IN-CANADA VENTILATORS
 Earlier this year, as part of the Plan to Mobilize Industry to
fight COVID-19, contracts were awarded to four Canadian
suppliers for the procurement of ventilators.
 These ventilators receive authorization by Health Canada in
order to be considered for use in a healthcare setting
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to receive
ventilators from both international and domestic suppliers.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with
provincial and territorial governments to develop an
allocation strategy for these ventilators.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will also be retaining
an inventory of ventilators in the National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile to meet the future needs of the
healthcare sector.
IF PRESSED ON UNDERSTANDING THE DEMAND FOR PPE TO SUPPORT THE
REOPENING OF THE ECONOMY
The Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety is

developing guidelines for various sectors based on public
health guidance.
The federal government is working with experts to better

assess the PPE, medical equipment and supply needs of
Canada’s society and economy, based on the most up-to-
date public health advice.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that
provinces and territories (PTs) can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease
outbreaks, natural disasters and other public health events, when their own resources
are exhausted. These supplies include a variety of items such as: medical equipment
and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care
response to COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach
of interdepartmental coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), Health Canada, National Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the
Department of National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC),
and Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED).
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is
that provincial, territorial and local governments are prepared to be able to respond in a
reasonable manner to the most common emergencies in their jurisdictions. This
includes being responsible for the procurement and management of personal protective
equipment and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is
twofold:
 It provides surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request
when their own resources are not sufficient; and
 It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health
emergencies, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
In an August 5, 2020 article by the Canadian Medical Association, it was suggested that
a $300-million emergency stockpile of pandemic supplies be privatized or run on a
commercial basis by a Crown corporation. The article noted that certain doctors blame
PHAC for what they argue was mismanagement of the stockpile, which resulted in
waste and shortages of emergency medical equipment and supplies.
PHAC acknowledges that the pandemic created unprecedented demand for certain
types of supplies. Canada, like most countries, is applying the lessons learned from the
COVID-19 outbreak to our stockpiling strategies and considering all options going
forward to ensure that the most effective stockpile practices are implemented and
maintained.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and
warehouses strategically located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved
from nine warehouse locations across Canada to six. An independent assessment
indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’ role as timely surge
capacity support.
As of 2019, all NESS holdings were consolidated in eight warehouses in six cities. In
Spring 2020, two additional NESS warehouses were leased in addition to 10
warehouses secured through third-party contracts, given the volume of supplies being
donated to and purchased by the NESS as part of the federal government’s COVID-19
response. The warehouse footprint grew from approximately two hundred thousand
square feet in January 2020 to over one million, three hundred thousand square feet.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while
obsolete and expired supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
NESS Funding
In 2010-11, the ongoing annual base funding for the NESS, including salary and
operating costs was $5.6 million. By 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS
was reduced to $3 million. Additional funding has historically been provided to the
NESS through internal reallocation
decisions and incremental funding decisions through which PHAC has received funding
linked to specific purchases, such as a four-year investment in medical
countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began in 2015-16.
More than $5 billion has been invested in the NESS since the onset of the COVID-19
outbreak in Canada.
Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan PPE Guidance
The 2006 CPIP recommended “a 16-week supply (i.e. two pandemic waves) of both
influenza and non-influenza related materials to address sporadic interruptions of supply
chains (e.g. resulting from mail and courier disruptions, border closures, supply
limitations)”.
The 2011 CPIP indicates that methods to estimate PPE requirements are beyond the
scope of the CPIP, and notes that PTs are responsible for ensuring the provision of
medications, supplies, and equipment required for provision of pandemic health care
services.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Bulk Procurement
ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian industries to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce equipment and supplies
including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role,
conducting technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of
Canada technical specifications for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell
website.
Access is further facilitated by Health Canada, by expediting regulatory approvals of
products through the Interim Order for Medical Devices signed by the Minister of Health
on March 18, 2020. As the regulatory authority, Health Canada also continues to
monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all medical devices for use in the diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as
provinces and territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada.
Manufacturers and importers are also required to notify the Minister of Health of medical
device shortages considered critical.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-
19 and working with companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
Health Canada is also modeling PPE, medical equipment and supplies supply and
demand at provincial and territorial, as well as pan-Canadian levels, to understand and
plan for possible pressure points across different sectors of the economy and to inform
future procurement plans of PPE, medical equipment and supplies.
In addition, the government is also exploring opportunities for more environmentally
conscious federal PPE, medical equipment and supply procurement.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers and manufacturers (both domestically and abroad) is
challenging. Once products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality
verification before distribution to provinces and territories (PTs). This process is
supported by testing capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with
suppliers to address issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers
in the future once issues are identified.
Government of China Customs Regulations
In response to international criticism concerning the quality of PPE, the Government of
China has imposed more stringent certification and customs regulations for masks and
other PPE.
As a result, PHAC, as an importer, is now required to sign a joint declaration with the
exporter attesting that the products meet the standards and certification requirements of
the destination country.
For products that are not certified as medical devices in China, the joint declaration will
also stipulate that the item is ―not for medical use‖ even if it meets Canada’s technical
specifications
for healthcare settings. These products are subsequently labelled in Simplified Chinese
as ―not for medical use‖ both on the outer shipping boxes and inside each of the
individual product package.
As noted above, all supplies procured internationally continue to undergo quality
verification by PHAC prior to distribution to PTs. To maintain the integrity of the PPE
packaging, PHAC will be labelling the outer shipping boxes, confirming quality and
stating that it is suitable for use in healthcare settings. PHAC will not be removing labels
inserted inside each of the individual product boxes, as the process of removing these
inserts in Simplified Chinese would cause significant delays in the distribution.
KN95 Respirators
On May 8, the CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators
received by the Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out
of China, 8 million did not meet the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for
healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1 million met specifications, and 1.6 million
were pending testing results. The number not meeting specifications has since
increased to approximately 10 million. PSPC has suspended shipments from this
supplier and is pursuing the appropriate recourse on behalf of PHAC. Where possible,
supplies that do not meet specifications are subsequently assessed for potential use in
non-healthcare settings.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) Allocation and Distribution
As agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health, PHAC is allocating procured PPE using an
80/20 formula: 80% is distributed to PTs on a per capita basis and the remaining 20%
replenishes the inventory of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS),
including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada to support the requirements of
First Nations on reserve. The purpose of the NESS is to provide surge capacity to PTs
when their own resources are not sufficient.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified four Canadian
companies capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight
against
COVID-19. Each has been contracted to provide made-in-Canada ventilators (for a total
of up to 37,500): FTI Professional Grade (FTI), CAE, Canadian Emergency
Ventilators/Starfish and Vexos.
Prior to delivery of ventilator units to PHAC, each of these companies must obtain
authorization under Health Canada’s Interim Order. Additionally, once authorized, all
ventilator units undergo quality verification by PHAC as part of the NESS in-take
process before they are designated ready for deployment to provinces and territories.
OUTBREAK MONITORING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is working with provincial, territorial and international
partners to detect signals and investigate transmission patterns to closely monitor the
emergence and spread of COVID-19 in communities across Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the federal government monitoring new outbreaks of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada understands the importance of
continued outbreak monitoring.
 Multiple data sources are used to monitor the current situation
in Canada, including daily case information by province and
territory, and any developing outbreaks.
 Provinces and territories share data with the Public Health
Agency of Canada, which are analyzed on a daily basis to
monitor the patterns of transmission.
 We continue to use early warning systems to collect and
exchange timely information on illness clusters in Canada and
internationally.
 The Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence platform is
also facilitating the secure, timely exchange of information
between local/regional, provincial/territorial and federal public
health officials related to events of public health concern.
IF PRESSED ON WASTEWATER SURVEILLANCE…
 Testing samples of wastewater can provide an early warning of
the presence of COVID-19 in communities.
 Scientists from the Public Health Agency of Canada and other
government departments are working together to lay the
foundation for community-wide surveillance programs in
various locations across the country.
 A COVID-19 wastewater surveillance initiative is being
developed to collect and test sewage samples in First Nations,
Northern and remote communities, as well as wastewater
leaving hospitals and large cities.
 Evidence collected through this initiative will inform public
health interventions for the ongoing management of COVID-19.
BACKGROUND
Outbreak monitoring and response is part of the core work of the Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC). Existing early warning initiatives are based on many years of
epidemiological expertise and include both technological solutions as well as
communication channels. Initiatives include:
 Public Health Alerts (PHA), administered and distributed by the Canadian
Network for Public Health Intelligence (CNPHI), facilitate secure, timely exchange
of information between local/regional, provincial/territorial (PT) and federal public
health officials regarding events of public health concern.
 FluWatch is an online health surveillance system that helps track the spread of
influenza and influenza-like illness across Canada and is an important part of
Canada's national influenza surveillance program.
 The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) scans publicly available
information in order to give early-warning of illness clusters in Canada and
internationally.
 Outbreak intelligence is gathered via web scraping of PT websites/press releases
and media coverage, and information is assessed daily by epidemiologists.
These initiatives have been leveraged to effectively monitor and respond to this
unprecedented pandemic. This includes collecting granular and near real-time data, and
the use of new and complementary data streams.
Detecting the COVID-19 virus by testing samples of wastewater can provide an early
warning of the presence of this virus in communities. People with COVID-19 shed the
virus through stool, and testing wastewater can alert a community to the presence of the
virus or provide early warning of a resurgence. Some studies suggest that early
detection of the virus causing COVID-19 in wastewater may provide a 5-10-day warning
before there are a large number of cases in the community, allowing for important
intervention opportunities to try to stop further spread.
Scientists from PHAC are working in collaboration with Environment and Climate
Change Canada, Indigenous Services Canada, and Statistics Canada to lay the
foundation for community-wide surveillance programs in various locations across the
country. A COVID-19 wastewater surveillance initiative is being developed to collect and
test sewage samples in First Nations, Northern and remote communities as well as
wastewater leaving hospitals and large cities. Participation in the initiative begins with
the consent of municipalities who submit wastewater for testing and have ownership
over the results. The National Microbiology Lab will conduct the analysis of the samples,
including detection of the virus. Results will be shared with the local health authorities in
the respective jurisdictions so appropriate public health measures can be taken if
necessary. Other groups and organizations are also conducting research on wastewater
surveillance. For example, the University of Guelph is developing a COVID-19 early
warning system that will sample and test wastewater from its student residences.
Engagement with PTs
PHAC works closely with provinces and territories (PTs) to monitor and respond to
outbreaks. PTs report case level data to PHAC, which are analyzed on a daily basis in
order to monitor epidemiological trends for early detection of new patterns of
transmission.
PHAC also supports PTs with the management of outbreaks of national concern. PHAC
is called upon by PTs to investigate and to provide additional technical expertise or
specialized skills as required. This includes deployment of specialized teams (including
field epidemiologists and public health officers) to support the investigation of outbreaks.
PHAC provides ongoing national coordination and federal leadership for
multijurisdictional COVID-19 outbreaks, or complex single jurisdiction COVID-19
outbreaks. Since early May 2020, PHAC has been involved in the investigation of a
number multijurisdictional or complex outbreaks, including:
 industrial worksite outbreaks in northern Alberta;
 a gathering-associated outbreak in northern Saskatchewan and Alberta;
 Ontario agricultural sector outbreaks (including by providing support to mobilized
field epidemiologists);
 a condominium tower outbreak in Alberta; and
 outbreaks amongst Hutterite colonies in Saskatchewan, Alberta and Manitoba.
PHAC is promoting rigorous epidemiologic investigations of COVID-19 outbreaks in
Canada in order to respond more effectively to these outbreaks and to increase our
understanding of COVID-19 transmission dynamics and risks, and is developing
guidance for epidemiologic investigation of COVID-19 outbreaks.
From a national perspective, there is considerable interest in monitoring case clusters
and outbreaks related to COVID-19, especially heading into fall/winter respiratory illness
season. Presently, PHAC is working closely with PTs to produce guidance on outbreak
investigations in schools to support a systematic approach to outbreak response in this
setting.
Defining an “Outbreak”
The purpose of the ―outbreak‖ definition is to trigger management activities (e.g., an
investigation of the source, and implementation of measures to control spread). The
definition of an outbreak of an infectious disease is contextual – it is typically defined as
the occurrence of disease cases in excess of what is usually expected. As COVID-19 is
a novel disease, the threshold required to initiate public health management activities is
low; in other words, every case detected remains of public health interest and triggers
active prevention and control activities.
Outbreak definitions for COVID-19 may differ across PTs depending on settings. PTs
have varying definitions of outbreaks for different settings, typically with a minimum of 1-
2 cases occurring in a setting within a certain period of time. In closed populations or
settings with vulnerable individuals (e.g., correctional facilities, long-term care facilities,
shelters), there tends to be a lower threshold, where only one confirmed case is needed
in these settings in order declare an outbreak.
Use of Personal Protective Equipment
SYNOPSIS
Public health advice on the use of personal protective equipment (PPE) has evolved
with the scientific evidence on transmission. The Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) develops and updates guidance on infection prevention and control for acute
health care settings and long-term care facilities. PHAC has also provided advice to
workplaces and businesses on how to reduce the risk of COVID-19 infections in the
workplace, which may include the use of PPE.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why isn’t the Government recommending PPE, including N-95 masks, for all front-line
workers?
KEY MESSAGES
 The appropriate use of personal protective equipment or
PPE is essential to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
 Expert guidance is supporting the appropriate use of PPE in
health care settings.
 This guidance will evolve as science provides more
information on COVID-19 transmission.
 The Government of Canada emphasizes that, for all
Canadians, physical distancing, hand hygiene and wearing a
non-medical mask are effective ways to prevent
transmission of the COVID-19 virus.
 We encourage Canadians and businesses to:
o Follow their local public health authority’s advice on the
use of PPE and non-medical masks; and
o Follow the advice of provincial and territorial
environmental authorities and municipalities on their
proper disposal.
IF PRESSED ON USE OF NON-MEDICAL MASKS FOR HEALTHCARE WORKERS:
 Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical,
medical procedure masks and N95 respirators.
BACKGROUND
Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has been adjusted as the
evidence base and our understanding of COVID-19 evolves.
Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical, medical procedure masks
and N95 respirators. It is extremely important that we have enough supply of medical
masks for healthcare workers where they are urgently needed for medical procedures
and to care for individuals who have COVID-19.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in healthcare settings
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) interim guidance on infection prevention
and control in acute healthcare settings was updated to ensure we provide
comprehensive recommendations based on the best available evidence. The guidance
emphasizes the need for environmental and administrative controls in facilities to
protect healthcare workers and patients, as well as the fundamental importance of
training in the use of PPE.
In new technical guidance, PHAC recommends that all healthcare workers in acute
health care settings wear medical masks and eye protection/face shields for the full
duration of a shift. Wearing a medical mask throughout the duration of a shift is an
important measure to help reduce the risk of transmission from a healthcare worker to a
patient. This recommendation applies to healthcare workers who are in direct contact
with patients, as well as environmental services staff working in patient care areas. In
addition, any healthcare workers who have COVID-19-related symptoms should
immediately go home and only return to work following the advice of their local public
health units.
Healthcare workers should refer to their province or territory’s guidance, as well as
facility policies on the use of masks, eye protection, and other PPE, including any PPE
conservation strategies that are in place.
PPE may be a component of infection prevention efforts in non-healthcare workplaces.
However, the choice and use of PPE is based on occupational health and safety advice
specific to the job and workplace. PHAC provides information to help employers and
employees determine what infection prevention and control measures, which might
include PPE, are necessary in their workplaces.
Environmental impacts from increased PPE usage
Increased PPE use is creating more PPE waste, which is not currently recyclable or
biodegradable. While single-use PPE is the current standard for medical settings,
options are becoming increasingly available for reusable masks for non-medical
purposes and the general public. These options are more cost-effective and
environmentally friendly than single-use, disposable masks, particularly as more
jurisdictions make mask-wearing mandatory in certain contexts.
Since the beginning of the pandemic, a number of federal initiatives are investing in
PPE technology advancements. These advancements, such as innovative solutions to
disposable masks and gowns, will help reduce the amount of PPE waste from both
medical and non-medical settings. The government also continues to work with
provinces and territories through the Canadian Council of the Ministers of the
Environment (CCME) to explore how PPE waste can be diverted away from landfills.
Provinces, territories and local governments are also providing vital leadership in
developing programs to reduce litter, prevent plastic pollution and recover materials
through recycling services and material depots.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – COVID TESTING IN PRIVATE CLINICS
SYNOPSIS
 On October 5, 2020, media reported that private medical clinics are offering
COVID-19 tests to Canadians willing to pay a fee to circumvent lengthy lineups at
government sites and long waits for results from laboratories.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Minister doing to ensure these clinics do not open the door to two-tier
health care that prioritizes treatment based on a person’s ability to pay over
need?
KEY MESSAGES
 Testing is a key pillar of Canada’s response to the COVID-
19 pandemic, enabling the detection, prevention and public
health management of the virus.
 Testing should be available for free to all Canadians who
meet the guidelines and criteria on testing developed by our
public health officials.
IF PRESSED on private testing …
 Provided private pay testing does not adversely impact
public health testing capacity, private payment for COVID-19
testing may be appropriate for individuals who do not meet
public health guidelines and criteria on testing.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER COVID TESTING FALLS UNDER THE CHA…
 Canadians who meet the testing requirements determined
by public health officials should have free access to COVID-
19 testing and not be charged for the service.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER CANADIANS WILL HAVE TO PAY FOR ACCESS TO
COVID-19 VACCINES…
 Canada's universal health care system, based on need
rather than ability to pay, is a source of national pride.
 Our Government will always take action to keep our health
care system that way.
 All governments are committed to reducing the health impact
of COVID-19, and a vaccine is a critical element in this effort.
BACKGROUND
On October 5, 2020, media reported that private medical clinics are offering COVID-19
tests to Canadians willing to pay a fee to circumvent lengthy lineups at government sites
and long waits for results from laboratories. According to the article, the for-profit clinics
serve individual patients as well as companies that require employees to test negative
for the coronavirus before returning to work. Individuals pay anywhere from $50 to $250
for a test.
Critics say the clinics open the door to two-tier health care that prioritizes treatment
based on a person’s ability to pay over need, ―upending the very foundation of Canada’s
publicly funded system‖.
Ontario Health, the agency providing COVID-19 swabs has been directed by the
Ontario government not to provide swabs to clinics that charge patients for the test and
looking to ensure the practice is discontinued. A spokesperson for Ontario Minister of
Health, Christine Elliot stated ―It has been brought to our attention that some providers
are asking patients to pay in order to receive a COVID-19 test. This is not permitted.‖
As a part of the public health response, COVID-19 screening and testing have proven to
be a key public health tool to prevent the spread of the virus. Coordination between
federal, provincial and territorial governments has been integral to an effective and
efficient response to the pandemic, while recognizing that responsibility for testing
regimes is within provincial and territorial jurisdiction. To ensure Canadians continue to
have confidence in COVID-19 testing requirements:
 COVID-19 testing should be free and accessible for all Canadians who meet the
public health testing and screening criteria as determined by jurisdictions.
 Private payment for other COVID-19 testing may be appropriate provided private
pay testing does not adversely impact public health testing capacity.
RACE/ETHNICITY DATA COLLECTION
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is working to collect additional data on
race/ethnicity and Indigenous identity to improve our understanding of the overall impact
of COVID-19 in Canada and, in particular, health inequities associated with COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How does the federal government work with provinces and territories on the collection
of race/ethnicity-based data on deaths and active cases?
KEY MESSAGES
 As the pandemic has unfolded in Canada, it has become clear
that we need more information on certain groups at higher risk
for exposure to, or severe outcomes of, COVID-19.
 Given this, we are working hard with our partners to gather
more detailed and complete data – including data on
race/ethnicity and Indigenous identity.
 Federal, provincial and territorial public health partners have
agreed to a new national data set for COVID-19, which
includes new variables to help understand the impact for
racialized groups in Canada.
 In addition to improving our national case data set, we are
supplementing this information through research and other
data collection activities. Together, these efforts will improve
Canada’s understanding of, and therefore ability to prevent
and respond to, COVID-19 among racialized populations in
Canada.
 In doing this work, we are ensuring privacy laws are being
respected and that a health equity lens is applied to these
efforts.
BACKGROUND
The health consequences of the pandemic differ across sub-populations. Those
Canadians who before the pandemic were at greater risk of poor health are likely to be
at greater risk of suffering its consequences. There is also emerging evidence that
COVID-19 may be widening health inequalities. Given this, the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) and partners are undertaking activities to generate evidence on the
impact of COVID-19 among racialized and Indigenous communities.
PHAC has completed a review of published literature on race/ethnicity and COVID-19.
While there is limited evidence available overall and in Canada, studies to date show
that those of Black, Asian or Hispanic backgrounds appear to have a higher chance of
acquiring COVID-19 infection than those who identify as White. Evidence suggests that
underlying health inequalities and socio-economic factors place certain racialized
populations at greater risk of COVID-19.
Federal/provincial/territorial (FPT) governments have approved the inclusion of
race/ethnicity and enhanced information on Indigeneity within the national data set for
COVID-19, to be collected and reported to PHAC. The new national data set will be
operationalized in October 2020, and some PTs have already begun collecting this
information. PHAC, in collaboration with Indigenous Services Canada and Regional
Indigenous Organizations, is working with the PTs to ensure complete and standardized
reporting on all variables, including race and Indigeneity.
To complement the national data set, efforts are underway to deepen our understanding
of trends within those populations identified at greater risk of impacts related to COVID-
19. Specifically, PHAC is working with PTs and other partners to:
 Undertake specialized surveys and enhanced surveillance activities among key
populations of interest, including studies to explore the impact of COVID-19 and the
consequences of COVID-19-related public health measures on racialized
communities; and
 Expand the knowledge base on racialized communities and COVID-19, including
through leveraging Statistics Canada’s race-based data from new data collection
initiatives, and coordinating efforts with the Canadian Institutes for Health Research
(CIHR) to facilitate research activities related to the burden and impact of COVID-
19 among racialized communities.
It is important that this work be done in a way that avoids stigmatization of population
sub-groups, respects privacy laws, and ensures individual autonomy (in choosing
whether or not to provide this information to the health care system and public health).
LIVING WITH COVID-19 – NEW NORMAL
SYNOPSIS
As we prepare to enter the winter months, the Government is focussed on three
objectives related to COVID-19 and health: sustained epidemic prevention and control
overall and management of ongoing outbreaks where they arise; enhanced readiness to
respond to resurgence; and vaccines and treatments to enable a longer-term recovery.
10 areas of activity ranging from testing and tracing to PPE to communications form part
of the strategy. The approach is risk-based: public health measures will continue to be
critical and actions will be balanced with economic and social impacts.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government’s longer-term plan to help Canadians live with COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
Canadians have shown strong solidarity as we’ve worked to

address the challenges posed by COVID-19. We must
maintain this solidarity in the months ahead as we live with
COVID-19.
The Government is focused on three main objectives: first

and foremost, sustained efforts to prevent and control the
spread of the virus and ensuring that we are managing
outbreaks where they occur; secondly, continuing to prepare
our health systems to respond to significant resurgence; and
finally, working on longer-term solutions like vaccines and
therapeutics.
We are working in a comprehensive way to advance work on

all necessary aspects of a COVID-19 response, from testing
and tracing to personal protective equipment and vaccine
development.
Our approach is and will continue to be informed by the most

recent evidence and rigorous science.
We are also working to ensure that decisions to maintain,

strengthen, or ease public health measures are balanced
against real economic and social impacts felt by Canadians.
This includes the very real consequences of COVID-19 for
the mental and physical health of Canadians.
We will continue to provide guidance to help Canadians in all

walks of life, from business owners to students, assess and
mitigate their personal risk.
BACKGROUND
The Government’s Risk Management Strategy for Living with COVID-19 is based on
three key goals:
 Sustained epidemic prevention and control and rapidly addressing outbreaks and
resurgences;
 Continuing to enhance readiness to respond to resurgence; and
 Vaccines and treatments to enable a longer-term recovery
To support these goals, work is advancing across 10 comprehensive and interrelated
areas:
1) Surveillance and Data, e.g., symptom tracking, environmental surveillance;
2) Borders, e.g., risk-based approach, with initial focus on high value, low risk
travellers;
3) Public Health Measures, e.g., online guidance for schools and businesses;
4) Health System Capacity, e.g., Safe Restart Agreement funding to support
incremental costs, staffing, infection prevention and control, and surge capacity
e.g., mobile hospitals;
5) Vulnerable Populations, e.g., addressing challenges in long-term care homes, for
temporary foreign workers, and unintended effects;
6) Testing and Contact Tracing, e.g., national approach, made-in-Canada supply
chain, exposure notification app;
7) Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), e.g., targeted procurement, domestic
manufacturing, demand and supply modelling;
8) Vaccines and Other Medical Countermeasures, e.g., work to secure access to
vaccines;
9) Communications, e.g., targeted risk communications, vaccine readiness
10) Research, e.g., ensuring the Canadian research community is mobilized to
respond.
As part of this plan, the Government has developed four areas of surge capacity that
can be drawn on when local resources are insufficient:
 The Federal COVID-19 Rapid Response Team to provide technical expertise to
support local health authorities in assessing and responding to outbreaks;
 The COVID Testing Assistance Response Team to respond to surges or targeted
testing needs;
 Federal laboratory support for testing; and,
 Surge support for outbreak and crisis management
Key aspects of the plan also include:
 Strong focus on best available evidence, science, and data;
 Scenario planning;
 Whole of Government approach;
 Collaborative approach with provinces and territories;
 Leveraging business, academia, and other stakeholders
RECALL OF RESPIRATORS
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the increased importation, sale and use of
varying kinds of medical devices in order to protect healthcare workers and treat
patients. While most of these medical devices have functioned properly, a subset of
Class I medical devices, including personal protective equipment (PPE) such as
respirators, have been found to be of substandard quality, misrepresented or
counterfeit. Respirators that do not meet required standards may not provide
consistent and adequate protection.
 Health Canada will continue to actively monitor information related to the safety and
effectiveness of respirators and will take prompt and appropriate action if needed to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure the quality of respirators used by
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 The quality, effectiveness and safety of health products is a top priority for the
Government.
 The Government of Canada verifies the effectiveness of all respirators procured
by the Government to confirm that they meet performance standards before we
distribute to the provinces and territories for frontline healthcare workers.
 We continue to assess and take action when respirators do not meet safety and
effectiveness standards by asking companies to recall and re-label respirators as
face masks for use in settings where 95% filtration is not required.
 Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are removed from the market
and are not permitted to be sold in Canada.
 Health Canada maintains a list of manufacturers and respirators that are subject
to recall/re-labelling on its website.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PROTECT CANADIANS…
 Health Canada assesses all sources of information related to respirators that
may not meet safety and effectiveness standards, including testing conducted by
the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), the Public
Health Agency of Canada and other laboratories.
 Health Canada also conducts inspections of licensed importers/distributors and
assessments of referred shipments at the border to prevent the sale of non-
compliant respirators in Canada.
 The Department directs all companies who may have imported or distributed
respirators that may not meet safety and effectiveness standards to stop sale
and re-label any impacted products as face masks for use in settings where 95%
filtration is not required.
 Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are removed from the market
and are not permitted to be sold in Canada.
 Health Canada continues to provide guidance to industry on the detection of
substandard, misrepresented and counterfeit products.
IF PRESSED ON RECALLS…
 Companies have been directed to recall respirators that do not meet
performance standards. Recalled products must be re-labelled as face masks to
be used in settings where a 95% filtration is not required.
 Health Canada maintains a list of manufacturers and respirators that are subject
to recall/re-labelling on its website and will continue to update it as required.
IF PRESSED ON RESPIRATORS PURCHASED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF
CANADA
 PPE and medical supplies received by the Government of Canada, whether
donated or procured internationally or domestically, are verified by the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to ensure they meet Government of Canada
technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response.
 If PHAC cannot account for the quality of devices, they will not be allocated to the
provinces and territories for frontline healthcare response.
 Provincial and territorial health authorities and health care institutions have been
advised to review their inventories of respirators to confirm that they meet the
Government of Canada technical specifications for healthcare settings for
COVID-19 response on a regular basis.
BACKGROUND
Regulation of Medical Devices in Canada
All medical device products, including N95 and KN95 respirators and other Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE), are subject to the safety and effectiveness requirements of
the Medical Devices Regulations. Manufacturers of medical devices are responsible for
ensuring that they are safe and effective.
Most PPE (e.g., respirators, gowns, masks) are classified as Class I devices in Canada.
Class I devices are considered the lowest risk Class of devices and do not require pre-
market authorization by Health Canada, which means they are not assessed by the
Department for safety and efficacy prior to import or sale in Canada.
A Medical Device Establishment Licence (MDEL) is required to import and distribute
Class I devices. MDELs are issued based on an attestation to requirements related to
documented procedures for complaint handling, distribution records, recalls and
problem reporting.
Improving Access to Medical Devices During COVID-19
Health Canada implemented three different measures to expedite the availability of
medical devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts:
1. Interim Order Respecting the Importation and Sale of Medical Devices for Use
in Relation to COVID-19 - provides an expedited authorization pathway for medical
devices for sale in Canada. Health Canada reviews the scientific evidence provided by
the manufacturers through this pathway to support the safety and effectiveness of
devices before issuing authorizations for these devices.
2. Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special
Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 - builds on an existing practice to facilitate
access to alternative supplies of health products to help prevent and alleviate shortages
resulting directly or indirectly from COVID-19. Under this Interim Order, companies must
report shortages of medical devices related to COVID-19 to Health Canada to help the
health care system prepare for supply disruptions.
3. Expedited review and approval of MDEL applications for companies applying to
supply medical devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts. Between April 22 and
May 25, the Department implemented a temporary measure to expedite access to PPE
and avoid delays at the border while maintaining quality and safety requirements.
Through this temporary measure, MDEL applicants were assigned a Submission
Number while the MDEL applications continued to be processed. As of July 27, all
Submission Numbers have been transitioned to MDELs or withdrawn and no further
Submission Numbers are being issued. Health Canada continues to expedite the review
of MDEL applications related to COVID-19 products, and to date has authorized 3063
MDELs to support the response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Recalls
Health Canada is assessing all available information on a daily basis to identify
companies that may be selling or importing respirators that do not meet the labelled
performance claims. Health Canada will continue to take action to ensure that products
that do not meet the applicable standards are re-labelled as face masks for use in
settings where 95% filtration is not required. Health Canada will also continue to update
the online list of devices that must be re-labeled as face masks in order to be distributed
in Canada.
This action does not implicate KN95 respirators purchased by the Government of
Canada and tested by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). Before allocating
any personal protective equipment to the provinces or territories for frontline healthcare
workers, PHAC conducts a quality verification. For KN95 respirators, this includes a
visual inspection to check for defects in design and construction, and testing to confirm
that they meet filtering specifications.
SAFE RESTART
SYNOPSIS
Recognizing that provinces and territories (PTs) have had to respond to COVID-19 in
unique ways, on July 16, 2020, First Ministers agreed to a Federal/Provincial/Territorial
(FPT) Safe Restart Agreement, supported by over $19 billion in federal investments, to
help PTs restart their economies over the next six to eight months while making Canada
more resilient to possible future waves of the virus.
On September 16, 2020, the Prime Minister announced that the premiers have now
submitted the response letters and the federal funding will be transferred to the
provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the FPT Safe Restart Agreement?
KEY MESSAGES
On July 16, First Ministers agreed to a Federal/ Provincial/

Territorial Safe Restart Agreement – supported by over $19
billion in federal investments.
As of September 16, the premiers have now all submitted

their response letters and the federal funding will be
transferred to the provinces and territories.
This agreement helps provinces and territories restart their

economies, while protecting the health of Canadians.
We recognize that provinces and territories have had to

respond to COVID-19 in unique ways, and have already
made major investments, and will continue to do so.
Funding under the Safe Restart Agreement will help

provinces and territories in critical areas, such as healthcare,
childcare, sick leave and municipal services.
This includes investments to support our collective efforts on

testing, contact tracing and data management, health
system capacity, mental health and substance use, personal
protective equipment, and protecting seniors and other
vulnerable people.
First Ministers agree that continued collaboration is key to

ongoing success, and will build on the Team Canada
approach that has taken place throughout this pandemic.
BACKGROUND
On July 16, 2020, First Ministers agreed to an FPT Safe Restart Agreement, supported
by over $19 billion in federal investments, to help PTs restart the economy over the next
six to eight months while making Canada more resilient to possible future waves of the
virus.
Provinces and territories were asked to outline in a letter how these funds would best be
allocated within their jurisdictions, based on their priorities. On September 16, the Prime
Minister announced that the premiers have now submitted the letters and the federal
funding will be transferred to the provinces and territories.
Funding includes support for expanding testing and contact tracing capabilities so that
provincial and territorial health authorities are able to mitigate outbreaks of COVID-19.
This funding will also support capacity in health care services; procurement of personal
protective equipment, including for essential workers; and support for Canadians facing
mental health challenges, including problematic substance use. First Ministers also
agreed to jointly provide support to municipalities to maintain the delivery of critical
services.
In addition, there is a dedicated stream of funding for public transit. Funding will also
support measures to protect vulnerable populations, including seniors in long-term care
facilities, and child care services, so parents can return to work. Under the agreement,
the Government of Canada will establish a temporary income support program to
provide workers with up to ten days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19. PTs will
establish job protected sick leave legislation or regulation in their respective
jurisdictions.
Funds include:
 $700 million to support health care system capacity to respond to a potential
future wave of COVID-19;
 $500 million to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and protection
of people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance use and
homelessness; and
 $4.28 Billion to support PTs with the costs of increasing their capacity to conduct
testing, perform contact tracing and share public health data that will help fight
the pandemic.
COVID-19 SAFE VOLUNTARY ISOLATION SITE PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a Safe Voluntary Isolation Site Program
($100M over 2 years), as part of Canada’s growing list of rapid response tools against
the spread of COVID-19. The program aims to decrease community transmission of
COVID-19 by addressing gaps identified for individuals who live in housing that may be
crowded or have insufficient space for proper distancing from household contacts to
self-isolate. The voluntary isolation sites will help reduce the risks of spread of the virus
among household contacts, especially in Canada’s most densely populated urban
centres.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How will funding voluntary isolation facilities help with our fight against COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action to support
individuals who lack the space and means to undertake an
effective isolation.
 The availability of such facilities is expected to help lower the
rate of COVID-19 community spread via reduced
transmission among those living in crowded housing.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing funding for
voluntary isolation sites in Canada’s urban centres. We are
working to identify cities and municipal regions that would
benefit from this program.
IF PRESSED on voluntary isolation sites vs. Designated Quarantine Sites…
 Voluntary isolation sites are different from Designated
Quarantine Sites.
 Designated Quarantine Sites are for individuals who are
ordered to stay under the Quarantine Act should they not
have an appropriate isolation plan upon entry into Canada.
These sites are operated under federal jurisdiction.
 Voluntary isolation sites are meant for individuals who
cannot safely isolate at their usual place of residence due to
crowded housing or resource constraints. These sites are
operated by local public health officials.
IF PRESSED on the location of selected sites…
 The program exists to fill a gap for urban centres and
municipalities that are at risk of high rates of transmission
resulting from crowded housing.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working to identify
possible cases where epidemiological trends, demographics
and/or other relevant considerations suggest a voluntary
isolation site might be warranted.
IF PRESSED on why the City of Toronto was chosen as the pilot for this
program…
 The City of Toronto sent a request to the Public Health
Agency of Canada for funding of their proposed safe
voluntary isolation site. The decision to fund the Toronto site
was based on evidence-based rationale for how the
proposed project would contribute to reducing community
transmission of COVID-19.
 The City of Toronto is one of Canada’s most densely
populated urban centres. This can make it difficult for some
individuals to safely self-isolate at home, which contributes
to a higher risk of contracting COVID-19. (cid:7) We are pleased
to support Toronto Public Health who recognized that this
issue was contributing to levels of community transmission,
and is trying to address it, in part by providing a centralized
location where eligible individuals can safely self-isolate for
the required period.
 We are pleased to support Toronto Public Health who
recognized that this issue was contributing to levels of
community transmission, and is trying to address it, in part
by providing a centralized location where eligible individuals
can safely self-isolate for the required period.
BACKGROUND
When presenting with symptoms of COVID-19, self-isolation is one of the most effective
ways of reducing the risk of spreading the virus. However, for some Canadians,
crowded housing conditions and restrictive costs can make it unsafe or impossible to
effectively self-isolate at home.
Within the context of the broader COVID-19 pandemic response, evidence has
emerged that individuals facing socio- and economic challenges are at higher risk of
contracting COVID-19. Evidence suggests that densely populated neighbourhoods have
been disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including its most severe outcomes.
Individuals from these neighbourhoods may have more difficulty properly isolating
themselves due to factors such as overcrowding and/or resource constraints. The
establishment of voluntary self-isolation sites aims to assist in addressing this issue.
Role of Eligible Recipients
Sites selected under the Program will provide a centralized location where identified
individuals can safely self-isolate for the required period. Regular monitoring and
reporting will be conducted in coordination with local public health officials. The sharing
of best practices will be encouraged among the selected sites to optimize effective site
operation and administration of services under the objectives of the Program.
Costs Covered by Federal Funding
Federal funding will include: transportation to and from the site, lodging, meals and
incidentals such as bedding and other necessities for residents, as well as on-site
security and cleaning personnel for the facility will be provided. It is also understood that
related activities may be required, such as those performed by public health
professionals in the context of infection prevention and control.
Eligibility to access the self-isolation site
Through its case and contact management process, local public health officials will
identify individuals to be offered transfer to the isolation site on a voluntary basis.
For example, if a person is COVID-19 positive and lives in a home where there is no
separate room in which they can isolate, they may be considered as a candidate for the
voluntary self-isolation site. Individuals who are household contacts will also be
considered if, for example, the individual cannot isolate safely from positive case(s).
Those awaiting test results may also be considered.
The total number of individuals housed per site will depend on the need that arises
throughout the next 12 months.
COVID-19 FEDERAL RAPID SURGE CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge
Capacity initiative to assist provinces and territories in managing the impacts of COVID-
19 outbreaks. It is available for consideration when needs exceed municipal, provincial,
and territorial capabilities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government of Canada assisting jurisdictions with surge capacity needs?
KEY MESSAGES
As part of our ongoing support to the provinces and

territories, we have now established a COVID-19 Federal
Rapid Surge Capacity initiative.
This represents further investment by the Government of

Canada, in addition to the Safe Restart Agreements, which
provided provinces and territories with over $19 billion in
federal investments to support:
o Health care system capacity;
o Testing and contact tracing; and
o Other social services to support Canadians.
This Rapid Surge Capacity initiative is intended to support

the needs of provinces and territories in responding to
COVID-19 outbreaks and mitigating transmission in hot
zones where they have exceeded their own capacity.
It can strengthen existing services in areas where needs are

most pressing, and most critical – including outbreak
management, testing, and contact tracing.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT GIVEN TO PROVINCES/TERRITORIES …
 Provinces and territories will be responsible for prioritizing
requests from their local jurisdictions.
 The Government of Canada will prioritize requests received
based on the needs and capacity available at the time of the
request.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will coordinate the
requests for surge capacity support and assistance.
 We are currently providing support to Ontario, Quebec,
Manitoba and Alberta, and we are in discussions with all
provinces and territories on their needs that could be
addressed through this initiative.
 Our current support includes:
o Approximately 150 Canadian Red Cross personnel
deployed to outbreaks, from a roster of about 500
available personnel. This roster will increase over the
coming months.
o The establishment of two federal labs to supplement
testing capacity, with an additional four labs in
operation by December;
o Processing about 2000 calls a day to assist with contact
tracing, with the ability to assist many other provinces
and territories; and
o The commitment of $100 million for safe voluntary
isolation sites across the country.
 In addition, the federal government has over 100 subject
matter experts ready for rapid deployment to assist
provinces and territories with assessing local outbreaks, and
has committed $35 million for the Canadian Red Cross to
supplement testing.
 The Government of Canada is also continuously working to
secure critical personal protective equipment, as well as
medical equipment and supplies, and expedite the delivery
of this equipment to our frontline healthcare workers.
BACKGROUND
Through the COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge Capacity initiative, rapid response surge
capacity is being offered for potential deployments across Canada, including rural and
remote locations as well as Indigenous communities, and is available until March 31,
2021.
Under this initiative, the Government of Canada has developed seven fields to respond:
 Public Health Rapid Response Team;
 Outbreak Management;
 COVID-19 Patient Testing;
 Laboratory Services;
 Contact Tracing; and
 Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites.
The development of a seventh field, Provision of Testing Equipment is underway and
will be captured under regular reporting in the coming weeks.
The initiative leverages federal resources as well as the existing Public Safety Canada
contribution arrangement with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC).
Resource Management (as of November 4):
Services Total Available Capacity Committed Capacity
1. Public Health Rapid 108 individuals Nil
Response Team
2. Outbreak Rapid Assessment Team: ON: 2 teams deployed
Management (CRC) 7 teams
Full Support team: 492 QC: 106 personnel at long term care
individuals sites
ON: 25 personnel at a long term care
site
3. COVID-19 Patient $35M from Sep 2020-Mar Nil
Testing (CRC) 2021 (~80 staff, 2 teams) Discussions pending with ON (Ottawa
CHEO and Montfort hospitals)
4. Laboratory Services 2,000 tests per day ON: 200 tests per day
MB: 1,000 tests per day
5. Contact Tracing 14,580 calls per day ON: 1,175 calls per day
QC: 25 calls per day
MB: 47 calls per day
AB: 254 calls per day
6. Safe Voluntary $100M over 2 years ON (Toronto): $13.9M over 12 months
Isolation Sites (Aug 2020-Aug 2021)
Proposals from Peel and Ottawa
awaiting approval
The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal
protective equipment (PPE), as well as medical equipment and supplies. Canada is
receiving a steady supply of PPE with shipments arriving daily, and the inventory is
rapidly allocated to the provinces and territories. More information on the Government’s
efforts in this area can be found in the ―National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
Management and Personal Protective Equipment and Medical Device Procurement‖ QP
note.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
 On March 18, 2020, the Minister of Health approved an Interim Order (IO) to
expedite the review of medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the rapid testing
devices needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada understands the need to have a variety of

test kits available for use to meet different public health
needs
The Department has prioritized the review of all types of

COVID-19 tests, including rapid and new innovative testing
options and technologies.
Health Canada is working as quickly as possible to approve

rapid, point-of-care diagnostic and monitoring tests based on
nucleic acid and antigen technologies to meet Canadian
testing needs without compromising on standards for safety,
effectiveness and quality.
Health Canada has authorized 43 test kits through an

expedited regulatory review process under the Interim Order
for medical devices issued on March 18, 2020.
As of October 26, Health Canada has authorized 3 antigen

teststhe Abbott Panbio, the BD Veritor™, and the Quidel
Sofia.
On September 30, Health Canada authorized the Abbott ID

NOW rapid PCR COVID-19 test kit to be used at the point-
of-care.
A medical device is authorized only after a scientific

assessment by Health Canada reviewers to ensure that it is
supported by evidence showing it meets standards for safety
and effectiveness.
As new tests become available and approved for use in

Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada works with
provincial public health laboratories to acquire and distribute
them to increase our existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of “rapid tests”
 Health Canada is reviewing applications for many different
technologies, including those that are able to return rapid
results.
 Health Canada is reviewing applications for six antigen tests
that are all indicated for use in point-of-care settings, such as
the doctor’s office or bedside.
 Health Canada is reviewing these applications as quickly as
possible without compromising patient safety.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of the Abbott Panbio test kit
 The test is intended for use in symptomatic individuals.
 This point-of-care test is carried out by a health care
professional and can produce results within 20 minutes.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of the BD Veritor™ System
 The test is intended for use for individuals who are
suspected of COVID-19 by their healthcare provider, within
the first seven days of the onset of symptoms.
 This point-of-care test can be carried out by medical
professionals or trained operators, and can return results in
20 minutes.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of the Quidel Sofia
 The test is intended for use for individuals who are
suspected of COVID-19 by their healthcare provider, within
the first five days of the onset of symptoms.
 This point-of-care test can be carried out by laboratory
professionals or trained operators, and can return results in
15 minutes.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of the authorized antigen tests
 These tests provide preliminary test results only. There is the
possibility of false-negative results, meaning that the patient
may have COVID-19 even if the test result is negative.
 Negative results from this test are considered ―presumptive‖,
which means that they cannot entirely rule out that the
patient may be infected.
 Treatment decisions or the need for additional testing should
be made in consultation with the patient’s healthcare
provider and take into account whether symptoms are
present or continue.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of the Abbott ID NOW COVID-19 test kit
 The test is intended for use in symptomatic individuals,
within seven days of the onset of symptoms.
 This point-of-care test can be carried out by medical
professionals or trained operators, and can return results in
13 minutes or less.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of the Abbott ID NOW COVID-19 test:
 Health Canada was provided clinical evidence that
demonstrated the sensitivity of the Abbott ID NOW is
92.9%.
 The labelling makes it clear under what conditions the tests
should be used.
 The test is intended for use for individuals who are
suspected of COVID-19 by their healthcare provider, within
the first seven days of the onset of symptoms, and that
swabs should be tested as soon as possible after collection
or within one hour.
 The labelling is clear that negative results do not preclude
SARS-CoV-2 infection and should not be used as the sole
basis for patient management decisions.
 These limitations and directions mitigate the risks of potential
false negative results.
 Health Canada believes that the Abbott ID NOW COVID-19
test will perform adequately in the context of the urgent
public health need for rapid diagnostic testing solutions.
IF PRESSED… on how tests are deployed
 Scientists at Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory
(NML) are determining a national strategy to distribute point
of care tests in the best way possible to meet the needs of
those most at risk.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) distributes the
testing devices based on a needs analysis—in coordination
with provinces and territories and Indigenous Services
Canada—to get devices to communities that are at greatest
risk if there were to be an outbreak of COVID-19.
 As of October 7, 109 point-of-care testing devices and over
34,000 tests have been deployed across Canada to support
in-community diagnostics.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on home testing for COVID-19:
 Health Canada is open to reviewing all testing solutions. This
includes approaches that use self-collection or at-home test
kits for screening purposes - to enable individuals with or
without symptoms who wish to assess and monitor their own
infection status.
 Health Canada has not yet received any applications for at-
home test kits.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on saliva testing for COVID-19:
 Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and
reliable COVID-19 tests devices for use with various
samples.
 At this time, Health Canada has not authorized the use of
saliva samples with any authorized testing device.
 Health Canada is actively working with companies who have
filed their application for saliva based testing, and will
prioritize the review of applications for test kits that use
saliva samples in order to enable new testing options for
Canadians.
 Health Canada welcomes applications from any
manufacturer of a test kit that is validated for use with saliva
samples.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of the bCube
 On September 23, 2020, Health Canada has authorized the
Hyris Global Diagnostics bKIT and bCUBE from Hyris Global
Diagnostics, to be used at the point-of-care.
 We continue to work with companies developing innovative
and new testing technologies in Canada and around the
world to ensure Canadians get the tools they need to help
reduce the spread of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED… on the British Columbia swish and spit lab tests:
 Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada
welcome all new technologies that will help in the fight and
reduce the impact of COVID-19 on Canadians.
 Provincial/territorial laboratories can develop their own tests
in-house and offer testing services. These tests and testing
services are regulated under provincial or territorial
jurisdiction.
 Laboratory developed tests and testing are not regulated by
Health Canada - there is no sale of a device.
 Health Canada has not received any applications for a
commercial swish and spit COVID-19 test.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of the test kits:
 Health Canada has maintained a science-informed approach
to managing the pandemic.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada to ensure that it is supported
by evidence showing it meets standards for safety and
effectiveness.
 As with all medical devices, Health Canada will assess and
monitor the safety and effectiveness of the tests once they
are on the market.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of Spartan test kits:
 Health Canada continues to work with Spartan in their efforts
to produce the evidence required to demonstrate that their
product functions appropriately.
 Health Canada has provided regulatory guidance to Spartan
relating to the completion of clinical trials on their testing
device and will prioritize the review of the application for
authorization of the test when it is received.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing
the spread of the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for
clinical care and public health management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the
safety, effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an
application through the IO pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based
testing to reliably diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. A number of
lab-based and point-of-care nucleic acid-based tests have been authorized for use in
Canada, including the recent authorization of the Abbott ID NOW COVID-19 test on
September 30, 2020. Health Canada has received two additional point-of-care nucleic
acid-based tests which are being prioritized for review at this time. Health Canada has
also received a very small number of applications for lab-based nucleic acid-based tests
for use with saliva samples. These applications are also being prioritized for review at
this time.
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
Antigen tests are rapid tests that can be offered at the point of care in disposable
formats. Health Canada has authorized the sale of 3 antigen tests as of October 26, the
Abbott Panbio
the BD VeritorTM and the Quidel Sofia Antigen testing is one of several emerging
technologies that can be used to determine if a person is infected with the COVID-19
virus.
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not
aware of a serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are
not appropriate for early diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection
to develop antibodies.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the
provinces and territories to distribute the Abbott ID NOW and Abbott Panbio rapid tests,
following the bulk procurement of these tests in late September/early October.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians have access
to effective COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is working aggressively to procure tests to

meet both current and future demand as testing continues to
increase across the country.
As part of this work, we purchased two rapid tests – the

Abbott ID NOW and Abbott Panbio – and have worked with
our provincial and territorial counterparts to allocate and
distribute them.
The first shipment of tests were sent last week. Shipments

continued to provinces and territories this week and will
continue each week as supply arrives in Canada.
This means that we will have distributed over 200,000 ID

NOW rapid tests and over 2 million Panbio antigen tests by
November 7. These tests are being provided to provinces
and territories at no cost to them.
Provinces and territories will decide how to deploy these

technologies, informed by the Pan-Canadian Testing and
Screening Guidance that was released a few weeks ago.
We have also put into place surge support for provinces and

territories, including for contact tracing, testing sample
collection, and test processing in federal laboratories.
As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support

jurisdictions in their efforts to manage COVID-19. (cid:7)
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
 My department continues to work with colleagues in Public
Services and Procurement Canada, Innovation, Science and
Economic Development Canada, and the National Research
Council to identify and support new and emerging testing
and screening products and platforms.
 As emerging testing and screening products or platforms
become available and approved for use in Canada, the
Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial
public health laboratories to acquire them to augment
existing testing capacity.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial
and territorial officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and
conducting laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of September 15,
2020, over 6,200,000 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last week,
an average of more than 47,000 people were tested a day in Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as
part of over $19 billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the
Safe Restart Agreement, to further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the
associated data management and information sharing systems. The objective of the
Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has the resources and information it
needs to reopen the economy safely.
As we move into the next phase of lifting some public health measures and re-opening
some parts of the economy, cases of COVID-19 will still occur until the population has
enough immunity or a vaccine is available to prevent the disease.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with
close contacts, stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community. In this
next phase, testing will be critical for groups that are more vulnerable to complications
from COVID-19. This testing will be an early warning for our healthcare system.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for
commercial diagnostic devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic
capacity.
ACCESS TO TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
medical system, and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to treatments for
COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada is expediting the review of all
treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to ensure
that these products meet standards for safety,
effectiveness and quality.
 As of mid-October, 68 clinical trials had been
authorized for the treatment or prevention of COVID-
19. We have also authorized, with conditions, the
drug remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19.
 Additionally, I signed an interim order that creates a
mechanism for the expedited review of treatments,
while ensuring that we maintain a high level of
scientific scrutiny.
 The Government of Canada continues to proactively
engage with domestic and international companies to
negotiate advance purchase agreements for the
procurement of treatments to ensure timely access.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT AVAILABILITY
 Health Canada is closely monitoring global treatment
development and is in active discussions with manufacturers
and researchers to provide regulatory and scientific advice
for clinical trials that may launch in Canada.
 While recognizing the urgent need for treatments, all
products will undergo a rigorous scientific review to ensure
they meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality before
being authorized.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER
 The Interim Order will allow Health Canada to expedite the
review and authorization of drugs and vaccines for
Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available
evidence with more agile administrative and application
requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements
being approved by a trusted foreign regulatory
authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to
include COVID-19-related indications that were not in
the original authorization; and
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
to arrange for the importation of promising COVID-19
drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian
facilities prior to their authorization in Canada if the
Government of Canada has entered into a contract for
its procurement.
 Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by
sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and quality.
 In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can
impose terms and conditions on the authorization, such as
risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety
information.
 Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of
these drugs and will take immediate action, including the
suspension or cancellation of authorizations or
establishment licences, if required, to protect the health and
safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS AND POTENTIAL TREATMENTS
 Health Canada recommends that any potential treatments
for COVID-19 be investigated through clinical trials. Clinical
trials ensure the quality of the study, protection of the
patient, and the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
It is the best mechanism to provide trial volunteers access to
new drugs before they are approved.
 The Department is working tirelessly to facilitate and
expedite as many clinical trials for COVID-19 in Canada as
possible, without compromising their quality. To this end, in
May I approved an Interim Order that supports clinical trials.
Among its benefits, the Interim Order reduces the
administrative burden for sponsors without compromising the
safety of participants, and makes it easier to set up trials
across Canada to facilitate access. As of September 17,
2020, Health Canada has authorized five clinical trials
submitted under the Interim Order.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL DRUG TREATMENTS AND UNAPPROVED
PRODUCTS
 Results from large, well-designed clinical trials are needed to
make any conclusions on the safety and efficacy of any
treatments.
 Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so
that products can be studied and made available to
Canadians as quickly as possible.
 As new data about these novel treatments becomes
available, Health Canada will continue to take the
appropriate steps to ensure the health and safety of
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
 Health Canada has authorized the drug remdesivir (brand
name Veklury) for the treatment of patients with severe
symptoms of COVID-19 who have pneumonia and require
extra oxygen to help them breathe. We approved this drug
with conditions for the manufacturer to ensure its continued
safety, efficacy and quality.
 We are aware that preliminary results from the WHO
SOLIDARITY trial were somewhat inconsistent with results
from the previous trial, which Health Canada had used to
support the authorization with conditions of this drug.
 There are differences between the studies that make it
difficult to compare the outcomes. However, no additional
safety concerns have been identified in the available
SOLIDARITY data.
 Health Canada will continue to evaluate the detailed results
for these trials, as well as any other information that
becomes available, and will take the appropriate steps to
ensure the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON DEXAMETHASONE
 Treatment with dexamethasone has been shown to reduce
the number of deaths for severely ill COVID-19 patients.
 Dexamethasone is a relatively inexpensive steroid drug that
has been shown to reduce the number of deaths for some
severely ill COVID-19 patients. It is available in Canada and
can be used off-label by physicians to treat these patients.
 Health Canada is actively monitoring supplies of this drug in
Canada and is in contact with the manufacturers to assess
current supply levels. The Department will take action if
needed, in collaboration with the provinces and territories,
industry and key stakeholders, to help ensure continued
supplies of dexamethasone in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
 Hydroxychloroquine is a malaria drug being investigated as
a potential treatment for COVID-19 through clinical trials.
Some trials have been discontinued but others are
proceeding, depending on the purpose of the trial. Risks
associated with this drug can be best managed through
screening of trial candidates and close monitoring.
 Health Canada continues to closely monitor the safety and
effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine and other drugs used in
the treatment of COVID-19, and will take appropriate and
timely action, including informing Canadians if and when any
new health risks are identified.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with the US Food and Drug Administration, the
European Medicines Agency, and the World Health
Organization, amongst others, to share information and to
raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for treatments. The objective is to work towards
alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay informed
of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the
health product industry to proactively identify, track and
provide support to sponsors of clinical trials for COVID-19.
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health
professionals and Canadians are looking for the latest
information about health products for COVID-19. The
department has created a new website for the health product
industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval
and who to contact for questions. We are also making sure
information relevant to health professionals and Canadians
is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON THERAPEUTIC INVESTMENTS
The Government of Canada is collaborating with academia

and the private sector to advance research and development
of therapeutics including pre-clinical research, bio-
manufacturing and enhancing capacity for and access to
clinical trials.
The Government of Canada is closely monitoring and

reviewing emerging evidence on possible COVID-19
treatments such as corticosteroids, antiviral drugs and
antibody treatments.
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are

working closely with provinces and territories to ensure rapid
and equitable access to therapeutics.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food
and Drugs Act and the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and
provide the Government with additional powers.
The amendments will:
 help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
 seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for
Canadians; and
 allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is
needed to respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered
in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may
not fully meet some of the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act —
such as packaging requirements.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new
website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory
approval and who to contact for questions. Information relevant to health professionals
and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and
treatments related to COVID-19.
Clinical Trials
Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials
are conducted to determine whether new drugs, diagnostics or treatments are both safe
and effective in human beings. Several existing drugs have been repurposed to assess
their potential in treating or preventing COVID-19, while other new drugs are under
development. Health Canada recommends that any treatments be investigated in
clinical trials.
Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15
days. As of October 28, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 68 clinical trials for
treatment or prevention of COVID-19, most of which are repurposing existing drugs.
Remdesivir
Health Canada has authorized with conditions the drug remdesivir (brand name
Veklury) manufactured by Gilead Sciences Canada, Inc. for the treatment of patients
with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who have pneumonia and require oxygenation. As
a condition of authorization, the manufacturer will submit to Health Canada:
 post-market safety monitoring reports, as well as reports on all serious
adverse drug reactions, annual pregnancy safety reports and any foreign
regulatory actions related to the safety of remdesivir;
 any further data on the safety and efficacy of the drug, including final data
from ongoing clinical trials and additional safety data on patients with liver and
kidney disease; and
 further quality data confirming that the manufacturing processes and controls
will consistently produce product of suitable quality for the intended use.
Remdesivir has also been granted emergency or conditional authorization in the U.S.,
Europe, Japan, Singapore, Switzerland and Australia. In Canada, the authorization
included a full scientific review. There is no preset expiry date on the authorization.
Two existing clinical trials authorized by Health Canada to evaluate the safety and
effectiveness of remdesivir for use in Canada are ongoing. These clinical trials will
continue to gather more data on the drug.
On October 2, 2020, the European Medicines Agency’s safety committee (PRAC)
initiated a review to assess reports of acute kidney injury in some patients with COVID-
19 that were treated with remdesivir. This review is ongoing.
On October 15, interim results of the World Health Organization’s SOLIDARITY trial for
COVID-19 treatments were released. The trial comprised 11,266 hospitalized patients
across 405 hospitals in 30 countries. As reported in the preprint, which has yet to be
peer reviewed, and without accompanying detailed data, remdesivir appeared to have
little or no effect on hospitalized COVID-19 patients, as indicated by overall mortality,
initiation of ventilation and duration of hospital stay.
 The results of this pre-print are inconsistent with the results of the clinical trials
led by Gilead and NIAID, which demonstrated a reduction in time to recovery.
 Currently available evidence indicates that the remdesivir treatment arm of the
SOLIDARITY trial will continue.
Dexamethasone
Clinical trial results announced in June 2020 showed that dexamethasone, used since
the 1960s to reduce inflammation, cut death rates by around a third among the most
severely ill COVID-19 patients admitted to hospital. As a result, the WHO has updated
its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19. Although the dexamethasone study’s
results are preliminary, the researchers behind the project suggest the drug should
immediately become standard care in severely ill patients.
The oral tablet format of dexamethasone was added to Health Canada’s list of Tier 3
shortages on May 1, 2020 based on its current indications for use. Tier 3 shortages are
those that have the greatest potential impact on Canada’s drug supply and health care
system. Drugs on this list are in high demand or in shortage. The IV format of
dexamethasone has not been determined to be a Tier 3 shortage; a consensus
determination was made to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis.
Apotex and Pharmascience are the only two companies in Canada that market the
Dexamethasone oral tablets. Apotex is reporting a shortage for the 0.5mg strength with
an estimated end date of October 30, 2020. Apotex is not reporting any shortage for the
4mg strength. Pharmascience is reporting shortages for the 0.5mg strength with an
estimated end dates of November 23, 2020 and for the 0.75mg, 2mg and 4mg strengths
with an estimated end date of December 7, 2020. Health Canada continues to monitor
the supply situation on a monthly basis. Health Canada is also monitoring the supply
situation for dexamethasone alternatives, corticosteroids such as methylprednisolone,
prednisolone and hydrocortisone.
Hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine is an antiparasitic drug approved in Canada for the treatment of
malaria, as well as autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. Health
Canada has authorized clinical trials on the use of this drug in COVID-19, and is aware
of other ongoing clinical trials across the world.
 An article in the May 22, 2020 edition of ―The Lancet‖ features a study which
showed increased mortality and cardiac arrhythmias in hospitalised patients
taking chloroquine and hydroxychloroquine for the treatment of COVID-19. This
paper was later retracted amid concerns with the validity of the data.
 On June 3, a Canadian-led study published their results in the New England
Journal of Medicine, concluding that HCQ did not prevent infection when used as
post-exposure prophylaxis within 4 days after exposure.
 On June 5, Investigators of the RECOVERY trial (the UK arm of the
SOLIDARITY trial) issued their preliminary results and concluded that there is no
beneficial effect of HCQ in patients hospitalized with COVID-19. As such, they
have decided to stop recruitment to the hydroxychloroquine arm of this trial.
 On June 17, 2020, the World Health Organization announced that
hydroxychloroquine will no longer be part of its global SOLIDARITY trial. Their
decision was based on the evidence that hydroxychloroquine in that trial did not
result in the reduction of mortality of hospitalized COVID-19 patients, when
compared with standard of care. This decision does not impact other ongoing
clinical trials.
VACCINE RESEARCH AND TIMELINES
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the timely development of a
COVID-19 vaccine and securing sufficient supply for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to securing

promising COVID-19 vaccines for Canada.
The Government of Canada has entered into seven

agreements with AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline,
Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Medicago, and
Pfizer to secure millions of doses of the leading COVID-19
vaccines.
To complement these agreements, the Government of

Canada has signed an optional purchase agreement with
Gavi, committing approximately $220 million to procure
roughly 15 million vaccine doses for Canadians from the
COVAX Facility’s diverse portfolio of candidates.
An additional $220 million will be channeled through the

COVAX Advance Market Commitment to purchase doses for
low- and middle-income countries.
The Government of Canada has also invested more than $1

billion in support of a national medical research strategy to
fight COVID-19 that includes vaccine development,
production of treatments, and tracking of the virus.
In Canada, there are currently at least 30 candidate vaccines

in early development and it is anticipated that several of
these will advance to human clinical trials in the coming
months.
A Vaccine Task Force has been convened to provide advice

to the Government of Canada on how best to support
domestic vaccine research and help ensure Canadian
leadership in vaccine development, related bio-
manufacturing and international partnerships.
IF PRESSED…
Through our $1 billion investment, the Government of

Canada is supporting multiple organizations who are working
at unprecedented speed to develop candidate vaccines.
On July 14, Medicago, a biopharmaceutical company

headquartered in Quebec City, began a Phase 1 clinical trial,
marking the launch of the first Canadian clinical trial of a
COVID-19 vaccine candidate.
We are working closely with academia and the private sector

to advance research and development of candidate vaccines
by partnering on pre-clinical research, bio-manufacturing
requirements to support large-scale production, enhancing
capacity and access for clinical trials, and seeking solutions
for domestic capacity.
Advance purchase agreements with suppliers are an

investment in the promise of vaccines.
Novel vaccines often fail during development, which is why

Canada has purchased more supply than is needed for the
entire population.
A diverse portfolio of vaccine candidates will give Canada

the greatest chance of earliest access to safe and effective
vaccines.
Canada is exploring opportunities to donate any potential

surplus vaccine doses, should it have more than is needed
for Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine development is a highly complex and long process that typically takes over 10
years due to the extensive research required to ensure a safe and effective product for
human use. Global efforts are underway to develop a COVID-19 vaccine and work is
progressing at an unprecedented pace. As of October 5, 2020, there are over 120
COVID-19 candidate vaccines in different stages of development by academia and
industry globally, with 64 vaccines in clinical trials (51 vaccines in Phase 1 and/or 2 and
13 vaccines in Phase 3). Phase 3 clinical trials, which are designed to measure how
well a vaccine will prevent COVID-19, have been registered in the UK, the US, Brazil,
South Africa, Pakistan, Russia and the UAE with results expected this fall or early next
year.
Government of Canada investments
On March 11, 2020, the Government of Canada announced a $1 billion package to help
Canadians cope with the COVID-19 outbreak, which included $275 million for
coronavirus research and medical countermeasures. Major investments to date include
supporting vaccine development efforts by Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac.
Through the first round of its COVID-19 Rapid Research Funding Opportunities,
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $16 million in14 vaccine-
related projects, including ones focused on identifying candidate vaccines through
different animal models, which could be suitable for future clinical trials in humans.
These projects targeted a range of vaccine strategies and, in some cases, involved
industry partnerships (e.g., Medicago; Inovio) or were supported by the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC). Research included, for example, a focus on vertical
transmission (mother to child), immune enhancement, and nanoparticle-based vaccine.
One such example of a research project is from Dr. Denis Leclerc and his team from
Université Laval who were awarded $717,645 in February 2020, through CIHR’s first
Rapid Response competition to develop the most robust vaccine that will prevent
COVID-19. The team has already developed a nanoparticle that has the potential to
bond with the virus and trigger a general immune response that aims to motivate the
immune system to attack the virus before it can infect cells. Another prominent example
of a project is the one by a renowned expert in the field, Dr. Ève Dubé of Université
Laval, who received a $499,089 grant to research online discourses related to COVID-
19 in Canada (tweets and comments on news media reports) and to describe individual
and community understanding of disease, priorities, fears, etc., including public health
messaging that may impact the acceptance of measures to limit the spread of COVID-
19. Her research will also identify interventions that will help build public trust in
authorities responsible for disease transmission tracking and management, while
dispelling unfounded rumours and xenophobic discourse.
CIHR also funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN), a national
network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi-disciplinary vaccine and
immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research
questions and aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short- and long-term
effectiveness and protection, as well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake. CIRN
has established capacity for timely evaluation of vaccines for a variety of infectious
diseases, seeks to continue to improve immunization programs and coverage
nationwide, and has built strong links between the research community and key
decision makers. On April 7, CIHR and PHAC provided $1 million to CIRN’s Serious
Outcomes Surveillance Network to gather data related to COVID-19 symptoms, as well
as possible treatments and risk factors, to inform Canada’s public health response to
COVID-19.
On April 23, 2020, the Prime Minister announced more than $1 billion in support of a
national medical research strategy to fight COVID-19 that includes vaccine
development, the production of treatments, and tracking of the virus.
Investments were announced for the National Research Council of Canada to enhance
its bio-manufacturing capacity to prepare for production of a COVID-19 vaccine, while
investments through the Strategic Innovation Fund continue to support COVID-19
vaccine and therapy research and development led by the private sector.
Funding will also support academia and research networks to conduct vaccine-related
research and clinical trials, and to enhance Canada’s capacity to monitor vaccine safety
and effectiveness.
These investments contribute to Canada’s commitment to the Coronavirus Global
Response, a global pledging initiative that raised more than $17.9 billion (USD) to
accelerate the development of and equitable access to new diagnostic capabilities,
therapeutics, and vaccines, including through support to the World Health
Organization’s Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A).
Within ACT-A, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, has teamed up with the Coalition for
Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) and the World Health Organization, to
create a pooled procurement mechanism for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines called
the COVAX Facility. This will pool the resources of economies to make advanced
purchase agreements for a number of promising vaccine candidates. The Facility will
include both low- and lower-middle income countries, whose purchases will be financed
by official development assistance through the COVAX Advanced Market Commitment
(AMC), and upper-middle and high-income countries who will self-finance their own
purchase of vaccine doses for domestic use through the Facility. The Facility is a strong
multilateral mechanism that will support timely access to vaccines for all participating
economies.
On September 18, Canada signed a binding commitment with the Gavi Alliance to
participate in the Facility through an optional purchase agreement that could see
Canada acquire vaccine doses through the Facility for upwards of 20% of the Canadian
population. An additional $220 million will be channeled through the COVAX Advance
Market Commitment to purchase doses for low- and middle-income countries. By
joining, Canada is contributing to collective efforts towards a safe, effective, and
affordable COVID-19 vaccine, in line with the Prime Minister’s commitment to help
ensure that once a vaccine is developed, it will be produced at a scale and cost
accessible to all countries. As of September 25, 67 high-income economies have
formally joined the Facility along with 92 lower-income countries that are expected to
participate in the Advance Market Commitment.
As of October 1, 2020, the Government of Canada has secured access to seven
leading vaccine candidates for Canadians through agreements with Pfizer/BioNTech,
Moderna, Janssen/Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Medicago,
and AstraZeneca. Pfizer/BioNTech will supply a minimum of 20 million doses of its
BNT162 mRNA-based vaccine candidate, while Moderna will provide up to 56 million
doses of its mRNA-1273 vaccine candidate. Agreements in principle have been struck
with Janssen/Johnson & Johnson to supply up to 38 million doses of its Ad26.COV2.S
vaccine candidate; Novavax to supply up to 76 million doses of its NVX-CoV2373
vaccine; Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline to supply up to 72 million of doses of their protein
subunit vaccine candidate; Medicago up to 76 million doses of its recombinant plant-
derived COVID-19 vaccine; and, AstraZeneca to supply up to 20 million doses of its
viral vector vaccine candidate. Active negotiations with other potential vaccine suppliers
are also under way.
The development of a diverse portfolio of promising candidate technologies, based on
expert advice, will mitigate the risk of vaccines failing to reach market. Should Canada
find itself in the enviable position of procuring more vaccine than needed for the
Canadian population, the government could stockpile excess supply for future use or
donate unneeded doses to countries in need.
Vaccine research and development in Canada
As of October 5, 2020, of the 100+ global candidates noted above, at least 30
organizations in Canada are developing vaccines (some are developing multiple
vaccine strategies) using 7 novel and existing vaccine platforms. Two vaccine
candidates (CanSino and Medicago) obtained regulatory authorization to initiate clinical
trials in Canada and several others could advance to Phase 1 clinical trials in the
coming months.
Medicago is the only vaccine developer that is actively conducting vaccine clinical trials
in Canada. On July 14, 2020, Medicago launched its COVID-19 vaccine candidate’s
Phase 1 clinical trial in healthy adults. Their candidate, a virus-like-particle produced in
plants, is to be tested in Quebec in combination with proprietary adjuvants developed by
collaborators – GSK and Dynavax. Medicago is also planning a Phase 2/3 trial to
beinitiated in December 2020.
On May 15, 2020, Health Canada authorized CanSino Biologics Inc. (CanSinoBio)
vaccine candidate for a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in healthy adults in Canada. However,
this research initiative has since been cancelled, as CanSino could not secure Chinese
government approval to ship the vaccine clinical trial lots to Canada.
To facilitate impactful clinical trial research in Canada, government and experts are
convening a series of COVID-19 Vaccine Clinical Trials Discussion Forums. Further, a
COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force provides advice to the Government of Canada on
investments in vaccine development and bio-manufacturing for COVID-19. Task force
members include vaccine experts, as well as industry leaders with proven ability in
developing and commercializing vaccines. The co-Chairs of the task force are Joanne
Langley, Head of Infectious Diseases at the IWK Health Centre in Halifax and Professor
in the Department of Community Health and Epidemiology at Dalhousie University, and
J. Mark Lievonen, former President of Sanofi Pasteur Limited.
The Government of Canada has already announced $44 million in funding to support
upgrades to the NRC’s facilities in Montreal to enable compliance with Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards, to ensure readiness for Canadian
bioprocessing of potential vaccine candidates as they become available.
While every effort in Canada is being made to expedite vaccine development - safety,
efficacy and quality must not be compromised. However, the Government of Canada is
reviewing its regulatory pathways to help expedite access to safe and effective vaccine
for Canadians.
We are also working with international regulators and partners to help fast-track clinical
trials and applications for vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tests and share
information on any signals of global supply disruptions. For example, the Government of
Canada is monitoring international regulators’ reviews of safety signals detected during
trials of the AstraZeneca vaccine candidate.
On October 1, 2020, Health Canada received its first submission for authorization for a
COVID-19 vaccine from AstraZeneca. AstraZeneca is seeking authorization under
Health Canada’s Interim Order on drugs and vaccines, which allows companies to
submit data on the vaccine as it becomes available. This will allow the Health Canada to
start its review right away, while information continues to come in, so that the Health
Canada can speed up the review process.
Preparing provinces and territories for COVID-19 vaccine deployment
Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine
public health requirements in their jurisdictions, while considering national vaccine
expert advice. Planning is underway and will take into account guidance from Canada’s
National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI), to prepare for vaccine availability
and administration through public immunization programs.
NACI is formalizing national guidance that will inform administration and usage of
approved COVID-19 vaccines. This fall, based on what is known of the burden of illness
of COVID-19, NACI will identify key populations for early COVID-19 vaccination and
priority vaccine program strategies. NACI guidance on use of specific vaccines will be
formed as more is known about vaccine characteristics (e.g. efficacy, safety, dosing
schedule), how well the candidate vaccines work in different populations (e.g. elderly),
and until it is determined which vaccines reach market in Canada.
While the Vaccine Task Force will focus on strategic investments in vaccine research,
development, and domestic manufacturing, NACI will focus on recommendations for
vaccine roll-out to targeted groups, and optimal use of vaccines that are authorised by
Health Canada.
In addition, we are working with provinces and territories to ensure that the health care
system is prepared to roll out a national vaccination program when a COVID-19 vaccine
becomes available, including ensuring that we have sufficient supplies such as needles
and syringes, for vaccination clinics.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
medical system, and there is a need for vaccines to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to vaccines for
COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history and, in response, we are seeing
global vaccine candidates being developed.
 Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has
worked closely with other departments, including
Innovation, Science and Economic Development, the
National Research Council, Public Services and
Procurement Canada, and the Public Health Agency
of Canada, along with the Vaccine Task Force, to
develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
As the regulator, Health Canada has played a critical

role in approving clinical trials and will be fundamental
in the eventual authorization of vaccines for use in
Canada.
 I issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of
drugs and vaccines by allowing companies to submit
safety and efficacy data as soon as it becomes
available.
 As of November 3, Health Canada has three COVID-
19 vaccines under review for authorization: those
being developed by AstraZeneca, Pfizer, and
Moderna.
 While recognizing the urgent need for vaccines,
Health Canada will conduct a rigorous scientific
review to ensure vaccines are safe, effective and of
high quality, before being authorized.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVAL
 The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions
under the Interim Order signed in September, meaning that
the evidence required to support their potential approval will
be provided to Health Canada as it becomes available.
 Each manufacturer is filing a detailed plan that lays out the
timing and content of the subsequent data and information
submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
 Timing for the completion of the rolling submission will
depend on the outcomes of the companies’ ongoing clinical
trials.
IF PRESSED ON PRE-POSITIONING
 The Interim Order allows for pre-positioning of unapproved
therapies (drugs and vaccines) for COVID-19.
 Health Canada can consider allowing pre-positioning of
these unapproved therapies when there has been a filing in
Canada or in another trusted regulator, and where requested
by the Chief Public Health Officer so that the product can be
positioned within Canada and can be readily deployed upon
a market approval.
 Decisions on pre-positioning will be made on a case by case
basis in order to meet public health needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE RECENT PAUSES TO VACCINE CLINICAL TRIALS IN THE
U.S.
 Temporary pauses to clinical trials can be expected, and
show that the safety monitoring system is functioning
effectively. Any safety issues are being carefully assessed
by regulators and independent safety monitoring boards,
before decisions are made about trials resuming.
 All available safety data will be assessed by Health Canada
as part of the vaccine submission review.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE AVAILABILITY
 Health Canada is closely monitoring global vaccine and
treatment development and is in active discussions with
several vaccine manufacturers and researchers to provide
regulatory and scientific advice for vaccine clinical trials that
may launch in Canada.
 While recognizing the urgent need for vaccines, all products
will undergo a rigorous scientific review to ensure they meet
standards for safety, efficacy and quality before being
authorized.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER
 The Interim Order will allow Health Canada to expedite the
review and authorization of drugs and vaccines for
Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available
evidence with more agile administrative and application
requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements
being approved by a trusted foreign regulatory
authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to
include COVID-19-related indications that were not in
the original authorization; and
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
to arrange for the importation of promising COVID-19
drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian
facilities prior to their authorization in Canada if the
Government of Canada has entered into a contract for
its procurement.
 Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by
sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and quality.
 In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can
impose terms and conditions on the authorization, such as
risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety
information.
 Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of
these drugs and will take immediate action, including the
suspension or cancellation of authorizations or
establishment licenses, if required, to protect the health and
safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
 All vaccines must first be tested in clinical trials to assess
their safety and efficacy. Clinical trials ensure the quality of
the study, protection of the patient, and the proper collection
and retention of outcomes. It is the best mechanism to
provide trial volunteers access to new drugs before they are
approved.
 The Department is working hard to facilitate and expedite as
many clinical trials for COVID-19 in Canada as possible,
without compromising their quality. To this end, in May I
approved an Interim Order that supports clinical trials.
Among its benefits, the Interim Order reduces the
administrative burden for sponsors without compromising the
safety of participants, and makes it easier to set up trials
across Canada to facilitate access. As of November 3, 2020,
Health Canada has authorized 13 clinical trials submitted
under the Interim Order.
IF PRESSED ON UNAPPROVED PRODUCTS
 Results from large, well-designed clinical trials are needed to
make any conclusions on the safety and efficacy of any or
vaccines.
 Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so
that products can be studied and made available to
Canadians as quickly as possible.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with the US Food and Drug Administration, the
European Medicines Agency, and the World Health
Organization, amongst others, to share information and to
raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for vaccines and treatments. The objective is to
work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to
stay informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the
health product industry to proactively identify, track and
provide support to sponsors of clinical trials for vaccines for
COVID-19.
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health
professionals and Canadians are looking for the latest
information about health products for COVID-19. The
department has created a new website for the health product
industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval
and who to contact for questions. We are also making sure
information relevant to health professionals and Canadians
is up-to-date on our website.
BACKGROUND
Advance Purchase Agreements
 The Government has announced agreements to secure millions of doses of
seven leading vaccine candidates, including those being developed by
AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Moderna,
Pfizer, and Medicago.
 The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on it successfully completing
clinical trials and authorization by Health Canada.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new
website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory
approval and who to contact for questions. Information relevant to health professionals
and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers of the vaccine candidates
recommended by the Vaccines Task Force. While regulatory approvals are separate
from the procurement process, Health Canada is prepared to receive and expedite
vaccine drug submissions.
Clinical Trials
Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials
are conducted to determine whether new vaccine are both safe and effective in human
beings. Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved by Health Canada in
under 15 days.
Virtual Care
SYNOPSIS
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, on May 3, 2020 the Prime Minister announced
$240.5 million to support Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches. Of this, $200M will go to
support work in health systems to support expanded deployment of virtual care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the care
they need during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories, vendors and stakeholders to
expand virtual health services so that Canadians can
continue to access the care they need during the pandemic.
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced that the
Government of Canada is committing $240M to help
Canadian health systems meet health care needs through
virtual approaches and digital tools.
 Of this, $200M will support virtual care services so that
Canadians can safely engage with providers through
telephone, text or video-conferencing.
 This investment will help Canadians continue to have their
health needs met in a safe and secure manner, while
reducing pressure on health systems.
IF PRESSED ON THE NATURE OF FEDERAL SUPPORT
We are negotiating bilateral agreements with provinces and

territories to flow $150M this year to help them accelerate
their work on virtual care, with a focus on secure messaging
and file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient
monitoring, and patient online access to test results, along
with needed infrastructure for their existing digital systems in
this regard.
In addition, we are providing up to $50M to Canada Health

Infoway to develop pan-Canadian standards for these
priorities and to provide support to provinces and territories
to implement virtual care initiatives under the bilateral
agreements.
BACKGROUND
On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital
tools for Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and
needed supports for health systems, as the Government of Canada is working with
provinces and territories to assist health services to undertake virtual care and provide
health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to PTs through bilateral
agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and file
transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to
test results, and backend supports to integrate these tools within existing digital
systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian
standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they
implement new initiatives pursuant to the bilateral agreements.
Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to begin to identify where
support is needed most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure. As part of this
work, Health Canada is also supporting work to evaluate the benefit of virtual care in
terms of better quality and patient outcomes as well as more sustainable care.
VIRUS LIVING ON SURFACES
SYNOPSIS
Early evidence suggests the COVID-19 virus can remain viable on different objects and
surfaces from a few hours to days. The survival time appears to vary with surface type
and environmental conditions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Are Canadians at risk for contracting COVID-19 if they touch a surface that could
potentially be contaminated?
KEY MESSAGES
 Scientific information on COVID-19 continues to be
produced rapidly and we continue to evaluate new evidence
as it becomes available to inform our intervention and
mitigation strategies.
 Though evolving evidence suggests the virus causing
COVID-19 can survive on objects and surfaces from a few
hours to days, the type of material, and environmental
conditions like temperature and humidity, can have an
impact.
 We have learned that the virus is easily inactivated by using
simple disinfectants such as store-bought disinfectants,
which supports the importance of adhering to recommended
strategies to prevent infection.
BACKGROUND
Scientific information on COVID-19 continues to be produced rapidly and PHAC
continues to evaluate new evidence as it becomes available to inform our intervention
and mitigation strategies.
Early on in the pandemic, PHAC was aware that in simulated (laboratory) settings,
COVID-19 viruses could survive on surfaces from several hours to days depending on
several factors and varied under different circumstances, such as surface type and
relative temperature or humidity of the environment.
We have learned that the virus is easily inactivated by using simple disinfectants such
as store-bought disinfectants or a diluted bleach solution prepared daily.
Studies on the stability of the virus in laboratory and healthcare settings provide
important knowledge on how long the virus may survive on objects and surfaces, and
this supports the importance of adhering to recommended strategies to prevent
infection. PHAC continues to review new evidence that relates to transmission in
healthcare settings, and will update infection prevention and control guidance for
healthcare settings, as appropriate.
While important knowledge was gained on how long the virus survives on objects and
surfaces commonly found in healthcare settings, additional studies are required to
understand whether these findings are the same for surfaces and materials commonly
found in other community settings. The infectiousness (i.e., ability to cause infection) of
virus particles isolated from various surfaces is also largely unknown.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
SYNOPSIS
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act
limits coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals
currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that
individuals who received these services at Clinic 554 in Fredericton were required to
pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are
considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health Act. Even with the
announced closure of Clinic 554, the exclusionary nature of this regulation poses
comprehensiveness and accessibility concerns under the Act. The NB Health Ministry
has repeatedly stated publicly that the government has no intention of changing its
position on the issue.
Evidence continues to indicate that a number of abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) may be
charging patients, contrary to the Canada Health Act and provincial legislation.
Discussions between Health Canada and the province are ongoing on this matter.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act and penalize provinces (such as NB
and ON) where patients face charges when they attempt to access to abortion
services?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government believes that Canadians should have
access to the full range of reproductive health services,
including abortion services.
 Individuals should not face charges when seeking these
insured services regardless of where the services are
provided.
 The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges,
a mandatory deduction to federal health transfer payments
to the province or territory must be taken.
 This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help
ensure that patients do not face barriers when accessing
medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals
currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that
individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in Fredericton are required to
pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the last province with a private abortion clinic that
refuses to provide coverage for services delivered there. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under
the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and
comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack of coverage for abortions performed in
private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution.
The Morgentaler Clinic in Fredericton closed in July 2014. Clinic officials indicated New
Brunswick regulations preventing coverage of abortion services provided in private
clinics made the clinic financially unviable. A crowd-sourcing effort subsequently raised
sufficient funds and in January 2015, it reopened as Clinic 554. The clinic’s web-site
indicates abortion services cost between $700 and $850, depending on the stage of
pregnancy. It also indicates financial assistance may be available from the National
Abortion Federation and provides contact information. The clinic also offers primary
health care services and services to the LGBT community, all of which are covered
under the provincial health insurance plan, according to the clinic director. It claims a
roster of 3,000 patients.
Clinic 554, which was the only facility in the area providing surgical abortion services,
closed in fall 2020 due to the lack of public funding for these services. In early July
2019, former Minister Petitpas Taylor met with the NB Health Minister to discuss the
accessibility and comprehensive concerns related to this issue, including the patient
charges being levied by the clinic for the abortion services. These concerns were
reiterated by Minister Petitpas Taylor, and then by the Prime Minister and Minister
Hajdu, in late 2019. During the recent election in NB, Premier Higgs maintained the
province provides sufficient access to abortion services and does not intend to fund
abortion services in private clinics. He said this was consistent with the Canada Health
Act.
On October 14, 2020, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association notified the NB
government of its intention to launch legal proceedings to compel the province to
eliminate the preclusion for coverage under Regulation 84-20 of clinic abortions, if the
province does not take immediate action to do so, on its own.
In Summer 2019, media reports indicated that individuals in Ontario were encountering
patient charges for abortion services when they sought insured services in certain
private clinics in the GTA. Surgical abortions are an insured service under the Ontario
Health Insurance Plan. In Ontario, these services are provided in hospitals and two
types of private facilities: licensed Independent Health Facilities (IHF), and non-IHF
clinics. The Ministry of Health only funds facility costs at the four clinics licensed as
IHFs. Health Canada has signaled to Ontario that patient charges being levied in non-
IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA. Discussions between Health Canada and
the province are ongoing on this matter.
DECISION IN CAMBIE SURGERIES CORP V BC (ATTORNEY GENERAL)
SYNOPSIS
 On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of British Columbia released its
decision in Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC (Attorney General), which dismissed a
constitutional challenge to provisions of British Columbia's Medicare Protection
Act and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private
insurance for publicly insured health care services.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the federal government’s position on the Court’s decision?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government fully welcomes the Court’s decision and
commends the Government of BC for its successful defense
of universally accessible health care.
 This decision validates Canada’s single-payor public health
care system and the fundamental principle that access to
medically necessary health services should be based on
health need and not on the ability or willingness to pay.
 Patient charges – whether they take the form of charges at
the point of service or payment for private insurance –
undermine the principles of fairness and equity.
 These values are more important than ever as we continue
to respond to the unprecedented challenges presented by
the COVID-19 outbreak, and the Government of Canada will
continue to defend universally accessible health care for all
Canadians.
BACKGROUND
 On September 10, 2020, Justice Steeves of the Supreme Court of British Columbia
released his decision Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC (Attorney General), which
dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of British Columbia's Medicare
Protection Act and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the
purchase of private insurance for publicly insured health care services.
 Launched in 2009, the plaintiffs in this case (two private health facilities, founded
and co-owned by Dr. Brian Day, and four individual patients who paid privately to
obtain publicly insured health care services), argued that in light of long waits for
care in BC’s publicly funded system, provisions of the Medicare Protection Act
(MPA) that place limits on a patient’s ability to access more timely, privately paid
medical care violate section 7 (right to life, liberty and security of person) of the
Canadian Charter of Rights and Freedoms (Charter). They also argued that
exclusions under the MPA, which allow some BC residents (e.g., Workers’
Compensation claimants) unobstructed access to timely care in the private
system, violate section 15 (equality rights) of the Charter. The trial began on
September 6, 2016, and after numerous delays concluded on February 28, 2020.
 During the course of the proceedings the plaintiffs were also granted an
injunction that prevented the BC government from enforcing new penalty
provisions (e.g., large fines) to deter providers from charging patients for insured
services. The injunction expired on September 10, 2020, with the release of the
decision.
 On September 12, 2020, the plaintiffs filed their notice to appeal the decision to
the BC Court of Appeal, in an attempt to overturn Justice Steeves’ decision. Both
BC and Canada will participate in the appeal, which will be heard over five days
during the week of June 14, 2021. Regardless of the outcome of this appeal (i.e.,
whether it is successful, in part or in whole, or unsuccessful), it is expected that
the decision will ultimately be appealed to the Supreme Court of Canada.
 On October 16, 2020, the plaintiffs also filed a new injunction application (to
replace the injunction that expired on September 10, 2020). The new injunction
seeks to further delay BC’s enforcement of provisions to deter providers from
charging patients for insured services, as well as block BC’s injunctive authority
to restrain providers from levying these patient charges. If successful, the
injunction would apply to privately paid insured services provided in private
surgical clinics, and be in place until the appeal of the Cambie decision has been
adjudicated. Canada is not participating in these proceedings but will provide
assistance to BC, as required. The injunction hearing will take place on
November 17-18, 2020.
While the Canada Health Act was not under direct challenge in this case, Canada joined
these proceedings playing a supporting role to British Columbia in defending the
constitutional validity of provisions of the MPA, which reflect the CHA’s objective of
ensuring universal access to insured health services based on need and not on the
ability to pay.
 Given the significance of the plaintiffs’ challenges to Canadian Medicare, Canada
will continue to advocate for the principles of universally accessible publicly
financed health care, including support for BC for the duration of any appeals
process.
DENTAL CARE
SYNOPSIS
 The Government of Canada is committed to working with Parliament on its study
of national dental care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care
needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
While most Canadians have dental coverage through their

employment health plans, we know there are unmet dental
care needs in Canada.
My mandate letter highlights this Government’s desire to

work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of
national dental care.
Dental care is only one aspect of our commitment to

improving health care for Canadians. The recent Speech
from the Throne committed to work with provinces and
territories to address health needs arising from the
pandemic, but also to improve access to primary care, set
standards for long-term care, address the opioid epidemic
and implement pharmacare for Canadians.
BACKGROUND (FOR PUBLIC USE)
 The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health
both committed the Government to work with Parliament to study and analyze the
possibility of national dental care.
 In February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health agreed to
undertake a study on the development of a national dental care program, although
the study never began during the last session. On October 26, 2020, NDP Member
of Parliament Don Davies introduced a motion that HESA undertake a study on the
development of a national dental care program as an insured service for Canadians.
The motion is yet to be voted on. Health Canada remains ready to support a study
by the Committee, should it decide again to undertake that work.
 In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a
federal dental care program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income
below $90,000. It is estimated that this program would cost close to $11 billion over
five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3 billion to clear accumulated care
needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually through 2024-25).
The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year,
and decrease to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market
conditions.
 During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified
inequality and wasted spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care
avoidance due to cost results in preventable oral health emergency room spending.
The NDP planned to address this issue through a national, income-based
―Denticare‖ plan that would have provided free care for households earning under
$70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between
$70,000 and $90,000.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
 According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.5 billion was spent
on dental services in 2017: 54% was covered through private insurance; 40% was
paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians
receive dental coverage through employment-based private health insurance plans.
 Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary
dental care for all residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage,
and are limited to select services for groups such as those with low incomes, people
with disabilities, children, and seniors.
 Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for
services not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides
dental services to Canadian Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal
penitentiaries, and some veterans and refugee claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the
Government of Canada’s employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and
territories in 2020-21, which is used to support health services (including PT
dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not
including the value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees.
In addition, the income tax system provides assistance through the Medical
Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical expenses supplement
available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
 Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in
Canada. The Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5
people (6 million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and
that only Canadians with financial resources or insurance can experience good oral
health.
DIABETES
SYNOPSIS
Diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough
insulin or when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Diabetes can
lead to serious complications and premature death. Some Canadians with diabetes may
be at greater risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes because of pre-existing health
conditions. Those who have diabetes can take steps to control the disease and lower
the risk of complications.
KEY MESSAGES
Our top priority is to protect the health and safety of

Canadians and our Government recognizes the impact
diabetes has on the health of Canadians during and
following the COVID-19 pandemic. Almost 3.2 million
Canadians are living with diabetes and 200,000 new cases
are diagnosed each year.
We contribute to the Government of Canada’s coordinated

response to the COVID-19 pandemic, which includes
investments in research, prevention and early detection of
diabetes. In 2018–2019 alone, our Government invested
over $48 million in diabetes research through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research.
With physical distancing and self-isolation restrictions,

promoting healthy living and preventing diabetes continues
to be a priority. The prevalence of physical inactivity and
other factors that put some Canadians more at risk of
chronic diseases, including diabetes, are increasing, and will
likely remain high following the pandemic.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collection and analysis of
chronic diseases and their risk and protective factors; strengthens collaborations to
better track disease trends and risks; supports the development of prevention guidelines
for primary care; and shares knowledge of best practices and effective interventions.
PHAC also leads the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting Initiative, which
monitors over 100 indicators of health outcomes and determinants, including several
related to diabetes, disaggregated across a range of population groups at the national,
provincial, and territorial levels.
PHAC is supporting community-based initiatives that encourage behaviour changes that
will improve the health of Canadians and reduce health inequalities among sub-groups
of the population. In particular, PHAC’s Healthy Living and Chronic Disease Prevention
- Multi-Sectoral Partnerships (MSP) program invests approximately $20 million annually
and leverages additional non-governmental funding to support projects that address the
common risk factors, including physical inactivity, unhealthy eating and tobacco use,
associated with major chronic diseases such as cancer, diabetes, and cardiovascular
disease. Examples of projects funded by the MSP program include:
o Canadian Diabetes Prevention Program – In partnership with Diabetes Canada,
LMC Prevention Ltd. is implementing a 12-month lifestyle intervention program to
reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes in Canada by supporting behaviour changes and
weight loss. The program targets individuals at risk of developing diabetes and those
diagnosed with prediabetes.
o Hockey Fans in Training (Hockey FIT) – University of Western Ontario is
implementing a project to increase physical activity and healthy eating behaviours
among middle-aged overweight and obese men at risk of chronic disease, including
diabetes. The program targets men from urban and rural communities, Indigenous
communities, different cultures (e.g., new Canadian immigrant communities), and
individuals across the socioeconomic spectrum.
Projects funded by the MSP program are adapting to continue to reach those in need
during COVID-19.
To help Canadians identify their risk of diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC
developed CANRISK, the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible
to Canadians through partnerships with Diabetes Canada, Shoppers Drug Mart,
Pharmasave, Rexall, Loblaws and others.
From 2014-15 to 2018-19, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR), invested approximately $229 million in diabetes research,
including $48 million in 2018-2019 alone. CIHR also funds research in areas such as
obesity, kidney disease and cardiovascular disease that impact on diabetes prevention
and management of the complications of diabetes. Key strategic diabetes-related
research activities are included in the Pathways to Health Equity for Aboriginal Peoples
Initiative, Canada’s Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research, and a new Partnership to
Defeat Diabetes with the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation. CIHR recently
launched an initiative with key partners, including Diabetes Canada and JDRF Canada,
to celebrate the 100th anniversary of the discovery of insulin to be marked in 2021 (100
Years of Insulin: Accelerating Canadian Discoveries to Defeat Diabetes).
Some Canadians may be at greater risk for severe COVID-19 outcomes because of
pre-existing health conditions, such as diabetes.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health released its report on its study of
diabetes strategies, which had 11 recommendations in seven thematic areas: (1) a
national diabetes strategy for Canada, (2) research funding, (3) disability tax credit, (4)
provincial/territorial coverage of diabetes-related medications, supplies and equipment
(5) cost of insulin, (6) access to health services including in rural and remote
communities, and (7) diabetes-related education and training for health care
professionals. The government response was prepared, but not tabled due to the 2019
Federal Election. Once re-constituted, HESA may choose to readopt the report.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173) designating the month
of November as Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal – Ontario)
introduced Bill C-237, which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with the
representatives of the provincial governments responsible for health, Indigenous groups
and with other relevant stakeholders, to develop a national framework designed to
support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better health
outcomes for Canadians.
Both JDRF and Diabetes Canada submitted a brief for the Pre-budget Consultations in
Advance of the 2021 Budget of the Standing Committee on Finance. On September 10,
the All-Party Juvenile Diabetes Caucus wrote Minister Freeland to express its support
for the pre-budget recommendations submitted by the JDRF, citing it as an opportunity
for the Government of Canada to renew its investment of $15 million in the JDRF-CIHR
Partnership.
Diabetes Canada
Diabetes Canada publicly expressed disappointment about not received funding in
Budget 2018 and 2019 for their national strategy to address diabetes as outlined in their
Diabetes 360◦ report.
Missing Doc.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with
Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation
policies. This funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required
to support a submission to Health Canada for regulatory authorization. Canada’s blood
system is internationally recognized for its high safety standards. It is, and will continue
to be, one of the safest blood systems in the world.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
KEY MESSAGES
 Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
 I’m proud that our government has been working on
reducing barriers preventing MSM from donating blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-
Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral period for
donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services,
starting in 2016, and in collaboration with Héma-
Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting
in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing
barriers to the donation of plasma.
 Health Canada remains open to assessing future changes to
the MSM donor deferral policy, including its elimination,
provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot
mandate a policy change to donor screening requirements.
 Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make
submissions to Health Canada demonstrating the change’s
potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific
data. Without this evidence, the current screening policies
cannot be changed.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
 This matter is presently before the court and further details
of Canada’s legal position will be provided to the court.
 Cette affaire est actuellement devant le tribunal et des
détails supplémentaires sur la position juridique du Canada
seront communiqués au tribunal.
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
There are no regulations prohibiting MSM and other groups from donating blood. Donor
deferrals are policy decisions of the blood operators. However, under Canada's Blood
Regulations, CBS and H-Q are required to make submissions to HC for any changes to
their processes. HC must evaluate and authorize any changes before they can be
implemented. HC has no authority to mandate that a donor screening criterion be
changed due to perceived discriminatory aspects.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another
man even once since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a
request from CBS and H-Q to change its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral
period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent proposals from CBS and H-Q,
to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a one-year
deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to
further reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
There are two main blood donor deferral strategies used internationally to address the
risk of HIV and other disease transmission. The first and most common is a time-based
deferral based on the higher-risk activities of specific populations, such as the MSM
deferral currently applied in Canada. The second is an individual-based deferral that
looks at higher-risk activities on a donor-by-donor basis. This is often referred to as a
behaviour-based deferral and usually includes questions on new partners or multiple
partners of either sex.
In 2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence
base supporting a non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Results of these
research projects are expected to be available in 2021, to inform future blood donation
policies. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20,
for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood plasma.
Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are under
evaluation for MSM.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM.
Some countries, such as Austria and the Ukraine, maintain indefinite deferral periods,
while other countries, including France and Australia, have one-year deferral periods.
Others have adopted a 3-month deferral including England, Scotland, Wales, and
United States. Some countries, such as Spain and Italy, do not have MSM-specific
deferral periods. For example, in Italy the donor screening includes a face-to-face
interview in a private and confidential location by a trained physician who is responsible
for donor selection.
HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
SYNOPSIS
 Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic
in nature. With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command
high prices which pose significant challenges to patients, caregivers, and the
health care system, including the sustainability of public and private drug plans
that pay for these drugs.
 Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-
23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the September
2020 Speech from the Throne, this includes working with willing provinces,
territories and stakeholders to establish a national strategy for high cost drugs for
rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 The September 2020 Speech from the Throne referenced a rare diseases
strategy, which was previously included as a commitment in Budget 2019. Why
has the Government not delivered on this strategy while Canadians with rare
diseases desparately wait?
KEY MESSAGES
 We recognize that for many Canadians who require
prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the cost of these
medications can be astronomically high.
 To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments,
we are working with provinces, territories and other partners
willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for
high cost drugs for rare diseases.
 Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two
years, starting in 2022-2023, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the
drugs they need. The recent Speech from the Throne
highlights the Government’s continued commitment in
developing a national strategy.
 Our Government has also been working with key
stakeholders to improve access by encouraging the
development and availability of drugs for rare diseases for
Canadians. In 2019, 16 of the 35 new drugs Health Canada
approved were drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
 Despite the global pandemic, our Government recognizes
the pressing need to improve access and affordability of
treatments for rare diseases.
 In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other
partners, we intend to continue to work toward delivering a
national strategy by 2022-2023.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians

having access to the treatments they need.
Health Canada's Special Access Program considers

requests for access to drugs that are unavailable for sale in
Canada. There have been approximately 150 drugs
accessed through the program for the treatment of rare
diseases.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH…
Our Government recognizes that supporting research is

another important aspect of addressing rare diseases.
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR),
Canada is playing an important role, both at the national and
international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member

of the International Rare Diseases Research Consortium
and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main
instrument for funding research in areas related to rare
diseases.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
 Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic
in nature. They are often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early
childhood.
 More than 7,000 rare diseases (cancer and non-cancer) have been identified to
date. Despite the number of rare diseases, each disease affects a relatively small
number of patients (e.g., less than 5 in 10,000; typically closer to 1 in 100,000).
 Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are
high-end users of the public health care system.
HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
 Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in
unmet clinical need. Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can
command high prices. The pharmaceutical treatments for rare diseases are often
referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or high cost
drugs for rare diseases.
 High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research,
limited number of patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
 The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active
member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the
governments’ collective buying power to negotiate lower prices on brand name
drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
 In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines
Regulations to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has
the tools and information to protect consumers from excessive patented medicine
prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for governments
and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the
brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed
concerns that the amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical
investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
 Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through
participation in clinical trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the
Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are met, Health Canada’s
Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the
SAP are for the treatment of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
 Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on high cost drugs for
rare diseases, including on new drugs for specific patient cases, and general
calls emphasizing the need for a national strategy.
 To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage
status of patients taking high cost drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this
will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER PERSPECTIVES ON HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
 There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private
insurers and other health system partners for federal funding for high cost drugs
for rare diseases.
 Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of
access vs. affordability vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive
engagement approach. This will also help manage expectations around the limits
of federal funding.
 Engagement efforts will be carried out virtually and are expected to commence in
this fall. Key stakeholders will include PTs, patients and patient groups,
clinicians, health technology assessment organizations, pharmaceutical
manufacturers, private payers, and international jurisdictions.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
 Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is
supporting research on rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining
important international research initiatives, such as the International Rare
Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22
countries.
 As of 2017, this international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal
products and therapies for rare diseases.
LYME DISEASE
SYNOPSIS
Lyme disease continues to draw public, political and media attention with particular
scrutiny on the number of human cases, risks, diagnosis and treatment in Canada. In
particular, the risk of transmission from mother to baby during pregnancy is an issue
of concern to some advocacy groups.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes that Lyme disease is increasing
in Canada, due in part to climate change.
 We are committed to working with stakeholders to help
protect Canadians.
 We are raising public awareness of Lyme disease and
making sure health care providers have the information they
need to recognize the symptoms.
 We are funding research on the diagnosis and treatment of
Lyme disease to support early detection and care.
IF PRESSED on LYME DISEASE DURING PREGNANCY …
 Our Government recognizes that further research is required
to better understand if there may be adverse effects of Lyme
disease during pregnancy.
 Our Government will continue to support research to help
address the significant knowledge gaps that exist on this
topic.
IF PRESSED on CHANGES TO CDC WEBSITE LANGUAGE …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is aware of the recent
revisions to the United States’ Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention website regarding Lyme disease and
pregnancy.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to monitor
new evidence as it becomes available, and is committed to
providing Canadians with up-to-date information on Lyme
disease so that they can take measures to protect their
health.
BACKGROUND
Caused by the bite of an infected blacklegged tick, Lyme disease can cause serious
symptoms such as long-term neurological problems, chronic pain and fatigue.
However, if diagnosed early, it can be effectively treated with antibiotics. The
number of regions with established blacklegged ticks continues to increase across
Canada. The provinces reported 2,025 cases of Lyme disease in 2017, compared to
1,487 cases in 2018. Although total cases were down in 2018, there has been
variation in case numbers from year to year. The overall trend over the past 10
years indicates that incidence of Lyme disease is increasing in many areas of
Canada, in part due to climate warming and associated expansion of tick habitats.
Federal Role:
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) monitors Lyme disease in Canada.
PHAC provides national information on the number of cases reported and identifies
where Lyme disease is present and emerging in Canada. Addressing Lyme disease
is a shared responsibility. In partnership with public health authorities at other levels
of government, the Government of Canada is raising awareness through public
education; supporting surveillance activities and national reporting; conducting and
supporting laboratory diagnostic testing; engaging with international and domestic
organizations; and funding research. Provinces and territories (P/Ts) provide
healthcare services to Lyme disease patients and coordinate prevention and control
activities.
Federal Framework on Lyme Disease
The Federal Framework on Lyme Disease Act came into force on May 30, 2017. The
effectiveness of the Framework must be reviewed in five years, and a report on these
findings must also be tabled in each House of Parliament (2022). The Framework
includes an Action Plan with three pillars:
 Surveillance : Coordination of national surveillance to monitor and report on human
cases of Lyme disease and the geographic distribution of ticks;
 Education and Awareness: Increasing awareness of Lyme disease among health
professionals and the general public; and,
 Guidelines and Best Practices: Supporting medical professionals and provincial
laboratories in the diagnosis of Lyme disease and work to improve laboratory
diagnostic testing.
There is no dedicated long-term funding for the implementation of the Federal
Framework on Lyme disease.
Research Network on Lyme disease
Between 2014-15 and 2018-19, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
invested approximately $2.6 million in Lyme disease research. This includes
approximately $1.1 million in 2018-19.
In October 2018, CIHR and PHAC invested $4million over 4 years in the Canadian
Lyme Disease Research Network, led by Dr. Kieran Moore from Queen’s University. Dr.
Moore and his research team are working with Lyme disease stakeholders, including
researchers, clinicians and patients, in order to facilitate national collaboration and to
generate new knowledge to improve the diagnosis, treatment, and health outcomes for
people with Lyme disease.
Infectious Diseases and Climate Change Fund
PHAC’s Infectious Disease and Climate Change (IDCC) Fund provides $2 million
annually over 11 years (2017-2028) to help Canadians, communities and health
professionals have the information they need to better understand their risks and
take measures to protect themselves from climate-driven infectious diseases. As
of November 2020, more than $4 million in funding has been invested to support
fourteen new Lyme disease projects focussed on enhancing surveillance and
monitoring efforts, and developing new education and awareness resources and
tools for the public and health professionals.
Current Issues: Lyme Disease and Pregnancy
Revisions to U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) Website
Language
On January 27, 2020, the U.S. CDC revised their website (cdc.gov/lyme) to include
revised language regarding transmission of Lyme disease during pregnancy. The
revised language states ―untreated Lyme disease during pregnancy can lead to
infection of the placenta. Spread from mother to fetus is possible but rare.‖ As the
source of evidence for the updated language, CDC cites a 1997 review article of early
case reports and epidemiologic studies from 1983 to 1997. The change in language on
the CDC website has prompted an immediate response from media and stakeholder
groups, who are calling for the Canadian government to follow U.S. recognition of
mother-to-fetus Lyme disease transmission.
Federal Initiatives and Investments
PHAC and the CDC conducted a systematic review to assess the literature on Lyme
disease and its effect on pregnancy and the fetus, which was published in a peer-
reviewed journal in November 2018. The review concludes that, while maternal-fetal
transmission is biologically plausible, more research is needed to determine whether
maternal-fetal transmission occurs, and if so, whether there is any association with poor
outcomes for the baby. The PHAC review is consistent with the April 2018 review done
by the UK National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, both of which have
indicated that there is no conclusive evidence of maternal-fetal transmission of Lyme
disease.
Through the IDCC Fund, PHAC provided funding of $525,274 to the Society of
Obstetricians and Gynecologists of Canada (SOGC) to review the current
evidence on the effects of Lyme disease and other tick-borne diseases on
pregnancy and pregnancy outcomes. In May 2020, SOGC published the
Committee Opinion No. 399: Management of Tick Bites and Lyme Disease
During Pregnancy. The research concluded that while currently there are no
conclusive data to support transplacental transmission of Lyme disease, more
research is needed to address the gaps in knowledge around Lyme disease in
pregnancy and potential congenital infection. Lyme disease and other tick-borne
diseases represent an evolving field. The guidance provided in SOGC’s
committee opinion is based on the best available evidence. The funding provided
to SOGC also supports the development of resources that will equip health care
providers and women with evidence-based information and tools on Lyme
disease and other tick-borne diseases during pregnancy. It is expected that they
will complete this work in the coming months.
PHAC will continue to monitor new evidence as it becomes available and is committed
to providing Canadians with up-to-date information on Lyme disease so that they can
take measures to protect their health.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – DEBATE ON BILL C-7
SYNOPSIS
Bill C-7 was reintroduced on October 5, 2020 and responds to the Superior Court of
Quebec decision in Truchon, which struck down the eligibility requirement of a
reasonably foreseeable natural death (RFND). Bill C-7 was originally tabled on
February 24, 2020 and was terminated with the prorogation of Parliament.
The Quebec court originally suspended its judgment until March 11, 2020. In light of
COVID-19, the deadline was extended to December 18, 2020. If legislative changes are
not passed prior to this date, there will be a difference in eligibility for MAID between
Quebec and the rest of Canada.
The original MAID legislation required a Parliamentary Review of its provisions and of
the state of palliative care in Canada. It was originally anticipated that this review would
be initiated in June 2020 but this was delayed due to the pandemic.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the status of the government’s amendments to the MAID legislation and
the parliamentary review as required in the original MAID legislation?
KEY MESSAGES
● Bill C-7 was reintroduced in Parliament on October 5, 2020.
It responds to the Truchon decision, while also addressing
areas where there is strong provider and public support for
improvement in the medical assistance in dying law.
● We are working with Parliamentarians to meet the deadline
of December 18, 2020 set by the Quebec Court in order to
provide a consistent legal framework for MAID for all
Canadians.
● Our Government recognizes the importance of the
Parliamentary Review which will provide an opportunity to
address complex issues not addressed in Bill C-7. It is up to
Parliament to determine the scope and timing of this review.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean
Truchon and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an
individual’s natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial
requirement for a person to be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did
not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016
Criminal Code provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. These proposed
amendments were:
● remove the RFND eligibility requirement (those suffering solely from mental illness would not
be eligible);
● introduce two-tracks of safeguards (RFND and non-RFND);
● allow ―waiving of final consent‖ for eligible persons in the RFND category who may lose
capacity to consent before MAID is provided; and
● expand data collection to provide a more complete picture of MAID in Canada
The original Bill was terminated with the prorogation of Parliament. Bill C-7 was re-introduced
on October 5, 2020; its content was unchanged.
The Quebec court originally suspended its judgement until March 11, 2020. At the request of
the Government of Canada, the date of invalidity was extended to July 11, 2020, and then again
to December 18, 2020 in light of disruptions to parliamentary business during the pandemic.
During the period of suspension, Quebec residents who meet all eligibility requirements (other
than RFND) are able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their
request for MAID considered.
As of late October, 2020, eleven Quebec residents have applied for exemptions. Ten of these
requests have been approved, with one request still pending. Two people have received MAID
through an individual exemption, including Jean Truchon.
MAID DELIVERY DURING THE PANDEMIC
While MAID delivery continues, provinces and territories have experienced challenges during
the pandemic. Key concerns include:
● Obtaining individuals to act as witnesses to a MAID request and practitioner access to the
individual requesting MAID, either due to institutional policies limiting visitors or limited
supply of personal protective equipment (PPE) available to facilitate a safe encounter.
● Residents of faith-based institutions with restrictive MAID policies unable to move to another
location to receive MAID due to cancelled or limited transfers.
● Availability of drug supply used in MAID provision because the same drugs are also used as
sedatives for the ventilation of COVID-19 patients.
In response to correspondence from the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and
Providers encouraging use of virtual witnessing/assessment, Minister Lametti confirmed that
provisions in the Criminal Code do not pose a barrier to the use of electronic tools to facilitate
assessing or witnessing a MAID request. Many provincial governments and health professional
regulatory bodies have released pandemic-adapted guidelines/policies such as supporting the
use of virtual witnessing/assessments and preserving back-up MAID kits to prevent disposal of
unused drugs.
Some practitioners have reported increased MAID inquiries from individuals concerned about
their options in the context of COVID. The authors of an April 2020 Canadian Medical
Association Journal article state that palliative sedation is preferable for COVID positive patients
with a poor prognosis, given the procedural requirements for MAID. This view has been
reiterated by Dying With Dignity Canada.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID require the federal Minister of Health to produce an
annual report of MAID data. The first report, released on July 24, 2020, covers data collected
under the new reporting regime for the 2019 calendar year.
This report found that, in 2019, there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID, accounting for 2.0%
of all deaths (this percentage is in line with that of other permissive jurisdictions). This
represents an increase of 26.1% over 2018 numbers, with all provinces experiencing a steady
year over year growth in the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all data sources are
considered, the total of number of medically assisted deaths reported in Canada since the
enactment of federal legislation is 13,946.
Importantly, it also found that the majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported
to have received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access palliative
care services before receiving MAID, the majority (89.6%) would have had access to these
services according to the reporting practitioner. Similarly, 89.9% of persons receiving MAID
deemed to require disability support services received them.
The regulations came into force in November 2018 and set out reporting requirements for
participating physicians, nurse practitioners and pharmacists. Under this new reporting regime,
data is now being collected on all written requests for MAID and its provision. The regulations
will need to be updated to reflect the changes to the legislation proposed in the amendments.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
As outlined in the current legislation, the 2016 law was to be referred to one or more
Parliamentary Committees by June 2020. The parliamentary review will provide an opportunity
to undertake a comprehensive review of the MAID legislation as well as the state of palliative
care in Canada. The timing and scope of the review will be determined by Parliamentarians.
ORGAN DONATION
SYNOPSIS
 Every year, hundreds of Canadians die while waiting for an organ transplant.
Data from the Canadian Institute for Health Information shows that deceased
donor rates in Canada increased by 42% between 2009 and 2018. However,
Canada’s donation rates lag behind higher donor countries such as Spain, United
States and United Kingdom.
 Due to the COVID-19 pandemic, data from Canadian Blood Services shows that
there has been a 28% decrease in deceased donation and living donation has
decreased by 44% compared to 2019. Although rates are not at previous levels,
donation rates are rising again.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to improve organ donation and
transplantation in the country?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes the value of organ and tissue
donation and transplantation, and has an important role to
play in protecting the health and safety of Canadians who
need transplants as well as those who are living donors.
 Budget 2019 committed $36.5 million over five years, to
improve consistency and quality in data to ensure Canadians
have timely and effective access to organ transplant care.
 This investment will support the development of a pan-
Canadian data and performance system for organ donation
and transplantation, in collaboration with provinces and
territories, leading to more donors and recipients being
effectively matched.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THE ORGAN DONATION AND TRANSPLANTATION
COLLABROATIVE …
 Our Government recognizes that too many Canadians are
on organ waitlists. Since 2018, we have led a joint initiative,
the Organ Donation and Transplantation Collaborative, in
collaboration with the provinces and territories (except
Quebec), Canadian Blood Services and other stakeholders
to identify opportunities to improve the organ donation and
transplantation system for the benefit of Canadians.
Transplant Quebec participates as an observer.
 An additional $5 million over three years was allocated to
stakeholder organizations to support several major projects
arising from this collaboration that are aimed at improving
the accessibility, quality, sustainability and accountability of
Canada’s organ donation and transplantation system. One of
these projects will evaluate the impact of new ―opt-out‖
legislation in Nova Scotia, the Nova Scotia Human Organ
and Tissue Donation Act, which takes effect January 2021.
 By working together, we are identifying ways to continue to
improve the organ and tissue donation and transplantation
ecosystem and we will keep the House informed as this
process unfolds.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL INVOLVEMENT…
 Health Canada also regulates the safety of the system
through a national regulatory compliance and enforcement
program for human cells, tissues and organs for
transplantation. Serious adverse reactions to transplants are
also monitored.
BACKGROUND
Canadian Blood Services (CBS) is a not-for-profit charitable organization that is
financed by provinces and territories. Its primary mission is to manage the blood and
blood products supply for Canadians in every province but Quebec, where Héma-
Quebec has this responsibility. CBS also has roles in plasma, stem cells, and organs
and tissues.
the Organ Donation and Transplantation Collaborative (ODTC) was launched in
early 2018 in collaboration with Canadian Blood Services, various stakeholders, and
provinces and territories (Transplant Quebec participates as an observer). The
purpose of the ODTC is to inform thinking and facilitate action and collaboration on
improving Canada’s organ donation and transplantation system performance. The
priorities of the ODTC are based on comprehensive stakeholder engagement..
Membership aims to reflect the spectrum of functional (clinical, administrative,
research, patient advocacy), jurisdictional, and geographic stakeholders.
Between 2014-15 and 2018-19, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
invested close to $105 million in transplantation research, with over $20 million
invested in 2018-19 alone. In June 2018, an additional $3.3 million was invested by
CIHR and its partners ($2.4 million from CIHR) to support for the Canadian Donation
and Transplantation Research Program.
Budget 2019 provided Health Canada with $36.5 million over five years, starting in
2019–20, with $5 million per year ongoing, to develop a pan-Canadian data and
performance system for organ donation and transplantation, in collaboration with
provincial and territorial partners.
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), in 2018 a total of
2,782 transplants were performed in Canada (including Quebec), there were 4351
patients on organ waitlists, and 223 patients died while waiting for a transplant.
Kidneys are the core of the organ donation and transplantation system. In 2018,
59% of all organs transplanted were kidneys.
CIHI (2019). Annual Statistics on Organ Replacement in Canada: Dialysis, Transplantation and
Donation, 2009 to 2018. https://www.cihi.ca/sites/default/files/document/corr-snapshot-2019-en.pdf.
PHARMACARE
SYNOPSIS
 Last session, the NDP introduced Private Member’s Bill C-231 to implement
single-payer universal pharmacare, as well as a motion that passed with
Government support in March.
 In Budget 2019, the Government announced steps toward the implementation of
national pharmacare, including the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency, a
national formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare
program?
KEY MESSAGES
 No Canadian should have to choose between paying for
prescription drugs and putting food on the table.
 The Government of Canada is committed to working with
provinces, territories and stakeholders to implement
national universal pharmacare so that Canadians have the
drug coverage they need.
 As committed in Budget 2019, this important work will
include establishing a Canadian Drug Agency, a national
formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for
rare diseases.
 We have already taken action to improve access and
affordability of medicines. Last year, we modernized the
way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada,
which will save Canadians billions over the next decade.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
 On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213,
An Act to Enact the Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill
would provide for a legislative framework for a public single-payer drug coverage
system in Canada.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
 On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from
NDP MP Don Davies (Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government
to negotiate with the PTs to establish a dedicated fiscal transfer for universal,
single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the Government’s
support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national
pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final
report of the Hoskins Advisory Council on the Implementation of National
Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate initiation of multilateral
negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated fiscal
transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long
term, predictable, fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to
drug coverage, which protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance
companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the
economy while making life more affordable for everyone and strengthening our
health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
 In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council
on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The
Council engaged with Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous
leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional roundtables,
town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019,
the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the
implementation of national universal pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
 Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019
announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements
of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach
towards assessing effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary
to promote more consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to
help Canadians get better access to the effective treatments they need.
 Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to
establish a Transition Office to support the creation of a Canada Drug Agency
and national formulary. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over
two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help
Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
 In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines
Regulations to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has
the tools and information to fulfill its mandate to protect consumers from
excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will
result in savings for governments and private payers of approximately $13.2
billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name pharmaceutical industry and
some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could result
in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
 On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that
maintained most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of
confidential rebate information.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations to provide the PMPRB with the tools and
information needed to protect Canadians from excessive prices of patented
medicines. On October 23, 2020, the PMPRB published its final Guidelines to
operationalize the amendments, which will come-into-force on January 1, 2021.
 The brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have
expressed concerns that the amendments could result in reduced
pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to medicines.
 On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling that maintained most of the
regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why does the Government insist on continuing with the amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations when it impacts Canadians’ access to new
medicines?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government remains committed to increasing the
affordability and accessibility of prescription drugs, including
patented medicines, to improve the health of Canadians and
better meet health care system needs.
 Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in
the world, and these high prices negatively affect the ability
of patients to access new medicines. These regulatory
amendments will help Canadians to afford the prescription
medicines they need.
 Canada will continue to be an important market for new
medicines. In fact, many countries with much lower medicine
prices gain access to new medicines in the same time frame,
or even faster than Canada.
If Pressed on the Coming-into-Force Date
 The amendments were scheduled to come into force on July
1, 2020.
 The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demands on the
pharmaceutical industry. For that reason, the Government
delayed the coming into force of the amendments by six
months—until January 1, 2021.
 This delay allowed manufacturers of patented drugs
additional time to make any necessary adjustments to
comply with the new regulatory regime.
If Pressed on the Access to COVID-19 Patented Medicines
(Drugs and Vaccines):
 Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians
have access to the drugs, vaccines and medical devices that
are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
 On September 17, 2020, the PMPRB issued a policy notice
stating that special consideration would be given to specified
patented medicines authorized for use in COVID-19. This
policy notice was adopted as part of a government-wide
effort to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical
devices urgently needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment,
mitigation or prevention.
 In this policy notice, the PMPRB indicated that certain
patented medicines on lists published by Health Canada
would not be subject to review or investigation unless a
pricing complaint is received from myself or any of my
provincial or territorial counterparts.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry
and Drug Access
 Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales
are expected to continue growing over the next ten years in
Canada.
 Drug companies are expected to launch their products in
Canada at the same rate as they do today. In fact, industry
sponsored studies have found that many countries with
lower prices than Canada have faster access to new
medicines, including the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
Kingdom and Norway.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
If pressed on impact on pharmaceutical investments in
Canada
 Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical
industry investments, while having considerably lower prices
than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times
more investment dollars than Canada despite prices being
20% less.
 Our Government recognizes the importance of the life
sciences sector to the Canadian economy, innovation, and
quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the
innovation ecosystem in Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products, and strengthened intellectual property protection in
recent trade agreements.
If pressed on recent litigation
 There are ongoing proceedings before the Federal Court of
Appeal and the Superior Court of Québec.
 The PMPRB is aware of these proceedings and will take any
decisions into account.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines
Consultation Process
 The PMPRB has published all written submissions it
received during its consultation with stakeholders and the
public on the draft Guidelines.
 The PMPRB made revisions to the final Guidelines in
response to the significant stakeholder feedback it received.
 The PMPRB published its final Guidelines on October 23,
2020.
BACKGROUND
 As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the Patented Medicine Prices
Review Board (PMPRB) reviews the prices patentees charge for patented
medicines on the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or hold public hearings to determine whether
a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
 The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the
PMPRB to inquire into any matter regarding patented medicine prices and report
its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the Minister is responsible for
making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced the final
amendments to the Patentend Medicines Regulations which were then published
on August 21, 2019 in Canada Gazette, Part II. At that time, the amendments
were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
 The most significant reforms to the Patentend Medicines Regulations since their
introduction in 1987, these amendments lay the groundwork for national
pharmacare by giving the PMPRB the tools and information to protect Canadians
from excessive prices of patented medicines.
 The amendments include three main elements:
 Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that
consider the price of patented medicines relative to their value and impact
on the Canadian health care system;
 Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of
all adjustments (e.g. rebates, discounts); and,
 Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with
comparable consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine
markets as Canada.
 On August 23, 2019, five brand-name pharmaceutical firms (the Canadian
subsidiaries of Merck, Janssen, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Servier) filed a
constitutional challenge against the amendments in the Superior Court of
Quebec. The hearing started on September 28, 2020 but following three days of
hearing, the court was adjourned and will resume on November 17, 2020.
 On September 2, 2019, Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC), which represents
Canada’s brand-name pharmaceutical industry, and sixteen Canadian
subsidiaries of brand-name pharmaceutical companies, filed an application for a
judicial review of the amendments by the Federal Court of Canada. On June 29,
2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that maintained most of
the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Either party can initiate an appeal in a split ruling, and on September
10, 2020, a Notice of Appeal was filed by IMC and a Notice of Cross-Appeal was
filed by the Crown on September 21, 2020.
 On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations on its
accompanying Guidelines, which will define operational implementation of the
amendments, including specific price tests that will be applied. The PMPRB’s
consultation included numerous opportunities for stakeholder engagement and
extended the consultation window to allow constructive engagements to
continue.
 On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were informed that the coming-into-force of the
regulatory amendments would be delayed by six months. The delay responds to
the circumstances of COVID-19, including increased demands on industry
stakeholders. It also resulted in additional time for stakeholders to engage with
the PMPRB through its Guidelines consultation process, which was also
disrupted by COVID-19. The amendments will now come-into-force on January
1, 2021.
 On June 19, 2020, the PMPRB released revised draft Guidelines, which
operationalize the regulatory amendments, and undertook further consultations.
 The PMPRB published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
 The PMPRB has indicated that patented medicines appearing on either the List
of Drugs for Exceptional Importation and Sale or any list associated with other
COVID-19 Interim Orders will not be subject to review or an investigation unless
a complaint is received from either the federal Minister of Health or any of her
provincial or territorial counterparts.
SEASONAL INFLUENZA
SYNOPSIS
The flu season in Canada usually runs from mid-November to mid-May. In a typical year
in Canada, seasonal influenza leads to an estimated 12,200 hospitalizations and 3,500
deaths. The flu shot, recommended for all Canadians six months of age and older, is
the most effective way to prevent the flu and flu-related complications, such as
pneumonia. The flu shot is especially important this year because of the ongoing
pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of Canadians is our Government’s top
priority.
 Vaccination is the best defense against the flu. That is why
we work with the provinces and territories to provide flu
vaccine to Canadians every year during flu season. The
Government of Canada supports provinces and territories by
bulk procurement of flu vaccine, based on vaccine orders
placed by jurisdictions.
 All provincial and territorial flu vaccine orders have been
filled. In addition, we have a reserve that is available to
them, and we are accessing more supply from vaccine
manufacturers expected for mid-December.
 This year, because of the COVID-19 pandemic, we are
ensuring that residents in long-term care are protected from
the flu. We have purchased high-dose flu vaccine (FluZone)
for long-term care residents 65 and older in all provinces and
territories.
 Demand for the flu vaccine is high, but not necessarily
higher than what is typically seen at the start of program
launch.
 It may take longer than normal to get the vaccine due to
physical distancing and other safety measures in place
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 We are raising public awareness of the benefits of
vaccination for individuals, families, and communities. We
are giving Canadians the information they need to prevent
illness.
BACKGROUND
Seasonal influenza epidemics occur in Canada every year. Canada’s flu season
typically runs from mid-November to mid-May and peaks during the winter months. The
best time to get the influenza vaccine is between October and December; however, the
vaccine can still be effective even when received during later winter months. Each year
in Canada, seasonal influenza leads to an estimated 12,200 hospitalizations and 3,500
deaths. The flu shot, recommended for all Canadians six months of age and older, is
the most effective way to prevent the flu and flu-related complications, such as
pneumonia.
In light of the upcoming flu season, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is
planning for the potential co-circulation of both the flu and COVID-19 in Canada. While
the symptoms of the flu and COVID-19 can appear to be similar, it reinforces the
importance of getting the annual flu shot and then if you feel sick, getting tested for
COVID-19 and staying home.
Vaccine Effectiveness (VE) & Coverage
The Canadian Sentinel Practitioner Surveillance Network has published estimates of
influenza vaccine effectiveness against primary care visits for influenza. Based on data
from the early part of the 2019-20 influenza season up to February 1, 2020, vaccine
effectiveness was estimated to be 58% against influenza, 44% for A(H1N1), 62% for
A(H3N2), and 69% for influenza B.
Substantial protection was observed among children 1 to 19 years of age against both
influenza A and B. A good level of protection was also observed among working age
adults (20-64) across all influenza types. VE among adults 65 years and older, although
imprecise due to small numbers, was lower at 18%.
The 2019-2020 influenza season vaccine coverage was similar to the 2018-2019
season. 34% of adults aged 18 to 64 years and 70% of seniors (aged 65 years and
older) received their annual seasonal influenza vaccine.
2020-21 Influenza Surveillance
Canada participates in national and international activities to detect and monitor the
spread of influenza in humans and animals. PHAC maintains FluWatch, Canada’s
national surveillance system that monitors circulating flu viruses, activity levels,
outbreaks, and hospitalizations.
Testing for influenza continues at elevated levels; however, influenza activity remains
below average for this time of year.
In week 43 ((October 18 to October 24) 7715 tests for influenza were performed at
reporting laboratories, which is 2 times the average for this period over the past 6
seasons. Additionally, one outbreak of laboratory-confirmed influenza was reported in a
long-term care facility (LTCF). No other influenza or influenza-like-illness (ILI) outbreaks
were reported in any other settings.
Also during this reporting period two laboratory detections of influenza were reported
and two jurisdictions reported influenza activity. To date, no influenza-associated
hospitalizations were reported by participating provinces and territories.
Global situation summary
Globally, influenza activity remains at lower levels than expected for this time of the
year, although sporadic detections have been reported in some countries. Influenza
activity in temperate regions of the Southern Hemisphere remained low or below
baseline during the 2020 season.
As in Canada, changes in public behaviour, healthcare service delivery, and the
adaptation or initiation of surveillance programs for COVID-19 may affect the
comparability of influenza surveillance data with previous years, as well as the timing,
duration and intensity of the season. However, numerous studies have documented
reductions in influenza and other respiratory virus circulation because of public health
measures to reduce transmission of COVID-19.
Influenza Vaccine Development and Supply
The World Health Organization (WHO) issues recommendations each year on the
composition of the influenza vaccines for the southern and northern hemispheres.
These recommendations are used by national vaccine regulatory agencies and
pharmaceutical companies to develop, produce and license seasonal influenza
vaccines. WHO has released the recommended composition of the influenza vaccine
for use in the 2020-2021 northern hemisphere influenza season. The recommended
strain was changed for each of the A(H1N1), A(H3N2) and B/Victoria components
compared to the 2019-20 vaccine.
The P/Ts and some federal departments (Correctional Service of Canada, Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, and Department of National Defence) order the majority of
their influenza vaccine through Public Services and Procurement Canada’s Bulk
Procurement Program. The P/Ts use their discretion to make decisions regarding their
influenza vaccination programs, including eligible populations, vaccine types and
quantities.
Provincial and territorial governments have increased their vaccine orders for this year’s
influenza season in expectation of increased demand. Orders have been placed with
suppliers for more than 14 million doses of vaccine for 2020-21. In addition, this year
the Government of Canada has created a small reserve of additional doses that will be
made available to provinces and territories if needed. Approximately 300,000 additional
doses are now available and have been equitably allocated to PTs who can now order it
as needed. Efforts are underway to secure an additional (approximately) 1.3M doses,
with the majority of these doses available in mid-December. Final quantity for this later
supplier is still to be fully confirmed.
To date, most of the provincial and territorial orders have been released and
manufacturers are distributing additional doses from reserve supplies.
As a one-time initiative to help protect one of Canada’s most vulnerable populations in
the event of the co-circulation of both COVID-19 and influenza this fall and winter, the
federal government is purchasing Fluzone® High-Dose vaccine for long-term care
residents in all provinces and territories. This initiative includes purchasing Fluzone®
High-Dose vaccine for those provinces and territories that don’t regularly cover it as part
of their public immunization programs, and purchase costs in provinces and territories
that do already offer Fluzone® High Dose vaccine to long-term care residents 65 and
older as part of their program.
Recommendations for Influenza Vaccination
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI), an expert advisory body to
PHAC, annually reviews available scientific evidence to provide recommendations for
vaccinating Canadians with seasonal flu vaccine. NACI recommends that everyone 6
months and older, without contraindications, receive an annual flu shot.
The influenza vaccine remains the best line of defense against influenza and is
especially important for those at high risk of severe illness from influenza. Evidence
suggests that the influenza vaccine protects pregnant women and their newborns. NACI
notes that seasonal influenza vaccination provides benefits to health care workers and
to the patients for whom they care. NACI considers the provision of influenza
vaccination to be an essential component of the standard of care for all health care
workers for the protection of their patients.
Additional guidance has been developed to support the operation of influenza vaccine
programs during the COVID-19 pandemic. PHAC has published guidance on the
delivery of influenza vaccine in clinics and other vaccination settings for this fall. This
includes advice on infection prevention and control measures, physical distancing,
alternate delivery models (e.g. drive-through clinics), and personal protective equipment
needs for staff, volunteers, and vaccine recipients. Guidance has also been developed
on who should receive the influenza vaccine this fall, and what to do if someone seeking
vaccination is showing symptoms.
Concerns have been raised regarding the potential for influenza vaccine to worsen
COVID-19 symptoms. Based on international and Canadian studies, experts agree that
this concern is not supported by the currently available evidence base. Everyone who is
eligible should receive the influenza vaccine.
NACI also recently developed guidance recommending the usual wait time of at least 15
minutes after receiving the influenza vaccine be maintained in most circumstances. The
usual wait time could potentially be reduced after vaccination to limit the spread of
COVID-19 in clinics during times when proper physical distancing cannot be
maintained, due to a surge in people seeking vaccination.
NACI is also examining evidence related to the effectiveness of different influenza
vaccine doses, in the rare event that there is a significant shortage of influenza vaccine.
There is no shortage expected at this time.
Smoking and Tobacco Use in Canada
SYNOPSIS
 Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death
in this country, killing more than 47,000 Canadians each year. Smoking has negative
effects on many systems in the body. Smoking compromises the immune system
and increases the risk for pulmonary infections, as well as negatively affecting the
functioning of the lungs and causing chronic lung disease, cancer and
cardiovascular diseases.
 Almost 5 million Canadians still smoke cigarettes – about 15% of the population over
the age of 15.
 The Government has an ambitious target to reduce tobacco use in Canada to less
than 5% by 2035. Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated
approach to increase cessation rates and protect youth and non-smokers from
nicotine addiction, with a $330M investment over five years, starting in May 2018.
 The Strategy includes funding for enhanced scientific and surveillance activities;
grants and contributions programming directed at increasing the reach and
effectiveness of prevention and cessation programming; public education;
collaborative activities with the provinces and territories; and partnership and
engagement with domestic, international and multi-sector stakeholders.
 The emergence of COVID-19 has raised concern about the potential of increased
risks posed by smoking. Cigarette smoking has negative effects on many systems in
the body that are also affected by COVID-19. Smoking negatively affects the
function of the lungs, causing inflammation and impairing the ability of the lungs to
clear mucus. In addition, smoking can increase the spread of COVID-19 as hand-to-
mouth behaviour creates an opportunity for the virus to enter the body.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address smoking and tobacco use in
Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable
disease and premature death in this country. The
Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using
tobacco and to protecting the health of young people and
non-smokers. Through Canada’s Tobacco Strategy, we are
working to drive down tobacco use in Canada to less than
5% by 2035.
 Canada has a long history in tobacco control. We are a
global leader in the regulation of tobacco products and have
implemented many internationally-recognized practices in
tobacco control.The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
(TVPA) regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling and
promotion of both tobacco and vaping products. The TVPA
includes significant restrictions to prevent the uptake of
tobacco and vaping products by youth and adults who do not
use these products.
 Building on the strong foundation provided by the TVPA, we
will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and
non-smokers from becoming addicted to nicotine and to
provide Canadians with health information on tobacco use.
 We are engaged with our provincial and territorial partners to
find new and innovative ways to increase quit attempts and
make it easier for Canadians currently using cigarettes to
access the support and resources they need to quit and
reduce the harms to their health.
 We are continuing work to prevent the appeal and access of
tobacco products to youth and supporting specific initiatives
for populations that face higher rates of tobacco use.
 We continue to invest in research, science and surveillance
to support evidence-based decision-making while also
increasing investments to better understand and combat the
illicit tobacco market.
IF PRESSED ON SMOKING AND COVID-19…
 The Government of Canada is investing in research and
international partnerships to understand the health effects of
COVID-19. We are aware of reports in the media on the
impacts that smoking may have on contracting or
experiencing a COVID-19 infection.
 New findings are being published every day and our
researchers are actively engaged in interpreting that data as
it evolves. Smoking is a leading cause of heart disease,
cancer and many respiratory illnesses. As COVID-19 is a
respiratory disease, there is some evidence that smokers
may be at greater risk of developing more severe symptoms
of the disease. In addition, smoking can increase the spread
of COVID-19 as hand-to-mouth behaviour creates an
opportunity for the virus to enter the body.
 People should avoid or reduce exposure to any substance
that might impair the normal function of the lungs and
immune system, including the use of cigarettes. This is a
stressful time, but if you currently smoke, now is an excellent
time to consider quitting.
 The Government of Canada recommends that you do not
share cigarettes with anyone, and that you wash your hands
frequently with soap and water, for at least 20 seconds each
time. For the latest information on COVID-19, how it
spreads, and how to protect yourself, we encourage
Canadians to visit www.canada.ca/coronavirus.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR SMOKERS…
 The Government of Canada is concerned with the risks
posed to Canadians by smoking.
 We urge Canadians to consider quitting smoking. We know
that when you give up cigarettes, your body starts to renew
itself as early as the first day of quitting. Quitting will improve
your life in ways you will see and feel, both now and later,
including reducing your chance of developing heart disease,
cancer, breathing problems, and infections.
 Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The
Government of Canada has many resources to help
Canadians quit and reduce the harms of smoking.
 We urge Canadians to contact the pan-Canadian toll-free
quitline where trained specialists can help them develop a
quit smoking plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to
programs and services in their community where available.
The quitline can be reached by phone at 1-866-366-3667 or
online at http://www.gosmokefree.gc.ca/quit.
IF PRESSED ON NEW AND PLANNED REGULATORY MEASURES FOR TOBACCO
 In 2019, the Government of Canada implemented the
Tobacco Products Regulations (Plain and Standardized
Appearance) to standardize the appearance of tobacco
packages and tobacco products.
 Tobacco packages and the products they contain are
powerful promotional vehicles. Evidence shows that plain
packaging is perceived as less appealing, particularly among
young people.
 These Regulations apply to all tobacco packages and
products. The measures include requiring a standard colour,
font, and font size on all tobacco packages, and removing
distinctive and attractive features such as the use of logos,
graphics and promotional information on packages.
Cigarette packaging will be standardized to a slide-and-shell
format, and the appearance of cigarettes and other tobacco
products will be standardized as well.
 We are also working to finalize new regulations that update
and expand requirements for Health Warning messages for
tobacco products to ensure that these labels remain
noticeable, memorable and engaging. These new labels will
enhance public awareness of the hazards of all tobacco
products while also providing information to Canadians who
currently use tobacco about information and resources they
can access to help them quit.
 In October 2018, Health Canada sought feedback on options
for new health labelling for tobacco products including
labelling on cigarettes. Comments received through this
consultation are being carefully considered as Health
Canada continues to develop new health-related labelling for
tobacco products.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES…
 The rates of use of commercial tobacco for Indigenous
peoples are two to five times higher than the overall
Canadian rate. The Government is committed to working
with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis organizations to co-
develop distinct and high quality approaches to address high
rates of commercial tobacco use.
 Indigenous Services Canada and Crown-Indigenous
Relations and Northern Affairs are investing $45M over five
years to support community-based tobacco use
programming and the co-development process.
BACKGROUND (NOT FOR PUBLIC USE)
Tobacco use in Canada
Data released on August 5, 2020 from the 2019 Canadian Community Health Survey
(CCHS) shows a continued downward trend in smoking over the past three decades for
Canadians 12 years of age and older. Smoking declined to 14.8% (4,684,400) from
15.8% (4,926,800 Canadians) in 2018 and from 17.7% (5,344,100 Canadians) in 2015.
Daily smoking also declined to 10.0% (3,160,100) from 10.9% (3,392,700 Canadians) in
2018 and from 12.6% (3,809,500 Canadians) in 2015. Daily smoking for youth aged 12-
17 is less than 1% (10,300). While the recent declines are positive, millions of
Canadians are still smoking, reminding us that, despite decades of effort to deter
smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public health problem in Canada. Tobacco
use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all long-term
daily smokers. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit are
up to four times higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released a report
entitled ―Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015 – 2017‖. The report identifies
the enormous burden tobacco use places on all Canadians. The report found that in
2017 the total cost of tobacco use to society was approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for
every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the deadliest substance by far
accounting for over 47,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per day or 17%
of all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address
tobacco use. It is led by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services
Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency, Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous
Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Public
Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
SUICIDE PREVENTION IN CANADA
SYNOPSIS
Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and
backgrounds across Canada. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is
supporting the implementation of a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service, which is providing 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government recognizes the impact suicide has on
families and communities.
 That is why we are investing $21 million over 5 years for the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health and its partners to
implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide
prevention service.
 Recognizing that supporting the mental health of Canadians
is fundamental to suicide prevention, the Government of
Canada has also provided provinces and territories with $5
billion over 10 years to improve access to mental health and
addiction services.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR COVID-19
 On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an
investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to expand
crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19
pandemic.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing
additional funding for the Canada Suicide Prevention Service
to support the increased demand for crisis support at this
time.
 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is currently
leading a COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative
that is providing new knowledge to inform policy making and
innovative services for mental health in the pandemic
context.
BACKGROUND
Approximately, 10 people die by suicide every day in Canada. There were over 3,800
deaths by suicide in Canada in 2018. Suicide was the 9th leading cause of death among
all Canadians in 2018, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to
34, behind unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully
explains or predicts suicide; a combination of factors are associated with suicide, such
as mental illness, physical health, personal issues and loss, childhood abuse and
neglect, and exposure to trauma.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has provided proof of concept funding
to Crisis Services Canada (CSC) in the amount of $5.46 million over five years
(2015/16 to 2020/21) to support the development of the Canada Suicide Prevention
Service (CSPS), a national phone, text and chat suicide prevention service that links
existing telephone and distress and crisis infrastructures throughout Canada. Quebec is
serving its residents through its provincial suicide prevention line: 1-866-APPELLE.
PHAC is providing $21 million over five years, starting in 2020-21, to the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational
pan-Canadian suicide prevention service. CAMH will lead this initiative in partnership
with the Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) and Crisis Services Canada
(CSC). This service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual
crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text
or chat).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was made publicly available
November 2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating
information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework were released in December 2016 and December
2018 on Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release in December 2020.
Artificial Intelligence to Improve Understanding of Suicide-Related Verbalization
In 2018, PHAC funded a feasibility study that uses artificial intelligence to collect social
media (i.e., Twitter) data on suicide-related verbalization. Initial results suggest that this
could be a possible complementary data source that could provide timely information
among diverse populations to enhance suicide prevention efforts. This project will not
be able to predict suicides by individuals or include any interaction with people on social
media.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH) and Survey of Mental Health and
Stressful Events
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the unintended consequences
of COVID-19 on suicide and self-harm. The analysis will seek to estimate the
prevalence of suicide ideation among the population in Canada during the COVID-19
pandemic and compare this to pre-pandemic prevalence, while also identifying those
groups that may potentially have a higher risk of suicide than the general population.
Motion 174 – A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay) sponsored motion M-174,
calling for the Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action
plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174, though it
is non-binding. Some of the proposed actions in the plan are already being addressed in
the Federal Framework. PHAC will facilitate the coordination and collaboration on
elements of the action plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders
through its convening role on the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. An update
on M-174 will be included under the next Framework progress report (December 2020).
3-Digit Suicide Prevention National Telephone Line – 9-8-8 Campaign in Canada
In line with the efforts of the U.S. and the U.K. to designate memorable 3-digit numbers
for their suicide prevention national lines, Ms. Kathleen Finlay of the Zer0Now
Campaign recently launched an online and social media campaign calling for the
introduction of 9-8-8 in Canada. Senator Denise Batters (Conservative, Saskatchewan)
has actively championed the campaign online. More recently, Member of Parliament,
Todd Doherty, has also highlight this issue via a written question and Opposition Day
motion. PHAC will work with the new funding recipient leading the pan-Canadian
Suicide Prevention Service to develop an approach to introduce a 3-digit number in the
future.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
Demand for crisis support has increased significantly since the start of the COVID-19
outbreak.
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids
Help Phone to expand crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19
pandemic. The Public Health Agency of Canada provided $750,000 in additional
funding for the Canada Suicide Prevention Service to support the increased demand for
crisis support.
The Government of Canada recently launched Wellness Together Canada, a new portal
dedicated to mental wellness and substance use issues. The portal connects
Canadians to peer support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals for confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
Through its’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research is currently supporting more than 100 research projects on
COVID-19 and Mental Health, including problematic substance use ($13.5M from CIHR
and partners). These important projects will look at mental health during and after the
pandemic and will generate new evidence to inform the Mental Health response to the
pandemic. Ultimately, they will help offer new evidence-based treatments and services
to all Canadians, especially for priority populations that may be experiencing acute
mental health concerns associated with COVID-19.
TRIKAFTA
SYNOPSIS
In October 2019, the US Food and Drug Administration approved Trikafta, the first triple
combination therapy available to treat patients with the most common cystic fibrosis
mutation, at an annual cost of over $300,000 USD. Although Health Canada has not
received a new drug submission for Trikafta, as of October 2020, 151 patients in
Canada have accessed this drug through the Special Access Program (SAP). The
Department has received many letters from patients and their supporters expressing
their desire to have this drug made available in Canada, and media interest is high,
particularly because of its use in the pediatric population.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to make Trikafta available to Canadians with cystic
fibrosis?
KEY MESSAGES
Health Canada recognizes the importance of patient access

to new therapies for serious or life-threatening conditions. We
are aware of the many steps involved in the approval and
coverage of drugs in Canada, and that this can be frustrating
for families who are trying to gain access to treatments for
their loved ones as quickly as possible.
To date, the manufacturer of Trikafta has not submitted an

application to market this product in Canada. While Health
Canada encourages manufacturers to submit applications, it
is the manufacturer’s decision whether to do so.
For serious or life-threatening conditions, such as cystic

fibrosis, physicians may request access to the drug through
Health Canada’s Special Access Programme (SAP). As of
October 2020, 151 patients in Canada have accessed
Trikafta through this program.
To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments,

we are working with provinces, territories and other partners
to develop a national strategy for high cost drugs for rare
diseases. This is an important step in expanding drug
coverage for patients with rare diseases, through federal
support.
IF PRESSED ON THE DRUG APPROVAL
 Health Canada carefully reviews new drugs to determine
that they are safe, effective and of good quality. This
decision is distinct from price-setting and reimbursement
decisions, which are managed by agencies separate from
Health Canada.
 One of the first steps in a new drug approval process is to
conduct clinical trials, which can also be a potential way to
access unauthorized drugs. Although there are currently no
clinical trials for Trikafta open in Canada, Health Canada is
available to provide guidance to a sponsor wishing to
conduct a clinical trial.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND
DRUG ACCESS
 Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales
are expected to continue growing over the next ten years in
Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
 While Health Canada encourages manufacturers to submit
applications, it is the manufacturer’s decision whether to do
so.
BACKGROUND
Trikafta, by the drug manufacturer Vertex Pharma, is the first triple combination therapy
available to treat patients with the most common cystic fibrosis mutation. It is reported to
increase lung function by an average of 14%, which is a significant improvement for
many patients struggling with the effects of cystic fibrosis.
A study published in the ―Journal of Cystic Fibrosis‖ on August 24, 2020, predicted
benefits that will be lost by cystic fibrosis patients should the drug not be available to
them by 2021. Access to the drug by next year would result in a 60% decrease in
severe cases, 19% decrease in hospitalization, fewer lung transplantations and a 9-year
increase in survival. Such results would have a significant impact not only on the
personal health of these patients but also on the health care system.
Under the Food and Drug Act and Regulations, all products sold or marketed in Canada
and making a therapeutic claim need to be approved by Health Canada. The drug
authorization process is initiated when a manufacturer submits an application to Health
Canada for review. Every submission is then reviewed by scientists to assess the
product’s safety, efficacy and quality. At this time, Health Canada has not received a
new drug submission for Trikafta although Health Canada and Vertex Pharma have
been in contact in regards to this product. While Health Canada encourages
manufacturers to submit an application for authorization of this drug for sale in Canada,
it is the company’s decision whether to submit a new drug application.
Products containing compounds found in Trikafta are approved by Health Canada for
use in treating Cystic Fibrosis. The products are:
 KALYDECO (Ivacaftor)
 SYMDECO (Ivacaftor and Tezacaftor)
 ORKAMBI (Ivacaftor and Lumacaftor)
(Tikafta contains ivacaftor, tezacaftor and elexacaftor)
All drug products approved for sale in Canada are listed on the Drug Product Database,
available at: https://health-products.canada.ca/dpd-bdpp/index-eng.jsp.
The Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests from practitioners treating
patients with serious or life-threatening conditions for drugs that are unavailable for sale
in Canada when conventional treatments have failed, or are deemed unsuitable for the
patient. Decisions by SAP are taken on a case-by-case basis. They are based on the
clinical details of the patient’s unique situation as well as the clinical reasons why other
marketed therapies may not be suited for a patient. As of October 28, 2020, 151
patients in Canada have accessed Trikafta through SAP.
SAP does not provide drug funding to Canadians for access to medication and does not
have a role in the drug reimbursement process. Decisions on insurance coverage or
funding are under the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories.
The Government of Canada is committed to improving the affordability and accessibility
of prescription drugs for all Canadians. That is why we are working with provinces and
territories as an active member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to
combine the governments’ collective buying power to negotiate lower prices on brand
name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
Additionally, in August 2019, the Government announced final amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations. These amendments will give the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board (PMPRB) the tools it needs to protect Canadians from excessive
prices and make patented medicines more affordable for all payers - public and private
drug plans, as well as Canadians who pay out of pocket for their prescription drugs,
including high cost drugs for rare diseases. They will come into force in January 2021.
Youth Vaping
SYNOPSIS
 Youth vaping rates in Canada have doubled over the last two years.
Furthermore, youth are also vaping more frequently. There has been significant
media coverage and concerns expressed by parents, educators, health
professionals and non-government organizations.
 The Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of
measures to address youth vaping, including enhanced public education,
increased compliance and enforcement of existing rules and advancing
regulations to put in place more controls.
 Health Canada’s national public education campaign ―Consider the
Consequences of Vaping‖ informs youth and their parents about the risks and
harms associated with vaping through advertising, interactive learning tours in
schools and online. Health Canada quadrupled the investment in advertising and
the campaign last fiscal year to $8.8 million (more than $12 million over 3 years).
 Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and
Vaping Products Act remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. In
the last six months of 2019, Health Canada inspected 3,000 retailers, including
speciality stores and convenience stores, and seized more than 80,000 units of
non-compliant vaping products.
 The new Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7,
2020. These regulations prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or
media visible to youth. Additionally, the regulations require all remaining
permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness of the risks
of these products.
 In addition, the new Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came
into force on July 1, 2020. These regulations require that vaping products
containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine concentration statement and a
health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity warning to
further increase awareness of the risks.
 Building on consultations in 2019, additional measures with respect to nicotine
concentration limits and flavour restrictions are being examined, based on the
best available evidence.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address the increased use and appeal of
vaping products to youth?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is concerned by the rapid rise in youth
vaping, and is taking comprehensive action to address it.
 New regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising
of vaping products anywhere they can be seen or heard by
youth. This means that young Canadians should no longer
see advertising for vaping products in public spaces, in
convenience stores or online.
 These regulations also require health warnings on any
remaining permitted advertisements and join new labelling
requirements for vaping products that require warning labels,
an ingredients list and nicotine concentration on vaping
products and their packaging to further enhance awareness
of potential health hazards.
 Health Canada is also looking at additional measures to
reduce youth access and the appeal of vaping products.
These include measures regarding nicotine concentration
limits and flavour restrictions, using the best available
evidence.
 We increased investments in our national public education
campaign to inform youth and their parents about the risks
and harms of vaping, and created funding opportunities to
engage partners and stakeholders in a collaborative
response.
 My department also intensified enforcement of the strong set
of controls that Parliament has established under the
Tobacco and Vaping Products Act and will continue these
efforts to ensure that the vaping industry is compliant with
our new regulations.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
 In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the
Consequences of Vaping prevention campaign to inform
youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with
vaping.
 The campaign included digital advertising on social media
and television, advertising in malls, cinemas and on transit
and print and online resources. It also included an interactive
learning tour in schools and community venues. In June
2020, the tour transitioned to an online format in response to
COVID-19.
 Vaping awareness kits were also provided to all middle and
high schools across Canada. Information resources were
also sent to health care professionals to share in their
offices.
 An evaluation of the advertising campaign found that 26% of
teens who saw the ads, report that they decided not to vape
as result of the ads.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
 The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant
restrictions in place to limit youth access to vaping products
and vaping product promotions. For example, it is prohibited
to furnish a vaping product to anyone under 18 in Canada,
and lifestyle advertising of vaping products is strictly
prohibited under the Act.
 Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to
remove:
o lifestyle advertising or advertisements from television
and in-store displays; and,
o online content from social media influencers that
encouraged youth vaping.
 In the last year, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000
retailers of vaping products and seized more than 80,000
units of non-compliant vaping products.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISKS OF VAPING AND COVID-19…
 Doctors and scientists are in the early stages of
understanding COVID-19 and the factors that might make
the symptoms of COVID-19 more severe for some people.
 We are aware of one study to date that found associations
between vaping and testing positive for COVID-19. While
concerning, caution should be exercised given the limitations
in this study. Additional research is needed but we do know
that vaping can expose users to harmful chemicals that can
have negative effects on the lungs and airways.
 Youth and non-smokers should not vape. Vaping is a less
harmful option than smoking for Canadians who currently
use combustible tobacco products and are unable to quit -
switching completely to vaping will reduce their exposure to
many toxic chemicals found in tobacco smoke.
 We are advising Canadians not share vaping products with
anyone, and to wash their hands frequently with soap and
water, for at least 20 seconds each time after they vape.
BACKGROUND
There is a rapidly growing consumer market for vaping products in Canada. Smoking is
the leading preventable cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-
related disease is caused by the toxic and carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping
products expose users to far fewer toxic chemicals and substances than conventional
cigarettes, and are marketed, sold and used as less harmful alternatives to tobacco
products.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical
dependence and youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. In
addition, for those who do not smoke, vaping can also cause lung damage and can
increase exposure to harmful chemicals. The long-term health effects of vaping are
unknown.
The most recent Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS)
results from 2018-2019, released in December 2019, indicate e-cigarette prevalence
rates have doubled among students since the last survey with 20% of students reporting
having used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days, an increase from 10% in 2016-2017.
These students are also reporting using vaping products more frequently. Health
Canada has not seen a corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates
continue to be at all-time lows. Results showed the prevalence of current daily smoking
decreased among students in Grades 7 to 12 to 0.9% in 2018-2019, down from 1.3% in
2016-2017. High youth vaping rates have also been observed in other recent national
survey data, including the 2019 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey and the 2019
Canadian Community Health Survey, further confirming the upward trend.
The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) became law on May 23, 2018 and
regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling and promotion of both tobacco and vaping
products. The TVPA includes significant prohibitions and restrictions intended to prevent
access to, and uptake of, tobacco and vaping products by youth, including:
• prohibiting the furnishing (including online) to persons under 18;
• prohibiting the sale and promotion of products with design features that make the
product appealing to youth (e.g., a vaping device that is shaped like a toy);
• prohibiting the sale and promotion of products using flavour names appealing to
youth (e.g., flavour names such as cotton candy or crème brûlée); and
• restricting the promotion of tobacco and vaping products.
