Created: 2021-09-17T17:50:45.730373
Name: Standing_Committee_on_Health_(HESA):_Emergency_Situation_Facing_Canadians_in_Light_of_the_COVID-19_Pandemic
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/53cac676-07bc-4cd3-b1b5-39195589840b/resource/bd97946b-f31a-4aed-8e6e-e4a482a2adba/download/hesa-disclosure-for-appearance-on-may-21-2021-en.pdf
Package ID: 53cac676-07bc-4cd3-b1b5-39195589840b
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Abortion Access
2. Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research - MSM
3. Bulk Imports
4. Canada Health Act – Compliance Issues
5. CEPA
6. Clinical Trials - Exp. Pathways
7. Clinical Trials Fund
8. Dental Care
9. Digital Tools
10. Drug shortages
11. Glysophates
12. Health System Capacity (Hospital/Health Care System Impacts)
13. Health Transfers
14. HESA-Motion Production of Papers
15. High-Cost Drugs Rare Diseases
16. Home Care
17. Indigenous Reconciliation
18. Johnson and Johnson
19. LTC Homes
20. MAID
21. Mental Health and Substance Use Tools
22. Natural Health Products – OAG Report
23. PMRA Neonic Pesticides Aquatic Risk
24. Opioid Overdose Crisis
25. Palliative Care
26. Pharmacare
27. Plasma Collection
28. PMPRB Amendments
29. Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity
30. Research (CIHR)
31. Safety of AstraZeneca Vaccine
32. Sexual and Reproductive Health
33. Smoking and Tobacco Use
34. Status of Vaccine Approvals
35. Taking Action to Strengthen Supportive Care for Canadians
36. Test Kits
37. Testing Capacity
38. Therapeutics
39. Vaginal Mesh
40. Youth Vaping
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
SYNOPSIS
• In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services
at Clinic 554 in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health Act.
Even with the announced closure of Clinic 554, the exclusionary nature of this regulation poses
comprehensiveness and accessibility concerns under the Act. The NB Health Ministry has repeatedly
stated publicly that the government has no intention of changing its position on the issue.
• Evidence has indicated at least one abortion clinic (and likely more) in Ontario (ON) have been
charging patients to access insured services, contrary to the Canada Health Act and provincial
legislation. Health Canada and ON are working together to ensure these barriers to access are
eliminated.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act and penalize provinces (such as NB and ON)
where patients face charges when they attempt to access to abortion services?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick was the last province with a private
abortion clinic where the province refused to provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack of
coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995,
without resolution.
Clinic 554, which was the only facility in the Fredericton area providing surgical abortion services, closed
in fall 2020 due to the lack of public funding for these services. In early July 2019, former Minister
Petitpas Taylor met with the NB Health Minister to discuss the accessibility and comprehensive concerns
related to this issue, including the patient charges being levied by the clinic for the abortion services.
These concerns were reiterated by Minister Petitpas Taylor, and then by the Prime Minister and
Minister Hajdu, in late 2019. During the recent election in NB, Premier Higgs maintained the province
provides sufficient access to abortion services and does not intend to fund abortion services in private
clinics. He said this was consistent with the Canada Health Act.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association filed a statement of claim in the NB courts,
as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive regulation 84-20. The Association filed a motion
for public-interest standing on February 12, 2021, which would allow it to make a claim on behalf of the
public. That motion will be heard in Court in June 2021. The group argues that the regulation is
inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had previously advised the
province it would take legal action if the regulation was not amended to permit coverage for abortion
services received outside hospitals.
In December 2020, the NB Legislative Assembly passed a motion instructing the province’s two RHAs to
determine if access to abortion services in NB satisfies the requirements of the CHA and, if not, how the
Act’s requirements could be met while respecting NB legislation (i.e., without providing coverage for
clinic abortions).
When the Canada Health Act Annual Report 2019-2020 was tabled in Parliament in February 2021, some
media reports indicated Health Canada planned to levy a penalty of approximately $140K in March
2021. In fact, that was the deduction which was levied in March 2020. The penalty levied against New
Brunswick in March 2021 was $64,850.
Evidence indicates that several private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge patients facility fees when
accessing insured surgical abortion services. Health Canada has learned that, while the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has been clear with ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics
are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a
deduction of $13,905 was levied against the province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and
ON are working together to ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. It is also specified that the federal
government is committed to collaboration with the PTs to strengthen the health care system and ensure
access to a full suite of reproductive and health services in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer
discussions. The Budget proposed $45 million over three years, to fund community- based organizations
that help make sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for
vulnerable populations.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• I’m proud that our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from
donating blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral
period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration with
Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific
to reducing barriers to the donation of plasma.
• This research is ongoing. Health Canada remains open to assessing future changes to the MSM
donor deferral policy, including its elimination, provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor
screening requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without
this evidence, the current screening policies cannot be changed.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
• This matter is presently before the court and further details of Canada’s legal position will be
provided to the court.
• Cette affaire est actuellement devant le tribunal et des détails supplémentaires sur la position
juridique du Canada seront communiqués au tribunal.
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
Canadian Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (H-Q) were created as arm’s length organizations
responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they
are required to make submissions to HC for any changes to their policies, such as changes to donor
deferrals. These submissions must include scientific data that support the safety of the proposed
changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before they can be implemented, but has no authority
to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed, except in extraordinary situations when safety
issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing nineteen (19) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are
under evaluation for MSM.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other countries,
including the Netherlands, France and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain and Italy
there is no MSM deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as having sex
with more than one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have adopted a 3-
month deferral including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and Australia
(January 2021).
More recently, on December 14th, 2020, the UK accepted changes that lift the MSM blood donation
deferral based on recommendations by the UK-wide For Assessment of Individualised Risk (FAIR)
steering group. Changes are expected to be implemented in summer 2021.
U.S. PROPOSAL TO ALLOW BULK IMPORTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FROM CANADA
SYNOPSIS
• On October 1, 2020, the United States published the final rule on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, creating a pathway for licensed U.S.
pharmacists or wholesalers to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for the Canadian
market. The rule could worsen the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada and put the health of
Canadians at risk.
• The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on
November 27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help prevent bulk importation
programs, such as the one recently established by the U.S., from causing or exacerbating a drug
shortage in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to safeguard Canada’s drug supply from U.S. bulk importation
schemes?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue to have access to the medicines they need is a top priority for
our Government.
• This is why, on November 27, 2020, I signed an interim order prohibiting certain drugs intended
for the Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of Canada, if that sale could cause or
exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
• Canada’s drug market is too small to meet the demand for prescription drugs of both Canadian
and American consumers.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FOR CANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased drug prices for Canadians. The
Government of Canada is committed to improving Canadians access to, and the affordability of,
necessary prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with
key partners to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• This interim order respects international trade rules, and is not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributes to
millions of jobs in both countries and to increased North American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On October 1, 2020, the final rule for the U.S. regulatory proposal on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs was published. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, and creates a pathway for
licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored program approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA), to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for
the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be FDA- and HPFB-approved drugs labeled for
sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The Canadian seller must be licensed by Health
Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a provincial authority, and must also be registered with the
FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import request to the FDA at least 30 days in advance of product
entry and arrival into the
U.S. The program allows only a direct supply chain of one manufacturer, one Canadian seller and one
importer for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk.
On March 9, 2020, the Government of Canada submitted comments during the U.S. consultation
process to publicly document Canada’s opposition to the proposed rule, given that it is not deemed to
be an effective solution to high drug prices in the U.S. and that it could exacerbate drug shortages in
Canada. The comments also made it clear that the Government of Canada will take the necessary
measures to safeguard Canada’s drug supply.
President Biden has indicated support for importation programs as a solution to high drug pricing in the
U.S. States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription
drugs from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have already
enacted legislation to authorize such a program, and 15 other states have similar legislation in progress.
As of May 2021, Florida and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services for review and approval.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. Large industry players, representing 90-95% of pharmaceutical distribution in
Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this program. However, there is the
potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any industry uptake could have an impact
on the Canadian drug supply.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on November
27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help ensure that bulk importation programs,
such as the one recently established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage in Canada.
Under the interim order, certain drugs intended for the Canadian market are prohibited from being sold
for consumption outside of Canada if that sale could cause or worsen a drug shortage.
The interim order also authorizes the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or
drug establishment licence holder (DEL) that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate
an existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not in the scope of the interim order.
Health Canada will administer this interim order through compliance promotion, monitoring, and
verification activities. DEL holders who violate the terms of the Interim Order may be subject to
enforcement actions, which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or
the suspension or cancellation of the DEL.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure Canadians are not forced to pay out-
of-pocket for the medical services they need?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt the lives of Canadians at an unprecedented
level, our universal health care system has been an enduring source of comfort.
• The Minister of Health takes her responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK AND ONTARIO…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services (NB and ON)
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in
Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private
clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. NB was the last province with a private
abortion clinic where the province refused to provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act (CHA) and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack
of coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995,
without resolution.
When the Canada Health Act Annual Report 2019-2020 was tabled in Parliament in February 2021, some
media reports indicated Health Canada planned to levy a penalty of approximately $140K in March
2021. In fact, that was the deduction, which was levied in March 2020. The penalty levied against New
Brunswick in March 2021 was $64,850.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charged patients facility fees when
accessing insured surgical abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage
for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees
in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has
been clear with ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA,
and based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied
against the province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and ON are working together to
ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. The Budget proposed $45 million
over three years to fund community-based organizations that help make sexual and reproductive health
care information and services more accessible for vulnerable populations.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, including a deduction
of $4521.29 in March 2021, these amounts have been reimbursed as the province has successfully
eliminated the charges.
Charter Challenge in British Columbia (BC)
On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of BC released its decision in Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC
(Attorney General), which dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of BC’s Medicare Protection
Act and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private insurance for publicly
insured health care services. The decision is being appealed and will be heard in the BC Court of Appeal
June 14-18, 2021. Canada is participating in the appeal.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
While the elimination of patient charges in BC has been hindered by an injunction related to the Charter
challenge, the province has continued to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address these
charges. In March 2021, British Columbia's CHT payment was reduced by $13,949,979 for patient
charges at private surgical clinics. To date, Health Canada has authorized a partial reimbursement of
BC’s March 2019, March 2020, and March 2021, deductions for a total of $24,598,418 in recognition of
efforts taken by the province to address and eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy, which came into effect on April 1, 2020, is aimed at eliminating patient
charges for medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the
long-standing federal position that medically necessary diagnostic services are insured services,
regardless of the venue where the services are delivered.
Provinces and territories were given nearly two years’ notice that the Diagnostic Services Policy was
coming into effect, to give them time to align their health care systems with its requirements. Under the
Policy, provinces and territories will be expected to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Seven provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic
services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
CHEMICALS MANAGEMENT
BUDGET 2021
• The Chemicals Management Plan is a comprehensive Government of Canada strategy to protect
human health and the environment from harmful chemical substances. It continues to be supported by
industry, health and environmental groups. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada proposes
to provide $476.7 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, to support the renewal of the Chemicals
Management Plan.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How will the funding announced in the Budget better protect Canadians from harmful
chemicals?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to protecting all Canadians from the risks that harmful chemicals
pose to their health and to the environment.
• This investment will ensure the Government of Canada is able to continue implementing the
Chemicals Management Plan to help protect the health of Canadians and their environment from the
risks of chemical substances.
• Through the Chemicals Management Plan, the Government of Canada assesses chemical
substances for environmental and human health risks. It then develops appropriate measures to reduce,
eliminate or manage substances found to be harmful, and communicates these findings to the public.
• We will continue working with other leading jurisdictions to monitor international trends and
focus our efforts on key risks to Canadians.
BACKGROUND
• Jointly delivered by Environment and Climate Change Canada and Health Canada, the Chemcials
Management Plan uses authorities under various federal Acts, including the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), the Pest Control Products Act, the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act,
and the Food and Drugs Act to help manage the risks of substances found to be harmful to health or the
environment.
Budget 2021
• Budget 2021 announced $476.7 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, to fund the renewal
of the Chemicals Management Plan. This funding will support the continued implementation of the
Chemicals Management Plan to help protect the health of Canadians and their environment from the
risks of chemical substances.
• Communities and social groups who are exposed to higher pollution levels (including women,
Indigenous peoples, visible minorities, and lower-income groups) are expected to benefit from action in
this area, as well as those most vulnerable to chemicals (e.g. children and elderly people).
• To maximize our investment, we will also work with other leading jurisdictions to monitor
international trends to further reduce risks to Canadians.
Assessing and Managing Priority Chemicals
• As of March 31, 2021, the Government has addressed and, where appropriate, managed the
risks of almost 4,000 chemicals used in consumer products, cosmetics, and industrial applications in
Canada. Since 2006, the Government has also conducted pre-market assessments of approximately
6,500 new substances prior to their introduction to commerce in Canada.
• Where there have been risks to Canadians, we have taken action to protect human health and
the environment. Under Canada’s Chemicals Management Plan, almost 500 measures have been put in
place to control the harmful effects of chemicals.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has used agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID-19 clinical
trials and the review of COVID-19 vaccine and treatment submissions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has Health Canada done to facilitate and expedite access to COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of applications for
COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and submissions for authorization, while maintaining its high standards
for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• These measures have allowed us to authorize several clinical trials in Canada for COVID-19
vaccines, as well as the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF APPROVAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness
and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of May 2021, over 95 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for sale in
Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that
these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
Authorizing products
The Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in Relation to
COVID-19 created a mechanism for the expedited review of treatments, while ensuring that a high level
of scientific scrutiny is maintained.
The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and vaccines
for Canadians in four ways:
• authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements
• authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority
• allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related indications
that were not in the original authorization; and,
• permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada, if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and
quality.
In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate action,
including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required, to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
As of May 2021, 15 submissions have been received under the interim order – including 8 treatments
and 7 vaccines. Five of these vaccines and one treatment have been authorized, while the others remain
under review.
Clinical Trials
Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new vaccine are both safe and effective in human
beings, and Health Canada is also facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in
Canada, using the Interim Order respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs related to COVID-
19, which was issued in May 2020.
The IO introduces regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical trials to take place
more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient participation across the country. The IO
helps to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtaining patient consent in light of COVID-19 realities;
• broaden the criteria for qualified health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator
duties at remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinical trial
authorization.
Clinical trial applications are being reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
CLINICAL TRIAL FUND & X TRI-COUNCIL BIOMEDICAL RESEARCH FUND
BUDGET 2021:
$250 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to
implement a new Clinical Trials Fund & $250 million over four years, starting in 2021-22, for the federal
research granting councils to create a new tri-council biomedical research fund.
KEY MESSAGES
• In order to grow Canada’s bio-manufacturing sector, Budget 2021 proposes to invest a total of
$2.2 billion over 7 years into multiple initiatives.
• As part of this investment, $250M will be used to create a new Clinical Trials Fund, managed by
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, which will support research teams and infrastructure across
the country to conduct clinical trials.
• These trials will test new drugs, treatments, and interventions to prevent, detect, treat or
manage various diseases or medical conditions.
• In addition, $250M will be allocated to create a Tri-Council Biomedical Research Fund.
• This new fund will support bio-innovation-related research that straddles the health and natural
sciences and connects these efforts to industrial and health system partners to enhance key bio-
innovation capabilities.
• These important investments will stimulate innovation in the country and ultimately lead to
better health care systems and services for all Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the highest level of therapeutic evidence (i.e., the
gold-standard), enhanced by systematic reviews of similar trials, when available. The current global
pandemic has reinforced the vital importance of clinical trials, with research being fast-tracked to assess
the efficacy and safety of clinical candidate interventions to treat, diagnose and prevent COVID-19.
With $250M to establish the Clinical Trial Fund, CIHR will develop and implement an initiative that will
support clinical trials research projects through competitive funding opportunities while also training
highly qualified personnel (HQP) in trials research who can direct the conception, design and
implementation of controlled trials. CIHR will also develop a Network of clinical trials networks to
provide coordination and collaboration infrastructure for clinical trials activities across the country.
With $250M to establish the Tri-Council Biomedical Research Fund, CIHR will work with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) to support inter- disciplinary bio-innovation
research projects undertaken in collaboration with industrial and public health partners. It will integrate
the expertise and insights of the natural sciences and the health sciences, and link collaborating
researchers with partners who can commercialize and apply research results.
DENTAL CARE
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with Parliament on its study of national
dental care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• My mandate letter highlights this Government’s desire to work with Parliament to study and
analyze the possibility of national dental care.
• Dental care is only one aspect of our commitment to improving health care for Canadians. The
2019 Speech from the Throne committed to work with provinces and territories to address health needs
arising from the pandemic, but also to improve access to primary care, set standards for long-term care,
address the opioid epidemic and implement pharmacare for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-62 FEDERAL DENTAL CARE PLAN
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and Minister of Health Mandate Letter both committed to
support Parliament in studying and analyzing the possibility of a national dental care program.
• The results of this work by Parliament would be helpful for determining the best approach for
identifying gaps, improving access to dental care, and determining a federal role in this area. The
Government looks forward to the outcomes of Parliamentary work on this issue.
BACKGROUND
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health both
committed the Government to work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of national
dental care. The 2020 Speech from the Throne is silent on this issue.
• In February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) agreed to
undertake a study on the development of a national dental care program, although the study never
began during the last session. On October 26, 2020, New Democratic Party Member of Parliament Don
Davies introduced a motion that HESA undertake a study on the development of a national dental care
program as an insured service for Canadians. Health Canada remains ready to support a study by the
Committee, should it decide again to undertake that work.
• In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental
care program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated
that this program would cost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3
billion to clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually
through 2024-25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year,
and decrease to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
• During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified inequality and
wasted spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care avoidance due to cost results in
preventable oral health emergency room spending. The NDP planned to address this issue through a
national, income-based “Denticare” plan that would have provided free care for households earning
under $70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between $70,000 and
$90,000.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental
services in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was
publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans.
• Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care
for all residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select
services for groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
• Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for
services not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental services to
Canadian Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries, and some veterans and refugee
claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of Canada’s
employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in 2020-21,
which is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not including the
value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income tax system
provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical
expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
• Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
Digital Supports and Virtual Care
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety,
particularly during this third, aggressive wave of the virus and its variants.
• Digital tools play an important role in Canada’s COVID response and help provide Canadians
with up-to-date information and valuable resources, like alerts, screening tools and enhancing access to
services to support mental health and well-being.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide in 2021-22, $9 million to ensure the continued availability of
federal digital tools and $62 million for the Wellness Together Canada portal to continue to provide
services to support the mental health and well-being of Canadians.
SYNOPSIS
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada put in place a range of
digital supports to help Canadians get the information, resources and care they need. In May 2020,
$240.5 million was committed to support Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches. Of this, $200M is supporting work in health
systems to expand deployment of virtual care. Funding also helped launch a suite of digital tools,
including an online self-assessment tool, a mobile app to provide trusted information and resources and
an online portal for access to mental health and wellness supports. Budget 2021 proposes to provide in
2021-22, an additional $9 million to ensure the continued availability of federal digital tools and $62
million for the Wellness Together Canada portal to continue to provide services to support the mental
health and well-being of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the resources they need
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians need access to readily available digital tools and resources to help during the COVID-
19 pandemic, including education, information, mental health and substance use supports, alerts,
screening tools.
• The Government of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories, vendors and
stakeholders to make these tools widely available to Canadians and their families.
• In May 2020 the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health systems meet
health care needs through virtual approaches and digital tools.
• This investment will support virtual care services so that Canadians can safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-conferencing, to have their health needs met.
It also means they can continue to access specialist services throughout this time of uncertainty.
• As well, through this investment we implemented a suite of digital health tools, including:
o An online self-assessment tool that helps Canadians understand potential COVID-19 symptoms
and when to seek medical care;
o A mobile app called “Canada COVID-19,” which provides reliable information and resources for
Canadians;
o Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of virtual mental health and substance use
supports available through the Canada COVID-19 app and Canada.ca website.
• The funding proposed in Budget 2021 will ensure the ongoing availability and adaptation of
federal digital tools to meet the needs of Canadians as the pandemic evolves.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to support the rapid uptake
and use of virtual care services.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada will help reduce the pressure on health
systems and provide Canadians with needed health services and authoritative information in a safe and
secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-conferencing, in addition to face-to-face visits.
• Our government is working with provinces and territories to negotiate bilateral agreements,
which will provide a total of $150M to support enhancements to virtual care.
• In addition, we are providing up to $50M to Canada Health Infoway to develop pan-Canadian
standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing, and provide support to provinces and territories
to implement virtual care initiatives.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
• Privacy considerations were – and continue to be – front and centre at every stage of these
initiatives.
• Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve
personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is creating stress and anxiety for many
Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access to their regular support networks.
• That is why the Government launched an online portal for mental health and substance use
supports: Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for Canadians to access self-directed tools
and find credible information on mental health and substance use issues.
• It also connects Canadians to peer support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals for confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online counselling.
• The $62 million proposed in Budget 2021 will ensure that these valuable services continue to be
available and aligned with the needs of Canadians in 2021-22.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL PLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
• Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented time for Canadians, and are
continuing to explore how we can best take action in innovative ways.
• We will continue to work closely with provinces and territories and other partners to evaluate
needs and adapt digital supports as the pandemic evolves.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
• On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools
for Canadians.
• Of this, funding of $150M is flowing to PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to
virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient
monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end supports to integrate these tools within
existing digital systems.
• In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards
on secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant
to the bilateral agreements. To date, Infoway has led consultations on standards with all jurisdictions,
with a view of identifying key priorities and informing the standards development process.
• Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure. As part of this work, Health Canada is supporting key
organizations (Infoway, CIHI, CADTH, Centre for Digital Health Evaluation) in leading a cost-benefit
analysis of virtual care.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020)
• Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, this
tool is available to all Canadians through the Canada.ca website and the Canada COVID-19 app (see
below). Since its release in March 2020, the self-assessment tool has provided guidance to over 1.6
million Canadians.
• It is intended to complement PT self-assessment tools and is empowering Canadians to make
informed decisions on the appropriateness of COVID-19 testing and when to access other resources like
telehealth, primary care providers and emergency departments.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020)
• Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app provides an
integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and engage on issues related to
COVID-19. Since its release in March 2020, nearly 1 million people have downloaded the app.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April 15, 2020)
• Wellness Together Canada is a free online portal for virtual mental health and substance use
supports, available 24/7 in all provinces and territories in both official languages. It is available online at
https://ca.portal.gs/
• Depending on their needs, Canadians can access different levels of support, ranging from
information and self-assessment tools to connecting to peer support workers, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals for confidential text sessions or phone calls. It also provides
Canadians the opportunity to assess their mental health and monitor their progress as they engage in
their chosen care option.
• Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and connect users to
credible and appropriate promotion and prevention resources. They also help with determining the level
of need as well as self-managing mental health and substance use issues.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources promote mental health
as well as prevent poor mental health, mental illness and problematic substance use. These will focus on
enhancing protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and social networks) and addressing
risk factors (e.g., substance use, social isolation, discrimination and stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential triage support, chat sessions, phone
calls and online counselling with peer support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals.
• These supports complement, and do not replace, existing provincial and territorial services. Use
of Wellness Together Canada is closely monitored to ensure that tools and supports best align with the
needs of Canadians. New resources are continuously added to the portal to support Canadians in
addressing diverse mental health and substance use needs.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
• The Government of Canada put in place an opt-in email subscription service called “Get Updates
on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to those Canadians who would like to be alerted to
updates on the COVID-19 situation in Canada.
CovidTrends through the WeatherCAN app
• CovidTrends, a tool from the Public Health Agency of Canada is available through Environment
and Climate Change Canada’s WeatherCAN app and provides Canadians with summary data about
COVID-19 that is specific to their area.
Health Canada continues to explore other digital tools with a view to providing Canadians with the
information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic.
DRUG SHORTAGES
SYNOPSIS
• The onset of COVID-19 created global supply chain challenges and increased demand for drugs
used in supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly in the context of COVID-19
critical drugs, pose a risk to the health of Canadians.
• Health Canada collaborated with partners and took action early in the pandemic to supplement
existing supply and in certain cases avoid critical drug shortages. While some pressures still exist, the
supply and demand levels for many drugs are stabilizing.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is
continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with key supply chain players to mitigate impacts
of any drug shortages.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does not create drug
shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for the Government
of Canada.
• Significant efforts were made early in the pandemic to respond to drug supply disruptions. As a
result, the supply situation for many key drugs has been stabilizing.
• I have signed four Interim Orders to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages related to
COVID-19 and to safeguard supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to help
prevent and minimize the impact of shortages.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES…
• Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the impact of any drug shortages
related to COVID-19.
• Through this work, we have been able to secure additional supplies of needed drugs for Canada.
For example, we have worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of
drugs such as muscle relaxants, inhalers, and sedatives to support COVID-19 patients.
• While the supply and demand situation for many critical drugs is stabilizing, the need for
vigilance continues. As of May 14, 2021, we have been able to de-escalate 33 shortages from critical
status, out of a total of 49 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
Active monitoring continues and we will apply the lessons learned from early in the pandemic to
strengthen our response going forward.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SHORTAGES OF ARTHRITIS DRUGS USED TO TREAT COVID-19 PATIENTS
(Tocilizumab)
• The Government of Canada is taking steps to ensure Canadians have access to promising, safe
and effective COVID-19 therapies, which are essential to saving lives, reducing suffering and alleviating
the burden on health systems.
• The Government of Canada has secured access to some additional supplies of key drugs being
used to treat COVID-19 patients, including drugs also used to treat arthritis such as Tocilizumab, to help
protect supplies for all patients who rely on these drugs. These drugs are being directed to where they
are needed most in Canada and are making a difference.
• The Government of Canada will continue to closely monitor supplies of all drugs being used to
treat COVID-19 patients, and will take action with our partners to help mitigate the impact of any
shortages.
IF PRESSED ON THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE…
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada has established a
COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve.
• Based on Canada’s experience to date, analyses, discussions with provinces and territories, as
well as the advice of health care experts, the Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals
to support patients with COVID-19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular
blockers.
• The Critical Drug Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drug shortage
management efforts, and is a safety that has augmented the supply of key drugs used in treating
patients with COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE POTENTIAL FOR SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS AS A RESULT OF THE SITUATION IN INDIA…
• Health Canada is working with its partners to closely monitor the situation in India for any early
signals of drug supply disruptions and will take action to help prevent and mitigate any potential
shortages.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care
professionals, and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages where possible and minimize their
impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors, practitioners, and the
federal government. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and
territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may
include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repeals and replaces the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 that the Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention and Alleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to COVID-
19
This interim order, made by the Minister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduces new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allows the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allows the Minister to impose or amend terms and conditions
on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduces new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
such as the one recently established by the United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in
Canada. The interim order also enables the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could
help Health Canada take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Drug Shortages
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of years, capacity
has been built up across governments, leading to a more coordinated and effective approach to mitigate
the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages, and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocating supply where it is needed most.
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve has been established, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives,
muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
GLYPHOSATE
SYNOPSIS
• Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticide globally. Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) published its final re-evaluation decision document for pesticides containing
glyphosate, on April 28, 2017, allowing its continued use in Canada (marketed under brand names such
as Roundup and Vision). Several Notices of Objection (NoOs) were filed at the time, and following a
review of stakeholders’ concerns, the Department confirmed that issues raised in these NoOs were not
scientifically supported.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel was filed. On February 13,
2020, the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. This decision has been
subsequently appealed, along with a denied application for an NGO to intervene in the case. A hearing
date on the merits of these appeals has yet to be determined.
• Media and stakeholder interest in glyphosate remains high. It is the subject of class action
lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that have yet to be resolved. Much of the interest stems
from the hazard classification of glyphosate as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC). This concern was addressed by Health Canada in its final decision based on
an extensive risk assessment, which aligns with major pesticide regulatory bodies around the world.
• Public debate regarding the safety of glyphosate continues, with the tabling of a private
member’s bill to ban the use of glyphosate in Canada. There are also a number of Canadian
municipalities that have banned or are examining the issue of glyphosate use.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Given the dangers it poses, and the class action lawsuits in Canada, why is glyphosate still
approved for use?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions. Health Canada scientists regularly re-evaluate pesticides approved in Canada
to ensure they can be used safely and that human health and the environment are protected.
• We understand that Canadians have concerns about pesticides, and that is why we conducted
an extensive review of this chemical and of the issues raised during the Notice of Objection process.
• Health Canada concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions are followed.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S AWARENESS AND USE OF THE “MONSANTO PAPERS” IN THE REVIEW
OF GLYPHOSATE
• Health Canada scientists are aware of concerns raised in the media around the independence of
some scientific reviews of glyphosate.
• Health Canada scientists had access to all relevant data and information from the federal and
provincial governments, international regulatory agencies, published scientific reports and multiple
pesticide manufacturers. A total of 1368 peer-reviewed scientific papers were considered in the review.
IF PRESSED ON THE INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC)
• Health Canada took the International Agency for Research on Cancer findings into consideration,
but found that the level of exposure of Canadians to glyphosate does not cause any harmful effects,
including cancer.
• Health Canada’s finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority, the European
Chemicals Agency, the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. None of these pesticide regulatory authorities considers glyphosate
to be a cancer risk to humans when used according to the label.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN FOOD
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency shows levels found are not a cause for
concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE IN DRINKING WATER
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk of glyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosate was found not to be of
concern.
• Monitoring data from both surface and ground water sources were considered in this risk
assessment.
BACKGROUND
• Health Canada published its Re-evaluation Decision document for glyphosate on April 28, 2017.
The evaluation determined that glyphosate is unlikely to be genotoxic or carcinogenic. Health Canada
considered the findings of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) that glyphosate is
“probably carcinogenic to humans”, but did not alter the decision. It is important to note that the IARC
classification is a hazard classification and not a health risk assessment. This means that the level of
human exposure, which determines the actual risk, was not taken into account by IARC. Health Canada’s
finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
• In May 2017, eight Notices of Objection (NoO) to the glyphosate decision were filed with Health
Canada. On January 11, 2019, Health Canada scientists concluded that the concerns raised by the
objectors could not be scientifically supported when considering the entire body of relevant data.
Therefore, the final re-evaluation decision for glyphosate did not change. Health Canada published its
response to each notice of objection in the Public Registry.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in respect of part of the
glyphosate re-evaluation was filed on February 11, 2019 by two of the objectors. On February 13, 2020,
the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. One of the objectors appealed the
decision to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA) on March 13, 2020. On August 14, 2020, three NGOs
sought leave to intervene jointly in the appeal and the Court granted leave to intervene on October 7,
2020. In December 2020, a fourth NGO filed a motion with the Court seeking leave to intervene in the
appeal, which the Court denied on February 5, 2021. This NGO applied for leave to appeal the FCA’s
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) on April 7, 2021. Canada’s response will be due 30 days
from the SCC opening its file. A hearing date on the merits of the appeal has yet to be determined.
• A private member's bill to ban the use of glyphosate in Canada, was tabled in April of 2021 in
the House of Commons. Several municipalities continue to assess the use of glyphosate; the city of
Laval, Quebec has banned the use of the product.
• The European Commission renewed the authorization of glyphosate for five years starting in
December 2017. However, Luxembourg became the first EU country to completely ban products
containing glyphosate, effective December 31, 2020. France and Germany have announced their
intention to ban or severely restrict the use of glyphosate in the next few years. These plans are
contingent on alternatives to the uses of glyphosate being developed. Austria has notified the
Commission of its intention to ban glyphosate.
• The USEPA published an interim registration review decision in January 2020. The EPA uses
interim decisions to finalize enforceable mitigation measures. The EPA has concluded that there are no
risks of concern to human health when glyphosate is used according to the label and that it is not a
carcinogen. The EPA released a draft biological evaluation (endangered species assessment) for
glyphosate, in November of 2020. They are considering public comments before finalizing the decision.
• Mexico has announced that they will gradually reduce the use of glyphosate, towards a total
ban in 2024.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about the health care
system’s capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health care system?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is making investments that are helping provincial and territorial
health systems respond to the virus.
• Budget 2021 confirmed an additional $5 billion in direct support to provinces and territories for
health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination roll-out.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are
ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term
care, home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500
million in support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance
use, or homelessness.
• The federal government is ready to respond to provincial and territorial requests for assistance,
e.g., with health human resource support and the facilitation of mobile health services capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health system capacity
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and
territories to track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital beds and
medical equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
• Governments continue to work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under
different modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support from the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
• We know that in some cases, our systems are already severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
• That is why governments are very carefully balancing public health restrictions with available
capacity and careful tracking of resource use in hospitals (like intensive care bed use), and why the
Government of Canada stands ready to provide additional support should it be needed (for example,
through field units).
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase system capacity and
meet projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically
reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is also
complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also running training
exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing
to mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for Canadians
experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some
of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’
gradual return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential services
to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
• a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid sick leave
with access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemic and to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testing supplies
and supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE
and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as maintaining the
readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing a new Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces
and territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and control to
protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
• Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
• Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work with provinces and territories to set new,
national standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions;
• Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
• Continuing to respond to Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19
context; and
• Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond to COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-19
outbreaks and other large-scale emergencies.
Support for Health Care and Vaccinations
• Budget 2021 confirmed the Government’s intention to continue support for provinces and
territories, including addressing urgent health care needs.
• On March 25, 2021 the Government introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in
direct support to provinces and territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
• The proposed funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health
Transfer, distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care
system pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing the
backlog of medical procedures, patient care, and access to primary care put on hold due to the
pandemic.
• The legislation also includes a one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, to
the provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
SYNOPSIS
• Minister Hajdu’s 2019 mandate letter from the Prime Minister indicates that the government
will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare and renew
health agreements. This work will include ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams,
setting national standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and palliative care. Since
then, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and Fall Economic Statement have confirmed these priorities,
also committing up to $1B for safe long-term care, and to working with PTs to set new national
standards for long-term care, and $3B over five years proposed to support provinces and territories in
ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. This is in addition
to supplemental investments to the Canada Health Transfer announced in March 2020 and a
commitment most recently through Bill C-25 to provide provinces and territories with an additional $5
billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the CHT. This commitment and new
investment build on the bilateral agreements that are in place and will be renewed in 2022 to support
improved access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to support provincial and territorial health care
systems in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• On March 25, 2021, our Government committed to provide provinces and territories with an
additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer
to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support
vaccine roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19
billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
• In fall 2020, given the toll that COVID-19 has taken on those living in long-term care facilities,
our government further committed to up to $1 billion to support safe long-term care, and Budget 2021
proposes to provide $3B over five years to support provinces and territories in ensuring standards for
long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
• Through this work, our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories
in order to improve health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE LETTER COMMITMENT ON PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
• There are almost 90,000 physicians in Canada, a record number, but access to care is still an
issue for some Canadians.
• Our Government is committed to engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, health
professionals and experts to help make sure Canadians can access primary health care when they need
it.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
• Our Government will provide provinces and territories with over $43 billion in 2021-22 through
the Canada Health Transfer, totalling over $235 billion over the next 5 years.
• The Government has also introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in direct
support to provinces and territories for health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination
roll-out. This includes a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are
ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term
care, home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500
million in support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance
use, or homelessness.
• In addition, targeted funding in Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion in new targeted funding
over 10 years to provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care and mental
health and addiction services.
• Since then, our government has made additional commitments to support provinces and
territories in areas where resources are most needed and more recently targeted support has been
announced for virtual care of 150 million and safe long-term care of over $1 billion, and $3 billion to
ensure that standards for long- term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home
and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $9.7 billion to Quebec in
2021-22.
• Quebec will also receive $902.4 million as part of its share of the $4 billion, one-time top-up to
the CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING
• The Government of Canada has consistently emphasized the importance of Canadians seeing
results for the investments in mental health and home care.
• In the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles, federal, provincial and territorial Ministers
of Health agreed to work collectively to develop a focused set of indicators to measure progress and
report to Canadians.
• In 2018, Ministers of Health agreed to a set of pan-Canadian indicators to measure progress.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information began reporting on the first of these indicators on an
annual basis in 2019.
• In addition, provinces and territories have also included program- specific indicators in their
bilateral agreements.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE
• Through Budget 2021 our Government announced $3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23,
to support provinces and territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent
changes are made.
• This is in addition to our Government’s commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control.
• Through the Safe Long-Term Care Fund, provinces and territories are expected to use this
investment to undertake priority activities, including hiring additional staff (such as personal support
workers) or topping up wages, infrastructure improvements and readiness assessments for infection
prevention and control.
• As a condition of funding, provinces and territories must provide a detailed plan, similar to what
has been provided for home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
• The federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while
respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors
and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend those agreements to flow funding
for the Safe Long-term Care Fund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion, an increase of $28 billion from $42 billion in 2020-21, or from its
current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called for the CHT to grow by an annual
escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand on March 25th.
On March 25, 2021, the Government tabled Bill C-25 in Parliament, which will provide provinces and
territories with an additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT
intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by waves one and two of the
pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to support Canada’s COVID- 19 immunization plan.
Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is
in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that also provided one-time funding of $500 million through
the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
Federal Commitment to the Health Accord (now referred to as the Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities):
In 2015, the Government committed to engage with the Provinces and Territories (PTs) to develop a
new Health Accord, including a new long-term agreement on funding. The Government also committed
to work jointly, and with Indigenous leaders, to explore areas of shared priority that will improve the
health of Indigenous Peoples.
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services as follows:
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, for better home and palliative care, and $1 billion
over 4 years, starting in 2018-19, to address critical home care infrastructure requirements; and,
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, in support of mental health initiatives
This funding is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs. It
provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of
the Canada Health Act, which are: universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public
administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate the renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-
23 to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will continue to
work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare. This work will include
ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams, setting national standards for mental health
access, and supporting home care and palliative care.
Safe Long-term Care:
The Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care
Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
HESA MOTION ORDERING THE PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE GOVERNMENT’S
RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
SYNOPSIS
• On October 26, 2020, the House of Commons adopted a Motion ordering that the Standing
Committee on Health undertake a study of the COVID-19 emergency situation. The motion contains six
parts related to the production of documents on the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN),
testing, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and vaccines.
• To date, documents have been released to the Law Clerk in seven batches: on December 7,
2020, December 15, 2020, January 6, 2021 and January 20, 2021, February 4, 2021, February 18, 2021
and April 9, 2021.
• The Law Clerk tabled rounds of documents on December 16, 2020, January 20, 2021, January 29,
2021, February 5, 2021, February 19, 2021, February 26, 2021, March 12, 2021, March 26, 2021, April
16, 2021, April 23, 2021, April 30, 2021, May 7, 2021 and May 14, 2021.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Since the December 7, 2020 deadline, we have only received a small volume of pages of relevant
records from the health portfolio. Why hasn’t the department complied with this order yet and when
are you going to provide us the material requested?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to continuing to work with provinces, territories,
municipalities, Indigenous communities, and the private sector to respond to the pandemic and keep
Canadians safe and healthy.
• We are committed to provide the Health Committee the thousands of requested documents as
quickly as possible so that it can undertake its important, independent work on studying Canada’s
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have provided documents to the Law Clerk in the language in which they are available in
order to provide them as quickly as possible.
• To date, the Government has produced more than 22,600 pages to the Law Clerk.
• We will continue to provide records as they become available.
• Our review ensures that confidential and other sensitive information is reviewed to respects
contractual and legal obligations of the Crown.
IF PRESSED ON PROCESS FOR REVIEW
• We have completed the collection of documents related to the Motion for the Health Portfolio.
This represents hundreds of thousands of pages.
• We have released the maximum number of relevant documents that do not require redactions
as quickly as possible.
• Experts in the public service are now reviewing documents to protect national security
information, Cabinet confidences, solicitor-client privilege, and other sensitive information through a
rigorous and consistent process.
• The portfolio is making best efforts to complete the work as quickly as possible. Given the
considerable scope of the motion, the production of all relevant documents is a significant undertaking
which entails a substantial amount of time and resources.
IF PRESSED ON RESOURCES REQUIRED TO RESPOND TO THIS MOTION
• We will continue to comply with the order of the House of Commons to provide documents to
the office of the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel in a timely manner as they become available.
• As the work of reviewing the requested documents progresses, we cannot provide a specific
figure for the resource implications. However, hundreds of employees across the health portfolio have
been mobilized and continue to be involved in this work, which entails a significant amount of time and
resources.
IF PRESSED ON TRANSLATION
• The Government’s goal is to provide documents as quickly as possible to the Law Clerk to
support his mandate from this House to review and table documents that respond to the Motion
adopted in October.
BACKGROUND
A motion adopted by the House of Commons on October 26 2020 directs government departments to
produce to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health, certain documents relating to the
Government of Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to this Motion, the Health Portfolio, including Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, have contributed nearly 17,300 pages of
documents to the Law Clerk as of April 9, 2021.
The pages released to date include a wide variety of documents such as, communications products,
meeting agendas, briefing decks, terms of reference for committees, and Global Public Health
Intelligence Network daily reports.
The response to this Motion involves 16 departments, including Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada (ISED); Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC); Health Canada; the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC); National Research Council (NRC); Treasury Board Secretariat; and
Department of Justice.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
SYNOPSIS
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life- threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices which pose significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, as well as Budget 2021, this includes working with willing provinces, territories and stakeholders
to establish a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases for launch in spring 2022.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement and the Speech from the Throne, as well as Budget 2021
referenced a rare diseases strategy, which was previously included as a commitment in Budget 2019.
Why has the Government not delivered on this strategy while Canadians with rare diseases desparately
wait?
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases to be launched in spring 2022.
• We also held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on
March 26th, 2021. Canadians - especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers -
were invited to provide their views on the national strategy by participating in a public town hall or
completing the online questionnaire.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. The
recent Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2021 highlight the Government’s continued commitment in
developing a national strategy.
• Our Government has also been working with key stakeholders to improve access by encouraging
the development and availability of drugs for rare diseases for Canadians. In 2019, 16 of the 35 new
drugs Health Canada approved were drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy for launch by spring 2022, starting with a comprehensive
engagement process in late 2020 and continuing into early 2021.
• The virtual engagement has now concluded. A What We Heard report summarizing key themes
and feedback that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement will be published in spring
2021.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. There have been approximately 150 drugs accessed through the program
for the treatment of rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH…
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
• Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They
are often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
• Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the
world. They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a
handful of individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare
disease.
• Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of
the public health care system.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical
need. Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare
diseases.
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to protect consumers
from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for
governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could
result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and
overall quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
• Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government
drug plans, through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
• Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in
clinical trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases
where criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to
drugs that are unavailable for sale in Canada.
About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on high cost drugs for rare diseases,
including on new drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national
strategy.
• To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients
taking high-cost drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other
health system partners for federal funding for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs.
affordability vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also
help manage expectations around the limits of federal funding.
• In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their
officials to establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the
national strategy.
• A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and is continuing in early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting
research on rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research
initiatives, such as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate
medical breakthroughs for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22
countries. As of 2017, this international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and
therapies for rare diseases. Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting
in 2021- 2022, for the CIHR to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
• Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-
2022, in support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over
five years, starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-
start the new Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation
programming.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
Home Care
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety.
Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment that the Government of Canada made to take any action it
can to support seniors and vulnerable populations across the country.
• As highlighted in Budget 2021, the Government of Canada plans to continue its commitment of
$6B in funding over 10 years to provinces and territories to improve access to appropriate services and
supports in the home and community, including palliative and end-of-life care.
• This investment is expected to help more Canadians receive the care and services they need so
that they may remain at home longer, where they want to be.
• We are committed to working alongside the provinces and territories to help people stay in their
homes for as long as possible. We will continue to support equitable access to quality home care
services.
SYNOPSIS
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the first wave of the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care.
This situation increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
• In light of COVID-19, the federal government is taking additional actions to help people stay in
their homes longer while working alongside the provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the government doing to ensure that Canadians have access to quality home care
services during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over ten years directly to provinces
and territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• To support Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada and
provincial/territorial governments also reached a $19B Safe Restart Agreement, which includes $740
million in funding to support our most vulnerable populations, including incremental infection
prevention and control measures to protect those receiving home care and palliative care, and those in
long-term care.
• Budget 2021 proposes a $90 million investment over three years, starting in 2021-22, to launch
the Age Well at Home initiative, which would assist community-based organizations in providing
practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• Budget 2021 proposes to establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC,
and funded by $960M over three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver
relevant training, and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health
sector, this would include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
• Our government will continue to take any action it can to support seniors while working
alongside the provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• In the Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada committed to fund up to $1 billion
for a Safe Long-Term Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people from COVID-19 and
support infection prevention and control in long-term care and assisted living facilities. This is in addition
to $740 million provided through the Safe Restart Agreements for provinces and territories to improve
measures to control and prevent infections in home care, long-term care, and palliative care facilities
and services.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care. This guidance was
developed through the National Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control and endorsed
by the Pan- Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home
care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
• Through Budget 2021, the government is also proposing to increase Old Age Security for seniors
75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide funding of $27.6M over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-
Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees International Union Healthcare. The funding will
support incentives for worker participation. This will support retirement saving for personal support
workers.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3M over six years, and $7.7M ongoing, starting in 2021-
22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary
care, and pharmaceuticals.
BACKGROUND
COVID Impacts on Home Care
The Canadian Institute for Health Information has highlighted the following impacts COVID-19 has had
on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home Care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement.
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, and lay out the initiatives that
each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH CARE SYSTEM
SYNOPSIS
• Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Health
Canada and Indigenous Services Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health care
systems?
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous organizations
in the development of distinctions-based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care
system.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health system needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
voices are heard through meaningful consultation across the Health portfolio.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous partners and health service providers to
identify and support distinctions-based Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism
across Canada’s health care system.
BACKGROUND
Systemic racism has no place in Canada. Unfortunately, Indigenous Peoples continue to experience
racism, discrimination, stigma and bias in many facets, including when interacting with the health care
system, which has been well documented in a number of reports. There are ongoing domestic and
international calls for Canada to implement measures that address racism and discrimination in the
health care system and to demonstrate timely and meaningful progress.
In September 2020, the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman from Manawan, Quebec,
sparked widespread indignation, media attention, a public coroner’s inquest, and a lawsuit from
Echaquan's family against the hospital where she suffered racist insults from hospital staff before she
died in Joliette, QC. On November 16th, 2020, the Manawan Atikamekw Council and the Council of the
Atikamekw Nation submitted Joyce’s Principle to the Prime Minister, as well as federal, provincial, and
territorial ministers, which demands that all Indigenous Peoples have an equal right to the highest
standard of physical and mental health, with a right to traditional medicines.
In response to Joyce Echaquan’s death, Ministers Miller, Bennett, Vandal and Hajdu held two national
discussions on October 16th, 2020, and January 27-28th, 2021, to listen to Indigenous patients and
health care providers regarding their lived experiences with racism, and to provide federal, provincial,
and territorial governments and health system partners a platform to present their past, ongoing, and
planned actions to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care system.
At the January meeting, Minister Hajdu announced $4M in funding to a National Consortium of
Indigenous Medical Education to work on improving the experiences of Indigenous Peoples in medical
school/practices. Minister Miller also announced plans to begin co-developing distinctions-based
Indigenous health legislation and funding of $2M to the Atikamekw Nation and Manawan First Nation to
implement Joyce’s Principle.
Following the January meeting, FPT leaders released a joint statement to express a collective
commitment to working with Indigenous communities, organizations, and leadership to address
Indigenous-specific racism in the health care system. The federal government also committed to hosting
a third national discussion in spring 2021, and its intention to continue to convene thematic,
distinctions-based, and regional roundtable discussions. Expectations are high for the federal
government to demonstrate timely action.
While the federal government is working with Indigenous partners on a number of health policy
initiatives, dedicated work must be undertaken to directly address anti-Indigenous racism in the health
care system. The Government has committed to responding to a number of high profile reports and
recommendations to address anti-racism, cultural safety, and safe and equitable care, including the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action and the Inquiry into Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women and Girls’ Calls for Justice. In addition, there are class action lawsuits on forced and
coerced sterilization of Indigenous women in multiple jurisdictions, and both the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health and the Senate Committee on Human Rights have undertaken studies on
this issue.
Budget 2021
The Government’s commitment to engaging with Indigenous Peoples has placed a heavy burden on
Indigenous organizations who may not have the capacity to participate in the multiple engagement
requests from the federal government, including Health Canada. This investment will support
Indigenous organizations to build capacity to engage with the Department and will support distinctions-
based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism. Distinctions-based measures contribute to a
meaningful reduction in racism, discrimination, bias and stigma experienced by Indigenous Peoples
when interacting with health systems.
Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Indigenous Services
Canada and Health Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination
where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe. Prior to this investment, there was no federal funding
available to specifically address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care system.
EMERGENT BIOSOLUTIONS - ASTRAZENECA AND JANSSEN COVID-19 VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is a manufacturing site for the Janssen
vaccine, and previously manufactured AstraZeneca vaccines that were distributed in Canada. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) inspected the facility in April 2021 and found significant
deficiencies with good manufacturing practices.
The AstraZeneca vaccines imported from this site were determined by Health Canada to meet high
quality and safety requirements before being distributed in Canada.
The Janssen vaccines received on April 28 and intended for use in Canada contain an ingredient that was
manufactured at the Emergent site. These vaccines will not be distributed until Health Canada is
satisfied that they meet the required quality and safety requirements. Health Canada continues to work
closely with Janssen and the FDA to obtain all the information it needs to complete this assessment.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure that vaccines coming from the Emergent site are safe?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians can be assured that Health Canada is taking all necessary steps to ensure that
vaccines coming from the Emergent facility are safe and effective before they are distributed in Canada.
• The AstraZeneca vaccines previously imported from this facility were confirmed to meet strict
safety and quality requirements prior to distribution in Canada.
• Health Canada is assessing the recent shipment of Janssen vaccines that were made using an
ingredient manufactured by the Emergent facility to confirm that they are safe before they are
distributed in Canada, and will inform Canadians about the outcome of its assessment once completed.
• Health Canada will continue to verify that all vaccines meet strict quality and safety
requirements before they are distributed in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ASSESSMENT OF THE EMERGENT SITE…
• Health Canada is working with Janssen, Emergent and the US FDA to assess the quality of the
Janssen vaccines shipped to Canada; the vaccines will be released only if they are shown to meet Health
Canada’s quality standards.
• The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is currently rated as compliant with
good manufacturing practices by Health Canada, based on an assessment of an inspection report from
the European Medicines Agency (EMA) - Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA).
• The facility is currently authorized by Health Canada to conduct fabricating, packaging, labelling,
and testing of vaccine materials. No other product types are authorized for this site.
• Health Canada continues to work with the FDA and to further review its recent inspection report
in detail to determine whether any further actions are required to ensure the safety of Canada’s future
vaccine supply from this facility.
IF PRESSED ON THE SAFETY OF THE ASTRAZENECA VACCINES ALREADY IMPORTED FROM THIS SITE…
• Canadians can be assured that all AstraZeneca vaccines imported into Canada from this facility
are safe and of high quality.
• The Department reviewed test results of all vaccine lots that came into Canada, as well as the
company’s quality control steps implemented throughout the manufacturing process to mitigate
potential risks of contamination.
• As with all vaccines imported into Canada, the AstraZeneca vaccines were only released for
distribution once Health Canada was satisfied that they met high quality, safety and efficacy standards.
BACKGROUND
The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is a manufacturing site for the Janssen
vaccine, and previously manufactured AstraZeneca vaccines that were distributed in Canada. In March
2021, the facility was reported to have mixed up the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines, resulting in the
disposal of millions of doses of the Janssen vaccine. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
inspected the facility in April 2021 and found deficiencies with good manufacturing practices (GMPs).
The facility was rated as compliant by Health Canada earlier this year, based on a review of an inspection
report from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) - Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA). The 1.5 million
doses of AstraZeneca vaccines manufactured by this site and distributed in Canada were determined to
meet quality specifications prior to distribution in Canada.
On April 25, 2021 Health Canada issued a statement regarding the FDA recent inspection and reassured
Canadians that the Department was reviewing these findings, that it had verified that the AstraZeneca
vaccines distributed in Canada from this facility were of high quality and that the Janssen vaccines
produced at this facility had not entered Canada. The Department posted an updated statement on April
30th, advising that a drug ingredient used to manufacture the Janssen vaccine imported into Canada on
April 28th was made at the Emergent site. As with all vaccines imported into Canada, the Janssen
vaccines will only be released for distribution once Health Canada is satisfied that they meet the
Department’s high standards for quality, safety and efficacy. Health Canada is currently working with
Janssen and the FDA to obtain all information it needs to complete this assessment prior to releasing the
vaccines for distribution.
Health Canada continues to work with the Janssen, AstraZeneca and the FDA to ensure the facility meets
manufacturing standards and that all vaccine supplies for Canada are of high quality and safe for use,
and determine whether any further actions are required.
Safety, efficacy and quality requirements for vaccines
Whether a drug or vaccine is manufactured domestically or abroad, Health Canada verifies that both the
formulation and the facilities that make them comply with Canada’s high standards before approving
them for the Canadian market.
GMPs are a quality assurance system that is used to ensure that drugs and vaccines are consistently
made, packaged, labelled, tested, stored, imported and distributed in a manner that meets high safety,
efficacy and quality standards, and are recognized internationally.
All Canadian importers of drug products, including vaccines, must hold a valid Drug Establishment
Licence (DEL) for importation. When a drug is fabricated, packaged/labelled, or tested outside of
Canada, the foreign building where those activities occur must be listed on the Canadian importer’s DEL
to permit the importation of the product.
For the foreign building to be listed on the DEL, the building must be deemed compliant with GMP
requirements. To ensure they meet GMP requirements, Health Canada may conduct on-site inspections
of domestic or foreign facilities, or may rely on inspections conducted by trusted international
regulatory partners, to verify compliance.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety. The
COVID-19 pandemic highlighted longstanding challenges in supportive care, including gaps in infection
prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, testing, and visitation policies.
• It has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in community settings,
specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’ residences.
• Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment made by the Government of Canada to take any
action it can to support seniors and vulnerable populations across the country.
• It proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories
in ensuring that standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• The federal government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories,
while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure
seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Health Portfolio Operations Centre, more
than 61% of COVID-19 deaths in Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities (with a proportion
varying from 0% in smaller provinces and territories, to 49% in ON, 74% in QC, and 83% in Nova Scotia).
Eighty-one percent of the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (54%) and Ontario
(27%). Even residents of facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation and
reduced services.
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to support
residents and staff.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the federal government doing about working with provinces and territories to develop
national standards in LTC?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic has tragically highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in
Canada’s LTC system.
• The federal government has committed to working collaboratively with the provinces and
territories to take any action it can to support seniors.
• Budget 2021 includes a $3B investment over five years ($600M per year), starting in 2022-23, to
ensure that provinces and territories provide a high standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
• This is in addition to the 2020 Fall Economic Statement’s commitment of up to $1B through the
Safe LTC Fund to support infection prevention and control through making improvements to ventilation,
hiring additional, and topping up wages.
• The federal government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories,
while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure
seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Throughout the pandemic, the Government of Canada has prioritized protecting vulnerable
Canadians, including those in LTC and supported provinces and territories extensively. The Government
of Canada has:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to
work with the provinces and territories to ensure LTC has access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least one dose.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low- income essential workers, which could include front line workers in hospitals and LTC
facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories to
address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick- start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Committed to working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize
those who neglect seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
• To help the LTC sector share learnings and strengthen pandemic preparedness, we provided
$8.6 million to Healthcare Excellence Canada to support LTC facilities across the country through the
LTC+ initiative. Over 1,000 facilities are participating in the program.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting
in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care,
primary care, and pharmaceuticals.
• Additional federal measures to support seniors and those receiving care from Budget 2021:
• provide $90M over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based
organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age
in place.
• increase Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• provide funding of $27.6 million over three years a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support
retirement saving for personal support workers.
• establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC, and funded by $960M over
three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and
connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would
include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long- term care facilities across the
country. The government welcomes the news that the Heath Standards Organization and Canadian
Standards Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada.
• The Health Standards Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with
governments, stakeholders, and Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing
discussions with provinces and territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
BACKGROUND
Third-party standards development process
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care, and the health infrastructure and environmental design
of long-term care facilities.
Speech from the Throne
In the September 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government of Canada committed to taking any
action it could to support seniors. These commitments included:
• Working with the provinces and territories to set new national standards for long-term care so
that seniors get the best support possible.
• looking at further targeted measures for personal support workers, who do an essential service
helping the most vulnerable in our communities; and
• Working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize those who neglect
seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
Fall Economic Statement
In addition to the $1B in funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilities across Canada. The
goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks.
Participating teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to training sessions
and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improving LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Healthcare Excellence Canada (formerly the Canadian Foundation for
Healthcare Improvement (CFHI) and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI)) released a report in
summer 2020 outlining promising practices in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term
care and retirement homes prepare for possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate their effects:
• Preparation;
• Prevention;
• People in the workforce;
• Pandemic response and surge capacity;
• Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and,
• Presence of family.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Vaccination campaigns in long-term care facilities and seniors’ residences have significantly reduced the
number of outbreaks in congregate living settings. As of March 31, 2021, the number of outbreaks and
cases in the most affected provinces, ON and QC, have been sharply reduced since the peak in January
2021. The majority of PTs are not reporting any active outbreaks in long-term care facilities.
Several provinces and territories have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities,
including Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of
the ongoing investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On September 24, CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly funded LTC homes
offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of these facilities can be public or private.
Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory. Overall, 54% of
LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (28% for-profit, 23% not-for-profit and 3% no breakdown) and
46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was transferred to the
province in April 2016. VAC now supports about 4,000 Veterans in over 1,150 provincially and privately
owned and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an enhanced level of
services and specialized programs for veterans.
Since 2007, Revera Inc. is a wholly-owned operating subsidiary of the Public Sector Pension Investment
Board (PSPIB), an independent Crown corporation established under the Public Sector Pension
Investment Board Act in 1999 and is registered under the Canada Business Corporations Act.
The PSPIB operates at arm's length from the federal government – i.e., it is not part of the federal public
administration. Its business affairs are managed by an 11-member Board of Directors, and investment
decisions are informed by a governance model outlined in the PSPIB Act.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – PASSAGE OF BILL C-7
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The changes introduced through Bill C-7, which expanded access to MAID to more Canadians
suffering intolerably, underscored the need to support the evolution of Canada’s MAID framework.
• Budget 2021 will provide $13.2 million to Health Canada over five years, beginning in 2021-22,
with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the development of training and guidance materials for
practitioners, as well as a policy driven research agenda.
• This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to support safe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
SYNOPSIS
• Bill C-7 An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying) received Royal Assent
on March 17, 2021. In response to the 2019 Superior Court of Québec’s Truchon ruling, the new MAID
legislation removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order
to be eligible for MAID. It also includes additional safeguards for these new types of requests, as well as
the following short-term commitments:
• That a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent (i.e., by April 16,
2021). This review will address (but will not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature minors,
advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians
with disabilities.
• That the Ministers of Justice and Health initiate an independent expert panel tasked with
making recommendations by March 17, 2022 (within one year of Royal Assent) on protocols, guidance
and safeguards for MAID for persons suffering from mental illness.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, what is the Government going to do to ensure safe
implementation of the law?
KEY MESSAGES
• The new law introduces significant changes in Canada’s framework for MAID. These changes
arise from a Court decision and the views of Canadians expressed through public consultations and
debated fully in the House of Commons and the Senate.
• We recognize that the changes to the MAID regime present new challenges for provincial and
territorial governments and practitioners as they work to ensure safe, sensitive and consistent
interpretation and application of the law in health systems across the country.
• The Government will be working closely with provincial and territorial governments, medical
experts and other stakeholders over the next year and beyond to support the safe implementation of
Bill C-7.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that other important issues related to MAID remain to be
explored.
• As set out in the legislation, a parliamentary review of the MAID legislation will consider areas
such as the eligibility of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, palliative care and the
protection of Canadians living with disabilities.
• The Government will do whatever is required to support this work.
IF PRESSED ON THE TOPIC OF MAID FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS…
• The Government of Canada recognizes the concerns and the challenges associated with allowing
MAID for individuals suffering solely from mental illness.
• That is why the new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID
requests where mental illness is the sole condition. This is accompanied by a requirement to initiate an
independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards that would be applied to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness.
• Minister Lametti and I are working together to set up the expert panel that will undertake this
work. A final report containing the panel’s conclusions and recommendations will be completed within
the year.
• Parliamentarians will then have another year to consider whether additional safeguards should
be legislated, and it will provide professional regulatory bodies and associations with the information
they need to develop appropriate guidance and resources.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL C-268: PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT…
• The Criminal Code already provides significant protection for health care professionals in
relation to MAID.
• The current legislation explicitly states that nothing in the MAID legislation compels a health
care provider to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in dying.
• This is not changed in the new legislation.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new law responds to feedback from over 300,000 Canadians, experts, practitioners, stakeholders,
provinces and territories, provided during the January and February 2020 consultations. It is also
informed by the testimony of over 120 expert witnesses heard throughout Bill C-7’s study by the House
of Commons and the Senate.
During the period of suspension of the Truchon ruling (September 11, 2019 to March 17, 2021), Quebec
residents meeting all eligibility requirements (other than a reasonably foreseeable natural death) were
able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their request for MAID
considered. A total of 19 Quebec residents received exemptions during this period (in addition to the
two plaintiffs Jean Truchon and Nicole Gladu).
The new MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months,
and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
As outlined in the previous legislation, the 2016 law was to be referred to one or more Parliamentary
Committees by June 2020, but this did not take place as a result of the pandemic. The new legislation
requires that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent. The first
meeting of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying was held on Monday May 17,
2021. The Committee will meet every Monday until the House rises on June 23, 2021 (to resume in the
Fall).
The joint Chairs will be Dr. Hedy Fry (Lib) and Senator Martin (CPC). A workplan has not yet been agreed
upon, but the review is expected to address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities. The Committee must submit its report to Parliament no later than one year
after the start of the review.
MENTAL ILLNESS: SUNSET CLAUSE AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW
The new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests where mental
illness is the sole condition. The sunset clause is accompanied by a legislative requirement that an
independent review be initiated to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. Individuals with a mental illness would be required to
meet all other eligibility criteria including those that define a grievous and irremediable medical
condition. A report containing the conclusions and recommendations of the independent review must
be provided no later than 12 months after the day Bill C-7 comes into force (i.e., by March 17, 2022),
and made public very shortly thereafter.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID require the federal Minister of Health to produce an annual
report of MAID data. The first report, released on July 24, 2020, covers data collected under this
reporting regime for the 2019 calendar year.
This report indicated that, in 2019, there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID, accounting for 2.0% of all
deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This represents an
increase of 26.1% over 2018 numbers, with all provinces experiencing a steady year over year growth in
the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all data sources are considered, the total number of
medically assisted deaths reported in Canada from the enactment of federal legislation to December 31,
2019 was 13,946.
Importantly, it also found that the majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported to have
received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access palliative care services
before receiving MAID, the majority (89.6%) would have had access to these services according to the
reporting practitioner. Similarly, 89.9% of persons receiving MAID deemed to require disability support
services received them.
Health Canada is currently analyzing data from the 2020 calendar year to prepare the second annual
report, which will likely be released in spring 2021.
Federal reporting regulations setting out requirements for physicians, nurse practitioners and
pharmacists came into force in November 2018. Under that reporting regime, data is collected on all
written requests for MAID and its provision.
CHANGES TO DATA COLLECTION
Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, Health Canada will be amending the regulations to align
with the revised eligibility criteria and safeguards as well as other data collection requirements set out in
the new legislation. Bill C-7 requires that data be collected with respect to race or Indigenous identity
and disability. Expanding the MAID monitoring regime in this way will help demonstrate the presence of
any inequalities or disadvantages based on these or other characteristics in the provision of MAID. In
amending the MAID monitoring regulations, the Government will consult with a broad range of
stakeholders, including groups representing persons experiencing inequalities, to help identify the
appropriate information that needs to be collected and how collection can be undertaken in a way that
is respectful, inclusive and does not impose an unreasonable burden on clinicians who are legally
obligated to provide the data.
BILL C-268 PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT
Bill C-268, the Protection of Freedom of Conscience Act, proposes to amend the Criminal Code to create
two hybrid offences to protect the conscience rights of healthcare providers in relation to MAID: (1) an
offence prohibiting the use of violence or threats of violence, coercion or intimidation to compel a
healthcare professional to participate, directly or indirectly, in the provision of MAID; and an offence
prohibiting firing or refusing to employ healthcare professionals because they refuse to take part in
providing MAID.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING COVID-19
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government has allocated $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
• The Government will provide $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support
projects for innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted by
COVID-19, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and
racialized and Black Canadians
• The Government will provide $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support a
trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for populations
at high risk of experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought about by
COVID-19
• The Government has allocated an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for the Wellness Together
Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support mental
health and well-being.
SYNOPSIS
• The Government remains committed to increasing access to mental health and substance use
resources and supports so that Canadians can get the help they need, when they need it.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government’s plan to enhance access to mental health care to support Canadians
through the pandemic and recovery period?
KEY MESSAGES
• COVID-19 continues to create stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians, particularly
those who do not have access to support networks. That is why the Government launched an online
portal that provides access to mental health and substance use supports.
• Wellness Together Canada is the first national program of its kind, providing 24/7 access to free
and confidential evidence- based tools and resources.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals across the country can access supports ranging
from self-assessment, self- guided programming, and peer support, to confidential sessions with social
workers, psychologists and other professionals.
• Wellness Together Canada supports existing provincial and territorial services, and does not
replace them.
• All services are available in both official languages, and phone counselling sessions are
supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and dialects.
• To date, the Government of Canada has invested $68 million in Wellness Together Canada.
Through Budget 2021, the Government has allocated an additional $62 million in 2021-22 towards this
initiative.
IF PRESSED ON PREVIOUS INVESTMENTS
• As part of the Safe Restart Agreement in July 2020, $500 million was also provided directly to
provinces and territories for immediate mental health and substance use service needs.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help
Phone to provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million
to support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICE
STANDARDS
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to set
national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the support
they need, when they need it.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government will provide $45 million over two years to help develop
national mental health and substance use service standards, in collaboration with provinces and
territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for families who may be especially vulnerable
to stress given the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
• As part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is
providing support to young people via phone, text and live chat.
• We are also investing an additional $7.5M in Kids Help Phone to support their ongoing services
for youth, as a leader in responding to the needs of young Canadians.
• In addition to these actions, the Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to
provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access, which
includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS…
• Health care workers and other front line personnel are an important population for Wellness
Together Canada. That is why the portal features a dedicated text line for frontline workers that
provides immediate access to supports.
• Frontline workers can also access free counselling and a range of self-guided programming on
the portal anytime at their convenience. This includes resources tailored for healthcare workers.
• In addition, the portal features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers and other
Canadians in accessing portal resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal based on client feedback to ensure
an inclusive portal experience, tailored to meeting the needs of varying age groups and diverse
populations.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, which includes 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness, which provides Indigenous
peoples with access to immediate mental health counselling and crisis intervention.
• The portal also supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote
areas, facing stigma or financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• As of May 11, 2021, over 1.3 million individuals across all provinces and territories have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 3.9M web sessions since launch.
• Approximately 40% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than
usual male engagement.
• Approximately 46% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an age
group that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services.
• For phone sessions, 89% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 86% of
texters were highly satisfied with the service.
• Based on a client feedback survey, 24% indicated they have no other options for support, if not
for the portal.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA...
• The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health information legislation and standards to
maintain the security and confidentiality of personal information.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
• For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling by phone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals with the grief
they face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impact Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada has invested $130 million over two years in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician- researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Mental Health and Substance Use Service Standards
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government has allocated $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop national mental health and substance use service
standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so
that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to the Public Health Agency of Canada to
support projects for innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted
by COVID-19, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and
racialized and Black Canadians
• $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada to support a trauma and post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for populations at high risk of
experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought about by COVID-19.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500M targeted immediate mental health
and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce, targeted
programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the pandemic by
providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is currently leading a COVID-19 and Mental Health
Research Initiative in collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. This work is
guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and
substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will
inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is providing $21 million over five years to the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis Services Canada. This
service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained
responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing stigma,
disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release
in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived- experience.
THE COMMISSIONER OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT’S AUDIT OF THE
NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
• On April 22, 2021, at 10 a.m. EDT, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development tabled an audit report of the Natural Health Products Program. Health Canada agrees with
the findings and recommendations, and is committed to implementing measures to improve the
oversight of natural health products and implement proactive risk-based activities.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Are the natural health products on the market safe to use?
• What is the Department doing in response to the audit?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of ensuring that natural health products available for
sale in Canada are safe and effective.
• The audit focussed on natural health products available for sale in Canada to ensure that they
are safe, effective and accurately represented to consumers.
• The audit found that Health Canada licensed natural health products appropriately, based on
evidence of safety and efficacy prior to licensing. It also found that when an issue was brought to Health
Canada’s attention, immediate action was taken.
• It also concluded that Health Canada acted appropriately to increase the supply of alcohol-based
hand sanitizers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The audit also identified areas for improvement. Health Canada agrees with the
recommendations from the Commissioner.
• The department is already working to address all of the recommendations and is taking steps to
accelerate its efforts to strengthen the Natural Health Products Program, including increased oversight
of quality, advertising and labelling.
IF PRESSED…
Are the natural health products on the market safe to use?
• Canada has one of the best regulatory systems in the world for natural health products, with
some of the most stringent requirements.
• For many Canadians, natural health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy
lifestyle.
• While manufacturers are ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of the natural health
products they sell in Canada, Health Canada assesses the products for safety, efficacy and quality prior
to issuing a license.
• While the audit identified areas for improvement, it found that overall, Health Canada’s
approach to assessing safety and efficacy of natural health products prior to licensing is appropriate. The
audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, once the product was on
the market, the Department took appropriate action to mitigate any risks to Canadians.
• Our department is already working to address all of the audit recommendations, including
strengthening the oversight of online advertising, launching an inspection pilot program intended to
inform the development of a permanent inspection program, and helping ensure that the department
has the tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious health risk arises.
IF PRESSED….
What were the recommendations and the Department’s response?
• The audit recommendations include; increased oversight of the quality of natural health
products, greater monitoring of labels and advertising, improved product labelling, developing a risk-
based inspection program, and introducing proactive risk-based activities for compliance and
enforcement.
• Health Canada’s response focuses on strengthening the oversight of online advertising to ensure
that Canadians have accurate and reliable information to inform their choices, launching an inspection
pilot program intended to inform the development of a permanent inspection program, and bringing
forward a regulatory proposal to improve labelling so product labels are clear, consistent and legible for
consumers.
• The department will work to ensure it has the tools to protect the health and safety of
Canadians when a serious health risk arises by considering the expansion of Vanesa’s law authorities to
natural health products.
• Health Canada is also working on stabilizing funding by developing a proposal to implement cost
recovery for key regulatory activities related to natural health products in order to sustain increased
oversight of these products, including through inspections of the facilities that make or import them.
IF PRESSED….
How long will it take Health Canada to implement the recommended changes?
• In many of the areas of recommendation, work to address gaps has already begun. For example:
o An inspection pilot program was recently launched to promote and verify compliance of licence
holders across Canada.
o The Department is also expanding its oversight of online advertising of natural health products
through a pilot program to ensure advertisements are providing Canadians with accurate and reliable
information to inform their choices.
o The Department is on track to publish a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of natural health
products for consultation later this spring.
• Other elements of the Department’s response will take more time to implement, such as the
Department’s plans to take steps to propose fees for natural health products and expanding Vanessa’s
Law to natural health products. To implement this, the Department will develop a proposal which will be
subject to comprehensive stakeholder consultation prior to implementation.
BACKGROUND
In 2019, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development (CESD) began an audit of
Health Canada’s Natural Health Products Program. The period covered by the audit is from January 2017
to May 2020. The purpose of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensured that natural
health products available for sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. In June
2020, the audit scope was expanded to include Health Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic
specific to the Natural Health Products Program.
Health Canada regulates natural health products sold in Canada to ensure they are safe and effective.
Natural health products include products such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, homeopathic
products, traditional products (such as traditional Chinese medicines), and probiotics. Particularly
relevant in the context of COVID-19, natural health products also include alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
The auditors made five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted. The
recommendations support the direction that the Department has been taking to improve the oversight
of these products. Work to address many of these areas had already begun. The Department has
developed a detailed action plan in response to the audit, which is expected to be implemented over the
next three years.
The Department is committed to addressing the audit findings by implementing measures to improve
the oversight of natural health products, including enhanced enforcement tools and more proactive risk-
based monitoring activities.
NEONICOTINOID PESTICIDES
SYNOPSIS
On May 19, 2021, Health Canada released the final re-evaluation decision for the neonicotinoid
pesticide, imidacloprid. This followed the recent special review decisions related to aquatic organisms
for two neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam, released by Health Canada on March
31, 2021. Previously, Health Canada had consulted publicly on a proposal to cancel all outdoor uses of
these pesticides. Over 47,000 comments were received, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data. In order to protect the environment, in
this final decision, Health Canada cancelled some uses of imidacloprid, and introduced additional
mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered, which is consistent
with the recent Special Review decisions for clothianidin and thiamethoxam.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Neonicotinoids are affecting the environment. Why has the Government delayed this decision,
and not proceeded with a complete ban?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions.
• Health Canada reviewed more than 47,000 comments, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data that were received on the environmental
risks of neonicotinoids.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of neonicotinoids, and
introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the situation and take action if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA – WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES – IS TAKING
A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSURE FROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR:
• Health Canada has concluded that a complete ban on neonicotinoid pesticides is not warranted.
• As part of the public consultation on its decisions, Health Canada received more than 47,000
comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces. As
well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from various
sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these
neonicotinoid insecticides in Canada.
BACKGROUND
NEONICS AND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
• On November 23, 2016, Health Canada proposed to phase out all agricultural uses of
imidacloprid due to unacceptable aquatic risk. This proposed decision led to a special review on the
aquatic risks of two other neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. At the time,
concerns were identified by Health Canada from available scientific information that these two
pesticides were frequently being detected in aquatic environments in Canada at concentrations that
could pose a risk to aquatic insects.
• Health Canada consulted on proposed special review decisions on risks to aquatic insects for
clothianidin and thiamethoxam in the Fall of 2018. This review proposed the cancellation of all outdoor
uses based on risks to the aquatic environment, similar to the previous consultation on imidacloprid.
Health Canada then reviewed the more than 47,000 comments that were received via the consultation,
as well as a substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data
from various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities.
Approximately 65% of the water monitoring information considered in the special reviews was new
since the publication of the proposed decisions.
• The final special review decisions related to aquatic insects for clothianidin and thiamethoxam,
and the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, originally targeted for fall 2020, were delayed
until March 31, 2021 and May 19, 2021 respectively, due to the unprecedented volume of information
received during consultation and the challenges of COVID-19.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of clothianidin,
thiamethoxam and imidacloprid, and introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on
some of the uses that remain registered.
NEONICS AND BEES
• On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluation decisions for the
neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. The implementation timelines
outlined in the thiamethoxam decision were challenged by several organizations in proceedings against
the Minister of Health. The Federal Court dismissed the application in December of 2019.
• The special reviews for squash bees are currently ongoing. Health Canada plans to complete the
proposed special review decisions related to squash bees in 2021.
NEONICS AND HUMAN HEALTH
• Based on data reviewed for the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, the assessment
did not identify human health concerns. This included additional data received following publication of
the proposed decision, along with consideration of the proposed interim decision on neonics by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
• All available information will be considered in Health Canada’s ongoing cyclical re- evaluations of
clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Health Canada is expecting to publish the proposed cyclical re-
evaluation decisions of clothianidin and thiamethoxam in Spring 2022.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• The US EPA expressed similar concerns regarding aquatic insects in their preliminary ecological
risk assessments of the neonicotinoids in 2017. The EPA published a proposed interim decision for
acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, imidacloprid, and thiamethoxam on January 30, 2020. It contains
new measures to reduce potential ecological risks, particularly to pollinators, and to protect public
health. A final decision from the US EPA is expected later in 2021.
• The European Union voted to prohibit all agricultural uses of neonicotinoids except in
greenhouses. This measure came into effect on December 19, 2018. This decision was driven by
unacceptable risks to bees and other pollinators. Emergency use is permitted in some European
countries.
• Health Canada cannot speak to the decision-making process in other countries with regards to
neonicotinoids. Each country takes into account its own legislative requirements, policies, and scientific
analysis before making a decision. In Canada, pesticides are allowed on the market only after a full
scientific analysis is completed based on Canadian use, and the risks are found to be acceptable as per
the requirements of the Pest Control Products Act.
OVERDOSE CRISIS
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• Canada continues to face an opioid overdose crisis that has devastated lives and communities
across the country.
• To support efforts in communities, Budget 2021 proposes to provide an additional $116 million
over two years, building on $66 million invested in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, to support a
range of innovative approaches to harm reduction, treatment, and prevention.
SYNOPSIS
• The overdose crisis continues to be a serious and unrelenting public health threat. Tragically, the
COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions across the
country reporting increases in overdose deaths and harms. In addition, people who use drugs are also
facing additional barriers and risks related to the toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to
health and social services, including life-saving harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government addressing the overdose crisis in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s recent history.
• Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated long-standing challenges regarding
substance use and the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose
deaths and harms.
• Our government has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis using a public health-
focused approach, guided by our federal drug strategy – the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
We continue to support efforts to improve access to treatment services; increase access to harm
reduction services; strengthen enforcement to help reduce the toxic illegal drug supply; increase
awareness and prevention efforts; and, build the evidence base through investments in research and
surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
frontline service providers and people with lived and living experience to advance solutions to save lives
and help reverse this national public health crisis while recognizing that problematic substance use must
be treated as a health condition.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL COVID-19-SPECIFIC MEASURES…
• The Government of Canada has taken swift action to address the unique challenges posed by
the COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have taken urgent action to enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use and avert the harms associated with the increasingly toxic
supply of street drugs and challenges associated with accessing treatment and harm reduction services.
• For example, we removed regulatory barriers to make it easier for people with substance use
disorder to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for overdose prevention sites
to be established rapidly in temporary community shelters and other locations.
• We have also provided $500 million under the Safe Restart Agreements with Provinces and
Territories to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and protection of people experiencing
challenges related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
• Recently, we announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of naloxone kits and opioid
overdose response training to support communities across Canada that have been particularly affected
by the opioid overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those
struggling with substance use.
• That is why we have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and
facilitated their prescribing and dispensing through regulatory amendments; supported the
development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist treatment; and encouraged the
provinces and territories to increase their uptake of these evidence-based treatments.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has also provided $150 million in Budget 2018 through
the Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• The evidence is clear, harm reduction measures help reduce harms and save lives.
• That is why we have funded innovative pilot projects for safer supply models as an alternative to
the toxic illegal drug supply; have passed the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act to provide some legal
protection for people who seek emergency help during an overdose; have exemptions in place for 37
operating supervised consumption sites; and have increased access to naloxone, including to remote
communities and isolated First Nations and Inuit communities and to the sector serving individuals who
are experiencing homelessness.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention efforts, including
awareness building.
• That is why we have invested in prevention campaigns to engage youth and young adults on the
facts of substance use, expanded public awareness around opioids and the harms of stigma via public
health campaigns; supported school-based approaches that enhance student well-being to prevent
problematic substance use amongst youth; and supported the development of opioid-prescribing
guidelines and treatment guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our government is aware that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous illegal
drug supply, resulting in tragic increases in overdose-related deaths across the country.
• For this reason, we have taken a number of actions to reduce barriers to providing people who
use drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• For example, we have allowed pharmacists and practitioners to extend, renew and transfer
prescriptions to make made it easier for people to access the medications they need during the
pandemic.
• In addition, the Government of Canada is providing funding to support safer supply projects in
British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The evaluation of these innovative
projects will continue to build the evidence base and support the scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• International and Canadian evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms
and save lives.
• These sites reduce risk of overdose death and of transmission of infection. In addition, they
provide access to other health and social services for people who use drugs, including opportunities to
access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territories, service providers, people with lived and
living experience, and other stakeholders to take appropriate measures to maintain and expand access
to supervised consumption services in communities that need them.
IF PRESSED ON ENFORCEMENT/TOXIC DRUG SUPPLY…
• Our government recognizes that the toxic illegal drug supply is the leading cause of opioid
overdose harms and deaths, and that substance use requires a public health-centered approach.
• We continue to work closely with domestic and international partners to reduce the illegal
fentanyl supply; equip border agents with tools to intercept fentanyl; and, work with private sector
partners to address money laundering of the proceeds of fentanyl trafficking.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH AND SURVEILLANCE…
• Our government recognizes that in order to have an effective response to the ever-changing
crisis, a strong understanding and evidence-base is required to make informed and timely decisions.
• That is why, we have collected and published data on opioid-related deaths and harms; used
modelling to show how the opioid overdose crisis may change as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
conducted rapid knowledge synthesis; and, developed a range of guidance documents to support
evidence-based interventions.
IF PRESSED ON DECRIMINALIZATION…
• Our Government recognizes that substance use is first and foremost a health issue.
• We have lost too many Canadians to drug overdoses, and an increasing number of stakeholders
are saying criminalizing personal drug possession is hurting, not helping.
• We are looking at ways to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system
and towards health and social supports, such as supervised consumption sites and drug treatment
services.
• The Public Prosecution Service of Canada has issued a directive to only pursue charges for
possession of illegal drugs in the most serious cases. In addition, this Government has announced
amendments to federal drug laws in Bill C-22 that would further support actions to treat simple drug
possession more as a health issue, rather than as a criminal one.
• We will continue to work with other levels of government and stakeholders to help save lives
and better support the needs of people who use drugs during this crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE SECTION 56 EXEMPTION REQUEST FROM THE CITY OF VANCOUVER AND BRITISH
COLUMBIA THAT WOULD DECRIMINALIZE THE PERSONAL POSSESSION OF DRUGS…
• Health Canada is working with the Province of British Columbia and the City of Vancouver. We
will continue our work to get Canadians who use substances the support they need.
• Health Canada is committed to carefully reviewing any request for an exemption under the
Controlled Drugs and Substance Act on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential benefits and
risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE’S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CRIMINAL CODE AND
THE CONTROLLED DRUGS AND SUBSTANCES ACT (BILL C-22, INTRODUCED FEBRUARY 18, 2021)…
• This Bill represents a step forward in treating substance use as a health issue and addressing
systemic issues in the criminal justice system that disproportionately affect Indigenous peoples and
Black Canadians.
• The Bill would require police and prosecutors to consider alternative giving a warning or taking
no further action - instead of laying charges or prosecuting individuals for simple possession of an illegal
drug.
• We understand that many stakeholders are continuing to call for full drug decriminalization.
• We remain committed to saving lives and better supporting the needs of people who use drugs
during the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• Our government recognizes the close links between people who live with pain, substance use
and the overdose crisis.
• That is why we created the Canadian Pain Task Force to better understand these links and to
identify potential actions to better prevent and manage
• In early May, the Canadian Pain Task Force published their final report which includes
recommendations on key areas to ensure people with pain are recognized and supported, and that pain
is understood, prevented and effectively treated across Canada.
• We will continue to work with our partners to explore implementing the recommendations and
potential next steps.
• We have also invested over $175M in pain-related research through the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research and close to $19M in funding for 12 initiatives focused on improving opioid prescribing
practices and pain management through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP).
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 19,355 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and September 2020. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the crisis
with as many as 82% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2020 (January to September)
involving fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with
death most common among males and individuals aged 20 to 49 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing increased risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Available information indicate at least five provinces and
territories have observed record-breaking numbers of deaths in April to September 2020.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be the
most impacted region of the country. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,724
illegal drug toxicity deaths, a 75% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally, the crisis in
BC continues into 2021 with 498 illicit toxicity deaths recorded in the first three months, an 85%
increase from the same period in 2020. February and March 2021 both reported the largest number of
suspected deaths ever recorded for those months, 155 and 158 suspected illicit toxicity deaths
respectively. Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people in BC have also surged, almost
doubling between January and May 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. In 2020, Alberta also
experienced a 61% increase in opioid overdose deaths among First Nations people, as compared to the
same time period in 2019.
Other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar trends. Ten provinces and territories (ON, AB,
SK, MB, QC, NB, PEI, NL, YK, and NWT) are also reporting increases in toxicity of the illegal drug supply,
overdose deaths and/or emergency department or medical service (EMS) calls.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of nearly
$700M to address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products and tools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statement (December 2020) to help support community-based
organizations responding to substance use issues address the additional challenges posted by the
COVID- 19 pandemic. In March 2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the
distribution of naloxone kits and opioid overdose response training to support communities that have
been particularly affected by the opioid overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving
health outcomes of their residents.
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action to make it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for frontline service
providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
PALLIATIVE CARE
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety. The
COVID-19 pandemic has strained resources and exposed gaps and systemic vulnerabilities in palliative
care delivery across all settings.
• Our Government is investing $29.8M over six years as part of Budget 2021 to provide Canadians,
including those living in long-term care and their families, with better palliative and end-of-life care,
including culturally sensitive care.
• Starting in 2021-22, the government, through Health Canada, will use this investment to
advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on long-
term and supportive care needs, improving access to quality palliative care.
SYNOPSIS
• On August 27, 2019, Health Canada released an Action Plan on Palliative Care, which builds on
the 2018 Framework on Palliative Care in Canada. The Action Plan lays out Health Canada’s five-year
plan to tackle issues identified in the Framework. Using federal levers, it aims to help improve quality of
life for people with life-limiting illness, address concerns of families and caregivers, and enhance access
to quality palliative care, through improved health care system performance.
• Many of the planned initiatives in the Action Plan will require ongoing collaboration with
partners for successful implementation. The Action Plan complements financial support to provinces
and territories under the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
• Budget 2021 provides a federal investment of $29.8M over six years starting in 2021-22, to
advance the government’s Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated
action on long-term and supportive care needs, improving access to quality palliative care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to improve access to palliative care in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians approaching the end of their lives deserve to receive care in the setting of their
choice and live out their days in comfort and dignity. Never has this been more important than now.
• That is why our Government has worked collaboratively with partners, such as the provinces
and territories, to develop a Framework and a targeted Action Plan on Palliative Care.
• To support this Action Plan, our Government is investing $29.8M over six years as part of Budget
2021 to provide Canadians, including those living in long-term care and their families, with better
palliative and end-of-life care, including culturally sensitive care.
• Initiatives could include: raising awareness of the importance of palliative care; providing public
education on grief; improving palliative care skills and supports for health care providers, families,
caregivers, and communities; enhancing data collection and research; and improving access to culturally
sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
IF PRESSED… about why the federal government doesn`t compel provinces and territories to provide
more palliative care:
• As highlighted in Budget 2021, in order to support improvements to palliative care in Canada,
our Government continues its commitment of $6 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to
improve access to home and community care, as well as palliative care. Our government will continue to
work with provinces, territories and health partners to improve access to home and palliative care.
• The Framework and Action Plan complement this investment. They build on the strategies and
policies already in place in provinces and territories, and provide a useful reference point to help identify
opportunities, address gaps and share promising practices.
IF PRESSED… about what the federal government has done to support palliative care delivery during the
pandemic:
• While continuing to work with health partners to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care,
Health Canada has invested $10.3M in funding for Action Plan initiatives that respond to urgent needs
created by the pandemic. These projects will leverage virtual tools and caring communities to improve
palliative care delivery across all settings, including at home and in the community.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
• While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to palliative
home care services.
• Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care unit.
BUDGET 2021
Initiatives under the Budget funding could include:
• raising awareness of the importance of palliative care;
• providing public education on grief;
• improving palliative care skills and supports for health care providers, families, caregivers, and
communities;
• enhancing data collection and research; and
• improving access to culturally sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE: BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK ON PALLIATIVE CARE IN CANADA
While all governments, communities, and Canadians have a role to play in improving end-of-life care,
the Action Plan lays out the federal role. Budget 2021 investments in the above areas align with the
priority areas of Health Canada’s five-year Action Plan to implement the Framework on Palliative Care.
The Action Plan complements current financial support to provinces and territories under the Common
Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, as described below.
RESPONDING TO NEEDS CREATED OR EXPOSED BY COVID-19
Health Canada and its partners are working to support and implement initiatives identified in the Action
Plan, as well as new initiatives that will contribute to the delivery of palliative care in the new
environment created by the pandemic. They will respond to current priorities including symptom
control, information sharing, virtual care, advance care planning, and isolation. Current activities
include:
• Funding projects in support of palliative care delivery:
o The Canadian Hospice Palliative Care Association received an additional $612,829 to develop
advance care planning tools and resources for long-term care residents and family, as well as tools and
resources for health care providers and workers in long- term care facilities;
o The Canadian Virtual Hospice has received $586,534, in addition to the $2M already committed,
to develop a series of online learning modules for caregivers and palliative care patients; host discussion
forums for healthcare professionals; raise public awareness; and to develop modules to provide grief
support to care providers.
o William Osler’s RELIEF Project received $1.4M to facilitate palliative care delivery to vulnerable
populations through the use of technology to enable Remote Self-Reporting of Symptoms by Patients
with Palliative Care Needs;
o University of British Columbia received $2.25M for its Volunteer Navigation in Palliative Care:
Adapting and Expanding the Nav-CARE program - a program in which trained volunteers provide
navigation services to persons living at home with life-limiting illness using a palliative and
compassionate community approach; and
o Pallium Canada received $450,000 to provide webinars, training and other resources to
clinicians responding to the pandemic. In addition, Pallium will receive new funding of $5M for Project
ECHO. This project will build local palliative care capacity among health care providers through the
delivery of information, resources, and ongoing supports, such as how to effectively deliver virtual
palliative care services.
Indigenous Peoples
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years to improve home
and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. During the development of the Framework
and Action Plan, National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) indicated their interest in discussing
Indigenous-led engagement processes toward the development of a separate distinctions-based
framework on palliative care. This engagement is planned in collaboration with ISC. Engagement with
Indigenous groups will be a complex and multi-faceted process. ISC has begun the engagement process
with First Nations and Inuit peoples on long-term care, including palliative care. Plans for other streams
of engagement by Health Canada (e.g., Indigenous health providers, Métis peoples, urban Indigenous
populations) are also underway.
OTHER FEDERAL INVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
In 2017, the GoC committed $6B/10 years to P/Ts to improve access, as part of its $11B/10 year
commitment to strengthen health care. In August 2017, F/P/T Ministers of Health agreed to the
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities (CSOP), which set out agreed- upon actions
to improve access to home and palliative care supported by federal investments:
• Spreading and scaling evidence-based models for home care and community care that are more
integrated and connected with primary health care
• Increasing support for caregivers
• Enhancing access to palliative care and end of life care at home and in hospices
• Enhancing home care infrastructure, i.e., digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology and
facilities for community-based service delivery
Following agreement on the CSOP, GoC negotiated the first of two consecutive bilateral agreements
with each jurisdiction, based on the CSOP agreed-upon priorities. The bilateral agreements provide
details on each jurisdiction’s initiatives supported by federal investments related to home and palliative
care. F/P/T governments also agreed to report on progress through a set of 12 common indicators, five
of which relate to home and one to palliative care.
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), is supporting the Canadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centers
of Excellence Program, with an investment of $47.8 million between 2012-13 and 2021-22. This network
aims to improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through the development,
evaluation, and implementation of health care technologies. Moreover, between 2013-14 and 2017-18,
CIHR invested more than $8.2 million in the area of palliative care in cancer. In addition, CIHR is
currently investing approximately $2.8 million over 4 years in two research teams focused on Late Life
Issues.
PHARMACARE
SYNOPSIS
• In February 2020, the NDP introduced Private Member’s Bill C-231 to implement single- payer
universal pharmacare, as well as a motion that passed with Government support in March 2020. On
February 24, 2021, Bill C-231 was defeated at second reading.
• In Budget 2019 and 2021, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and the Fall Economic Statement,
the Government committed to implement national pharmacare, beginning with the creation of a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare program?
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• We have done more than any government in a generation to lower drug prices.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working together with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to build on the foundational elements of national universal pharmacare that are already in
progress so that Canadians have the drug coverage they need.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for high-cost drugs for
rare diseases in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders and the public.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
• We have already taken action to improve access and affordability of medicines. For example, we
modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will save Canadians billions
over the next decade.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
• On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact
the Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative
framework for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213
was defeated on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
• On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don
Davies (Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the
Hoskins Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the
immediate initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new,
dedicated fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term,
predictable, fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage,
which protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians;
and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while
making life more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with
Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders
through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12,
2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national
universal pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
• Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal
investments to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better
access to the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canada Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement
and Budget 2021.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its mandate to
protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will
result in billions of savings for governments and private payers over the next 10 years. However, the
brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
• On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that maintained most of the
regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information On
December 18, 2020, a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the
Attorney General of Canada. These decisions are currently being appealed.
Support for Canadian Blood Services’ Domestic Plasma Collection for the Health and Welfare of
Canadians
BUDGET 2021:
• Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the security of Canada’s
supply of plasma-derived products. Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with the
national blood and plasma agency is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area for the
health and safety of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 commits $20 million over three years beginning in 2021-22, which allows Canadian
Blood Services to build eight (8) new dedicated plasma collection sites across Canada.
BACKGROUND
Plasma-derived products (PDPs) are needed by thousands of Canadians to treat immune deficiencies,
rare blood disorders, and other conditions. PDPs are manufactured from plasma through multiple
processing steps. Most plasma products used worldwide are made from paid plasma donations and
collected by the commercial sector. As the federal regulator, Health Canada is responsible for
maintaining the safety of Canada’s blood supply and the plasma used in the production of drugs. Any
establishment that collects plasma must hold a HC authorization and license, as well as meet the strict
safety requirements under the Food and Drugs Act.
The need to enhance domestic plasma collection has been a long-standing issue given Canada’s
dependence on paid-donor plasma from the United States. Prior to the pandemic, provinces and
territories (PTs), except Québec, approved three new proof-of-concept sites – Canadian Blood Services
(CBS) opened two of these sites in 2020, and the third is on track to open in Spring 2021. However, the
COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated existing supply costs and other issues. In July 2020, CBS provided its
perspective on the current and future state of its plasma supply in the context of COVID-19 and
continued efforts to meet the needs of Canadian patients who rely on PDPs, namely Immune Globulin
(IG). The organization sought PT DMs support to increase domestic plasma collection capacity by
opening eight further sites over 2021-24 to achieve 22% domestic sufficiency.
This investment in CBS provides opportunities for Canadians, including for construction of site
enhancements and necessary refurbishments, as well as high quality, permanent jobs staffing the
centres. The investment will also increase domestic plasma collection capacity and security of critically
important therapeutics for Canadians, and has the potential to help mitigate rising healthcare costs for
PTs within a decade.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’) to provide the PMPRB with new tools and information needed
to protect Canadians from excessive prices of patented medicines.
• On October 23, 2020, the PMPRB published its final Guidelines to operationalize the
Amendments.
• As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to challenge all stakeholders, the coming-into-force date
of the Amendments has been delayed by an additional six months, from January 1, 2021 to July 1, 2021.
This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations and familiarize
themselves with the final Guidelines.
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry have challenged the Amendments in Court, and have
expressed concerns that they could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to
medicines. The Courts ruled to maintain most of the Amendments, but struck down the collection of
confidential rebate information. The rulings are currently the subject of an appeal by the applicants and
cross-appeal by the Crown.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why does the Government insist on continuing with the amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations when it impacts Canadians’ access to new medicines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains committed to increasing the affordability and accessibility of
prescription drugs, including patented medicines, to improve the health of Canadians and better meet
health care system needs.
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices
negatively affect the ability of patients to access new medicines. These regulatory amendments will help
Canadians to afford the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are
launched in major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are well
below those in Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Norway are examples of this.
If Pressed on the Coming-into-Force Date
• The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demands on the pharmaceutical industry and we are
mindful that all stakeholders continue to be challenged with the current situation. For that reason, the
Government delayed the coming into force of the amendments by another six months—until July 1,
2021.
• This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations introduced
by these Amendments. A delay will also provide industry more time to familiarize themselves with the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines which were published in October 2020.
If Pressed on the Access to COVID-19 Patented Medicines (Drugs and Vaccines):
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its final Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to specified
patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-wide effort
to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19 diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry and Drug Access
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
If pressed on impact on pharmaceutical investments in Canada
• Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical industry investments, while having
considerably lower prices than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times more investment
dollars than Canada despite prices being 20% less.
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products, and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
If pressed on recent litigation
• The Government of Canada is pleased that the courts have upheld the majority of the
Amendments.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to these regulatory amendments and as the
matter is still before the court, no further comments will be made.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines Consultation Process
• The PMPRB made revisions in response to the significant stakeholder feedback it received, and
published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The PMPRB has published all written submissions it received during its consultations with
stakeholders and the public on the draft Guidelines.
• Moving forward, stakeholders are encouraged to participate in the PMPRB’s consultation to
develop their Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.
BACKGROUND
• The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the
government, reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian
market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions, or hold public
hearings to determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of
excess revenues.
• The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire
into any matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister.
Additionally, the Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the
Patented Medicines Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada
Gazette, Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft
Guidelines that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020
and published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed twice in response to the
increased demands and challenges on industry stakeholders due to COVID-19. On March 29, 2020,
stakeholders were informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021, and most recently, the
coming-into-force date was delayed further to July 1, 2021. These delays provide additional time for
stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final
Guidelines.
• In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, on January
15, 2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definition of Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance. On April 16, 2021, the Board
revised its decision on the latter, reverting the compliance timeline back to two filing periods. Thus, the
operative date for assessing compliance has been shifted to July 1, 2022.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB is committed to developing and implementing a comprehensive
Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (GMEP) to assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any
future adjustments required to ensure that they are working as intended. The GMEP will be used to
monitor four different areas: impact on prices, impact on access, impact on the ecosystem and impact
on PMPRB processes. On May 3, 2021, PMPRB launched its consultation on the GMEP, inviting
stakeholders to comment on the proposed plan. The consultation concludes June 21, 2021.
• The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In
the Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-
name companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the
Court upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information.
• On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently
needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating
that special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against
COVID-19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim
Orders will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the
federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is reflected in
the PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity
initiative to assist provinces and territories in managing the impacts of COVID- 19 outbreaks. This
initiative is part of a collaborative whole of government approach to responding to the COVID-19 surge
capacity needs across Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada assisting jurisdictions with surge capacity needs?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting the health and safety of Canadians
from the COVID-19 virus and variants of concern.
• Canada has been working across federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal governments to
support a collaborative, whole-of- government response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• As part of our ongoing support to provinces and territories, we have established a COVID-19
Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative.
• This initiative is complemented by the Safe Restart Agreements, which provide provinces and
territories with over $19 billion in federal investments to support:
- Health care system capacity;
- Outbreak management, testing, contact tracing; and
- Other social services to support Canadians.
• The Government of Canada has recently established the Health Human Resources Assistance
Program. The HHRAP will provide up to $20 million per provincial/territorial jurisdiction in support of
their deployment of resources to other jurisdictions in need.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT GIVEN TO PROVINCES/TERRITORIES…
• Provinces and territories are responsible for prioritizing requests from their local jurisdictions.
• The Government of Canada triages requests received based on the needs and capacity available
at the time of the request.
• We are currently providing support in the form of testing supplies and equipment to all
provinces and territories, and we are in discussions with all provinces and territories on their ongoing
needs.
• Our current support includes:
o Approximately 101 Canadian Red Cross personnel deployed to address outbreaks or to provide
emergency testing sites, from a roster of about 1,500 available personnel. This roster will continue to
increase in size over the coming months.
o Six federal labs to supplement testing capacity.
o Supplying laboratory and testing equipment to all provinces and territories.
o Processing approximately 6,200 calls a day to assist with contact tracing.
o Committing $100 million for safe voluntary isolation sites across the country.
o Providing access to federal staffing inventories to assist provinces and territories in hiring the
personnel they need.
• In addition, the federal government has over 100 subject matter experts ready for rapid
deployment to assist provinces and territories with assessing local outbreaks.
• The Government of Canada has also committed $35 million for the Canadian Red Cross to
supplement testing.
• The Fall 2020 Economic Statement committed a further $150 million to support the Canadian
Red Cross and other non- governmental organizations with enhancing their surge capacity workforce for
Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment, as well as medical equipment and supplies, and expedite the delivery of this equipment to
our frontline healthcare workers.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT WIDE SUPPORT GIVEN TO SUPPORT SURGE CAPACITY NEEDS IN
ONTARIO…
• We have been working closely with our Ontario partners to share expertise and best practices
and to provide support to augment the province’s capacities to respond.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided biomedical equipment to Ontario to support
capacity in acute care settings.
• Equipment such as CardioHelp systems, oxygen units, and ECMO systems to oxygenate blood,
among others, have been delivered by the Agency to support Ontario in providing medical care.
• The Government of Canada has also deployed 2 mobile health units to provide additional
support to hospitals in some of the hardest hit regions.
• Ontario has accessed the federal stock of treatments and therapeutics as well, to supplement
their own supply.
• The Government of Canada through the support of the Canadian Armed Forces, is providing
logistical and local coordination support to the Ornge vaccination program in remote First Nation
communities in Northern Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY INITIATIVE SUPPORT GIVEN TO
SUPPORT ONTARIO…
• Our current supports for Ontario with this initiative includes:
o Approximately 37 Canadian Red Cross (CRC) personnel deployed to address outbreaks or to provide
emergency testing sites, from a roster of about 1,500 available personnel. CRC is currently supporting
Ontario with Epidemic Prevention and Control training and support.
o Federal laboratory support to supplement testing capacity – more than 16.5 thousand samples
have been processed in support of Northern Ontario.
o $72.5 million committed for safe voluntary isolation sites in Ontario for sixteen active sites in
nine communities: Toronto, Peel Region, Ottawa, Waterloo, Durham Region, York Region, Windsor-
Essex, Thunder Bay, and Sault Ste. Marie.
o 300 federal government contact tracers are assigned to Ontario and make an average of 1,000-
1,500 calls per day.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY INITIATIVE SUPPORT GIVEN TO
SUPPORT ALBERTA…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Alberta to offer surge support assistance to
address their needs, including rapid testing through the National Microbiology Laboratory.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also working with Health Canada and Indigenous Services
Canada to meet the needs of indigenous populations, such as vaccination and testing.
BACKGROUND
Through the COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative, rapid response surge capacity is
being offered for potential deployments across Canada, including rural and remote locations as well as
Indigenous communities.
Under this initiative, the Government of Canada has developed eight fields to respond:
• Public Health Rapid Response Team;
• Outbreak Management and Vaccine Support;
• COVID-19 Patient Testing;
• Laboratory Services;
• Laboratory Equipment;
• Contact Tracing;
• Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites; and
• Human Resources Recruitment.
The initiative leverages federal resources as well as the existing Public Safety Canada contribution
arrangement with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC).
Resource Management (as of May 14):
Services Total Available Capacity Committed Capacity
1. Public Health 108 individuals Nil
Rapid Response
Team
2. Outbreak Full Support team: 1 532  ON:37 personnel to support 6 sites
Management & individuals  PEI: 22 personnel to support 5
Vaccination vaccine administration sites
Support (CRC)  NB: 22 personnel to support 1 site
 MB: 20 personnel to support 1 site
3. COVID-19 Patient ~400 staff, 10 teams  Nil
Testing (CRC)
4. Laboratory 12,000 tests per day  NML Winnipeg: ~165 tests per
Services day (supporting MB, ON & federal
point of entry testing)
 CFIA Lethbridge: ~ 716 tests per
day (supporting AB, federal point
of entry testing)
 NML Guelph: ~1,236 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 DFO Moncton: ~78 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 CFIA Ottawa: ~842 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 ECCC Vancouver: ~270 tests per
day (supporting federal point of
entry testing)
5. Laboratory  Abbott IDNow (rapid point of  Abbott IDNow: 3,190 units to all
Equipment care diagnostic testing); PTs
 BioFire (multiplex diagnostic  BioFire: 114 units to 10 PTs
panel testing for patients with (except QC, AB, SK)
respiratory illness  GeneXpert: 158 units to 10 PTs
symptoms); (except NB, NS, PE)
 GeneXpert (point of care  Kingfisher: 39 units to 8 provinces
diagnostic testing); (AB, BC, MB, ON, QC, NB, NL,
 KingFisher (automated PE)
sample extraction for
analysis by the diagnostic
instruments).
6. Contact Tracing 17,020 calls per day Average over the last 5 days:
 AB: 297 calls per day
 MB: 405 calls per day
 ON: 1118 calls per day
 QC: 233 calls per day
 BC: 799 calls per day
 SK: 937 calls per day
 NB: 359 calls per day
 NL: 752 calls per day
 NT: 476 calls per day
 ISC: 160 calls per day
 PHAC Travel Monitoring: 663 calls
per day
7. Safe Voluntary $100M over 2 years ON:
Isolation Sites  Toronto: $13.9M over 12 months
(Aug 2020-Aug 2021)
 Peel: $6.5M over 16 months
(Dec 2020-Mar 2022)
 Ottawa: $4.7M over 7 months
(Dec 2020-June 2021)
 Waterloo: $4.1M over 15 months
(Dec 2020-Mar 2022)
 Government of Saskatchewan:
$11.6M over 15 months (Jan 2021
– Mar 2022)
 Government of Ontario: $23.7M
over 6 months (Jan 2021 – Jun
2021)
 Sault Ste. Marie & Algoma District:
$0.34M over 13 months (Feb 2021
– Mar 2022)
 Windsor Essex: $17.8M over 12
months (Apr 2021 – Mar 2022)
 Thunder Bay: $1.5M over 12
months (Apr 2021 – March 2022)
8. Human Resources 4 federal personnel  AB: 41 referrals made to support
Recruitment inventories: data entry needs in AB
 Post-Secondary Recruitment
 Indigenous Career Pathways
 Federal Student Work
Experience Program
 2020 Volunteer Recruitment
Campaign
The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment (PPE), as well as medical equipment and supplies. Canada is receiving a steady supply of PPE
with shipments arriving daily, and the inventory is rapidly allocated to the provinces and territories.
More information on the Government’s efforts in this area can be found in the “National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile Management and Personal Protective Equipment and Medical Device Procurement”
QP note.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
quickly develop and rollout safe vaccines and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and return
to a more normal life.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the government doing to participate in this unprecedented international effort?
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic.
• Since March, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $250 million
in more than 400 research projects, including 128 international collaborations, which focus not only on
vaccines, but also on other therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics, and other priority areas as
they emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Enabled by this investment, CIHR and partners across Canada collaborated to inform the
implementation of promising interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness
within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that $2 million of this investment is supporting Indigenous communities
as they lead strengths-based and solutions-focused research that is bold and innovative.
• Further, our government is moving to scale up research to increase our understanding of
persistent and emerging gaps and priority areas - including variants - and provide decision makers with
rapid guidance and evidence by investing an additional $144 million through CIHR.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will bring the evidence we need to help
Canada address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID- 19
and is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
Medical countermeasures funding accounts for 53 of the 100 projects funded for a total of $36.5M,
including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and clinical
management. The social and policy countermeasures funding accounts for 47 of the 100 projects funded
for a total of $17.7M, including research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health
response and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
CIHR subsequently launched the Sex as a Biological Variable Supplement funding opportunity to provide
additional funding to researchers, funded through the first rapid research response, to investigate
potential molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning observed sex differences in SARS-CoV-2 viral
pathogenesis and its associated immune response. This represents a total investment of $665K to 14
researchers to offset the costs associated with incorporating, comparing and analyzing male, female
and/or intersex biological samples, including cells, tissues and animals, into the proposed research
program.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures
against COVID-19. Building on the March 2020 investment, the majority of this investment enables
researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and social
countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
• Approximately $100M of this $114.9 million investment was allocated to the second COVID- 19
Rapid Research Funding Competition. In collaboration with its partners, CIHR was able to support 153
grants representing a total investment of $123.5 million. Twenty-two of these were funded in
partnership with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, and focus on improving our understanding of
COVID-19 immunity in Canada, a $12.4 million investment.
• Approximately $10 million of the $114.9 million investment was allocated to CIHR’s COVID- 19
and Mental Health Initiative. In collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada, this initiative supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. New knowledge
generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely
manner.
• This investment also secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials
responsive to WHO priorities to increase the understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines,
therapeutics, mental health supports and clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR – in partnership with PHAC - funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi- disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short- and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
Though vaccines are becoming available, support for research on treatment options and large clinical
trials must continue to ensure that these treatments are successful. CIHR is working tirelessly with its
partners to find ways to do this.
Further, medical countermeasure funds will also allow the Government of Canada, under the leadership
of CIHR, to set up a Centre for Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies Research that will lay
the groundwork towards more nimble domestic and global pandemic research coordination. The Centre
will allow CIHR to support real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the
research community and decision-makers alike, as well as to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHR funded network) produced national guidance
documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines related to prescribing,
dispensing, and delivery of opioids and other narcotics during the COVID-19 pandemic to support people
who use drugs.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR and partners have invested
$1.8M to date, to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement and the Canadian Patient
Safety Institute.
In October, CIHR completed an independent review of the Canadian International Surveillance Border
Study (led by McMaster Health Labs) which is part of the Government of Canada’s continued research
response to address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. In partnership with Health
Canada, $2.5M in funding is being provided to McMaster Health Labs to help determine the
effectiveness of an airport-based COVID-19 surveillance program.
On April 8, 2021, CIHR announced approximately $2 million in support of thirteen strengths-based,
solutions-focused research projects that focus on a wide range of topics and use diverse methods,
forming a strong base to study and understand the experiences of First Nations, Inuit, Métis, and Urban
Indigenous communities throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. The research, which is bold, innovative
and Indigenous community-led, will address the consequences of COVID-19 and inform future
preparedness. The findings will be used by Indigenous communities, researchers and decision-makers.
Finally, building on the priorities from CIHR’s recent COVID-19 investments, CIHR has launched several
rapid response competitions to support emerging priorities. This includes:
• The COVID-19 Knowledge Synthesis Network Funding Opportunity, to support collaboration and
rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge and evidence across the full breadth of
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health measures, clinical management, health-
system arrangements, and economic and social impacts). This $1M investment was announced on
January 13, 2021.
• The Network of Clinical Trials Networks Funding Opportunity, to expand existing national and
international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on interventions to prevent, detect, manage,
and/or treat COVID-19. This $6M investment was announced on January 20, 2021.
• Supplementary funding for CIHR funded COVID-19 researchers studying variants to accelerate
research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align efforts in this field. This
initiative represents an investment of $4.9 and was announced on January 29, 2021.
• Funding of a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research that will enable the rapid
support of research activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and population
health threats of emerging variants of concern. This $9M investment was announced on February 12,
2021.
• Priority funding of applications to the Fall 2020 Project Grant competition to invest in
applications specifically addressing persistent evidence gaps such as variants of the virus, vaccine
development and uptake, testing, mental health, and the ways in which the COVID- 19 pandemic is
having specific impacts on women, racialized populations, and Métis, Inuit and First Nations Peoples.
This initiative represents an investment of approximately $25.2 million in 52 research projects, and was
announced on March 12, 2021.
• CIHR is also investing in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative way in
consultation with partners. These investments will target key emerging research priorities and gaps to
contribute to Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way. While most
competitions under this series are set to roll out throughout the 2021-22 fiscal year, the first
competition was launched on March 3, 2021. The total funding amount available for this and upcoming
COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities competitions is approximately $119M. The amount invested in
this competition will not be the full amount and will depend on the number and quality, as assessed by
peer review, of applications received. Results are expected in late June 2021.
SAFETY OF THE ASTRAZENECA AND JANSSEN VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has evaluated potential safety issues related to the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and
Janssen vaccines and has concluded that the benefits continue to outweigh the risks.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the current status of the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is aware of very rare reports of blood clots with low levels of blood platelets
following vaccination with the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen COVID-19 vaccines.
• As of May 16, 2021, there have been 24 cases of these events reviewed by the Public Health
Agency of Canada and Health Canada and an additional 6 that were announced publically by the
Provinces following vaccinations with the AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD vaccines with more than 2.1
million doses of the vaccines administered by May 8, 2021.
• After a thorough, independent assessment of the currently available scientific data from the
manufacturers and international regulatory partners, Health Canada has concluded that these rare
events may be linked to use of the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines. This is in line with
the findings of other regulators, such as the European Medicines Agency.
• As a result, Health Canada has updated warnings in the product information for each of these
vaccines to inform Canadians of the possible side effects, and has issued risk communications that
provide advice to Canadians and healthcare professionals about signs, symptoms and when to seek
medical assistance.
• Based on a comprehensive review of these rare events, no specific risk factors have been
identified. Therefore, Health Canada is not restricting the use of these vaccines in any specific
populations at this time.
• Health Canada continues to review all the available safety data as it becomes available. We will
take appropriate action, if required, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• The rapid detection of these rare events thanks to ongoing international cooperation with
partners like the United States, Europe and the UK shows that Canadians can trust that our post- market
monitoring system is working well.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER APPROVED VACCINES
• In addition to the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines, there are two other vaccines
authorized for use in Canada – Pfizer and Moderna, which give us additional tools to fight this pandemic
as quickly as possible.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through a robust vaccine safety monitoring
system.
• Health Canada will continue to work with the Public Health Agency of Canada and international
regulators to monitor all COVID 19 vaccines for any potential adverse events.
• While an adverse event may occur soon after immunization, this does not mean that it was
caused by the vaccine, which is why such events are carefully reviewed to determine if any action should
be taken.
• Should any safety issue be confirmed, the Department will take appropriate action immediately.
BACKGROUND
Summary of Regulatory Actions for AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD Vaccines
On February 26, 2021, Canada authorized 2 manufacturers of the ChAdOx1-S vaccine:
• AstraZeneca (brand name AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine)
• Verity Pharmaceuticals and Serum Institute of India (SII) in collaboration with AstraZeneca
(brand name COVISHIELD Vaccine)
AstraZeneca COVID‐19 Vaccine (manufactured by AstraZeneca) and COVISHIELD (manufactured by
Serum Institute of India) are ChAdOx1-S recombinant vaccines developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford
University. Health Canada reviewed the manufacturing information for these vaccines and found them
to be comparable.
The vaccine is approved for people who are 18 years of age and older. It is given by 2 separate intra-
muscular injections of 0.5 mL each. The second dose is given 4 to 12 weeks after the first.
Recent Adverse Events
Throughout March, Health Canada has been participating in ongoing assessment of very rare adverse
events reported in Europe of thrombosis (blood clots) with thrombocytopenia (low blood platelets) or
vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT) occurring after immunization with the
AstraZeneca vaccine.
In Canada, the provinces have administered over 2 million doses of the AstraZeneca or COVISHIELD
vaccine. As of May 16, there have been 30 confirmed or suspected reports of VITT in Canada. Based on
available evidence to date, PHAC has estimated the rate of these events in Canada could be as high as 1
in 50,000 doses administered.
Following reports of these very rare adverse events in Europe, Health Canada has worked closely with
European regulators to review the evidence. A series of statements were issued to keep Canadians
informed of the situation.
• March 18, 2021: A statement was issued indicating that the benefits of AstraZeneca vaccines
continue to outweigh the benefits
• March 24, 2021: Health Canada communicated about updates to the product monograph and
issued guidance for healthcare professionals and vaccine recipients on the potential symptoms to
monitor.
• March 29, 2021: Health Canada issued a statement on its issuance of new terms and conditions
which require that the manufacturers conduct a detailed assessment of the benefits and risks of the
vaccine by age and sex in the Canadian context.
• On April 14, 2021: Health Canada provided an update on the safety review of the AstraZeneca
and COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccines, which concluded that these very rare events may be linked to the
vaccine though no risk factors were identified.
• April 19, 2021: Health Canada published a Summary Safety Review that provided an overview of
safety information to date.
Health Canada is aware that researchers in Europe have indicated that they have identified a possible
cause for these very rare events observed in AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine recipients; however, little
information is available about this emerging research. Health Canada will be reviewing this evidence
when available.
Health Canada is also consulting with scientific experts in Canada and internationally to discuss the very
rare events, and continues to be in regular contact with international regulators and the manufacturer
of the AstraZeneca vaccine to review all evidence as it becomes available.
Summary of Regulatory Actions for Janssen Vaccine
On March 5, 2021, Health Canada authorized the Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine (Ad26.COV2.S).
The Janssen vaccine is approved for people who are 18 years of age and older. A single 0.5mL dose of
the vaccine is given by intra-muscular injection.
Recent Adverse Events
Janssen has provided Health Canada with information on recent reports from the United States, of
thromboembolism with thrombocytopenia, and additional cases with other thromboembolic events.
Health Canada has now assessed the available data on these very rare events and has concluded that
there is a possible link with use of the Janssen vaccine. As a result, on April 26, 2021, Health Canada
made updates to the product monograph to reflect the risk of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia.
However, as no specific risk factors for these events have been identified, Health Canada has not
implemented specific restrictions on the use of the product.
Health Canada continues to conclude that the benefits of the Janssen vaccine against COVID- 19
outweigh the risks of this very rare event.
SUPPORTING ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• To improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information and services,
including protecting access to abortion care, Budget 2021 proposes to provide $45 million over three
years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada to fund community- based organizations that help make
sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for vulnerable
populations.
• These organizations support activities such as producing inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, carrying out public awareness activities, and providing travel
and logistical support to individuals who have to go long distances to access abortion care.
• In addition, there are currently no existing resources that collect comprehensive data on a wide
range of sexual and reproductive health indicators in Canada, limiting our ability to target supports.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $7.6 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics
Canada to develop and implement a national survey on sexual and reproductive health that captures
data on race, household income, and sexual orientation–information often not captured in existing
surveys. Better information will help ensure governments understand the challenges and improve the
support they provide.
• These investments will set the foundation for significant improvements for Canadians across the
country to have better access to the health care information and services they need for their sexual and
reproductive health.
SYNOPSIS
• Currently, women, youth, LGBTQ2 people, racialized Canadians, and Indigenous populations
face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support,
information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the same quality of care, particularly if they are
from marginalized communities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What will the federal government do to improve the sexual and reproductive health of
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We are proposing to invest $45 million over three years to help make sexual and reproductive
health care information and services more accessible to Canadians.
• We will fund community-based organizations to produce inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, work with providers to develop and implement best practices,
carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to access abortion care.
• We are also proposing to invest $7.6 million over five years for Statistic Canada to collect data
that will fill existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health
supports for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH TRANSFERS TO PTS…
• The Government is committed to collaboration with provinces and territories to strengthen our
health care system, ensuring equitable and appropriate access to a full suite of reproductive and sexual
health services, in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer funding discussions.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO ABORTION SERVICES…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Canada Health Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory
deduction to federal health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK…
• The Canada Health Act is clear, whether abortion services are received in hospital or at Clinic
554, patients should not be required to pay out of pocket to receive medically necessary health services.
• This Government is committed to upholding the Canada Health Act, and will continue to levy
mandatory deductions where evidence of patient charges exist.
BACKGROUND
• The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist
lens, and realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights. The 2019 Mandate Letter for
the Minister of Health outlines the need to ensure that Canadians have access to the full suite of
reproductive services across the country.
• Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and
reproductive health services remain. Women, members of LGBTQ2 communities, youth, racialized
Canadians and Indigenous peoples face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest
barriers to accessing support, information, and services.
• Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow
range of indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based
decision-making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including
prevalence of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual
knowledge and behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services in New Brunswick
• Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered extra- billing and
user charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and
comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. In New Brunswick, Regulation 84- 20 of the NB Medical Services
Payment Act limits coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals
currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who
receive these services at the private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. In March
20201, NB’s CHT payments were reduced by $64,850 in light of patient charges for medically necessary
abortion services in Clinic 554 during fiscal year 2018-2019.
Smoking and Tobacco Use in Canada
SYNOPSYS
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. Smoking has negative effects on many
systems in the body. Smoking compromises the immune system and increases the risk for pulmonary
infections, as well as negatively affecting the functioning of the lungs and causing chronic lung disease,
cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
• Almost 5 million Canadians still smoke cigarettes – about 15% of the population over the age of
15.
• The Government has an ambitious target to reduce tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by
2035. Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, with a $330M investment over five
years, starting in May 2018.
• The Strategy includes funding for enhanced scientific and surveillance activities; grants and
contributions programming directed at increasing the reach and effectiveness of prevention and
cessation programming; public education; collaborative activities with the provinces and territories; and
partnership and engagement with domestic, international and multi-sector stakeholders.
• The emergence of COVID-19 has raised concern about the potential of increased risks posed by
smoking. Cigarette smoking has negative effects on many systems in the body that are also affected by
COVID-19. Smoking negatively affects the function of the lungs, causing inflammation and impairing the
ability of the lungs to clear mucus. In addition, smoking can increase the spread of COVID-19 as hand-to-
mouth behaviour creates an opportunity for the virus to enter the body.
QUESTION POSSIBLE
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address smoking and tobacco use in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country. The Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and non-smokers. Through Canada’s Tobacco Strategy, we are working to drive
down tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Canada has a long history in tobacco control. We are a global leader in the regulation of tobacco
products and have implemented many internationally-recognized practices in tobacco control. The
Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling and promotion of
both tobacco and vaping products. The TVPA includes significant restrictions to prevent the uptake of
tobacco and vaping products by youth and adults who do not use these products.
• Building on the strong foundation provided by the TVPA, we will continue to strengthen
regulations to prevent youth and non- smokers from becoming addicted to nicotine and to provide
Canadians with health information on tobacco use.
• We are engaged with our provincial and territorial partners to find new and innovative ways to
increase quit attempts and make it easier for Canadians who smoke to access the support and resources
they need to quit and reduce the harms to their health.
• We are continuing work to prevent the appeal and access of tobacco products to youth and
supporting specific initiatives for populations that face higher rates of tobacco use.
• Budget 2021 put in place new measures to reduce tobacco use in Canada. Effective April 20,
2021, the tobacco excise duty rate increased by $4 per carton of 200 cigarettes, along with increases to
the excise duty rates for other tobacco products.
IF PRESSED ON EXCISE TAX ON TOBACCO…
• We know that increasing tobacco taxes and price are an effective way to prevent and reduce
smoking, especially among youth.
• Budget 2021 put in new measures to reduce tobacco use in Canada.
• Effective April 20, 2021, the tobacco excise duty rate increased by $4 per carton of 200
cigarettes, along with increases to the excise duty rates for other tobacco products.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR SMOKERS…
• The Government of Canada is concerned with the risks posed to Canadians by smoking.
• We urge Canadians to consider quitting smoking. We know that when you give up cigarettes,
your body starts to renew itself as early as the first day of quitting. Quitting will improve your life in
ways you will see and feel, both now and later, including reducing your chance of developing heart
disease, cancer, breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help Canadians quit and reduce the harms of smoking.
• We urge Canadians to contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can
help them develop a quit smoking plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and
services in their community where available. The quitline can be reached by phone at 1-866-366-3667 or
online at https://www.canada.ca/fr/sante-canada/services/tabagisme-et- tabac/cesser-fumer/services-
provinciaux-territoriaux.html.
IF PRESSED ON NEW AND PLANNED REGULATORY MEASURES FOR TOBACCO
• In 2019, the Government of Canada implemented the Tobacco Products Regulations (Plain and
Standardized Appearance) to standardize the appearance of tobacco packages and tobacco products.
• Tobacco packages and the products they contain are powerful promotional vehicles. Evidence
shows that plain packaging is perceived as less appealing, particularly among young people.
• These Regulations apply to all tobacco packages and products. The measures include requiring a
standard colour, font, and font size on all tobacco packages, and removing distinctive and attractive
features such as the use of logos, graphics and promotional information on packages. Cigarette
packaging will be standardized to a slide-and-shell format, and the appearance of cigarettes and other
tobacco products will be standardized as well.
• We are also working to finalize new regulations that update and expand requirements for
Health Warning messages for tobacco products to ensure that these labels remain noticeable,
memorable and engaging. These new labels will enhance public awareness of the hazards of all tobacco
products while also providing information to Canadians who currently use tobacco about information
and resources they can access to help them quit.
• In October 2018, Health Canada sought feedback on options for new health labelling for tobacco
products including labelling on cigarettes. Comments received through this consultation are being
carefully considered as Health Canada continues to develop new health-related labelling for tobacco
products.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES…
• The rates of use of commercial tobacco for Indigenous peoples are two to five times higher than
the overall Canadian rate. The Government is committed to working with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis
organizations to co-develop distinct and high quality approaches to address high rates of commercial
tobacco use.
• Indigenous Services Canada and Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs are investing
$45M over five years to support community-based tobacco use programming and the co- development
process.
BACKGROUND
Tobacco use in Canada
Data released on August 5, 2020 from the 2019 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) shows a
continued downward trend in smoking over the past three decades for Canadians 12 years of age and
older. Smoking declined to 14.8% (4,684,400) from 15.8% (4,926,800 Canadians) in 2018 and from 17.7%
(5,344,100 Canadians) in 2015. Daily smoking also declined to 10.0% (3,160,100) from 10.9% (3,392,700
Canadians) in 2018 and from 12.6% (3,809,500 Canadians) in 2015. Daily smoking for youth aged 12-17
is less than 1% (10,300). While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking,
reminding us that, despite decades of effort to deter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public
health problem in Canada. Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing
half of all long-term daily smokers. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit
are up to four times higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released a report entitled “Canadian
Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015 – 2017”. The report identifies the enormous burden tobacco use
places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use to society was
approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the deadliest
substance by far accounting for approximately 48,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per
day or 17% of all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Five COVID-19 vaccines have now been authorized by Health Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION0
• What is the current status of COVID-19 vaccines expected to be available for Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• With five vaccines now authorized - Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca vaccines, and Janssen - we
have additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly as possible.
• Health Canada has also approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15.
• In addition, there are two other vaccines currently under review by Health Canada, from
Novavax and Medicago.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUTHORIZED VACCINES
• The Janssen vaccine is the first single-dose COVID-19 vaccine to be authorized in Canada. All
other authorized vaccines require two doses. As with the AstraZeneca vaccine, the Janssen vaccine can
also be stored and transported at refrigerated temperatures, between 2 and 8˚C for at least three
months, giving greater flexibility in how it can be distributed across Canada.
• With the exception of the Pfizer vaccine, which is authorized for people 12 years of age and
older, the authorized vaccines are currently only for use in adults (18 years and older).
• The authorization of additional vaccines to fight this pandemic can only help. They provide
additional tools to fight COVID-19 as quickly as possible, and will provide more supply to the market.
IF PRESSED ON EFFICACY OF JANSSEN AND ASTRAZENECA COMPARED TO HIGHER EFFICACY OF MRNA
VACCINES
• Each vaccine has unique characteristics and all authorized vaccines are helpful in the fight
against COVID-19.
• Canada has negotiated a broad and diverse COVID-19 vaccine portfolio to ensure we have
sufficient supply for everyone in Canada, while also mitigating risks of supply disruptions.
• Having additional vaccines from different manufacturers can help meet volume requirements to
get more people vaccinated sooner and offers more vaccination options.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
• On May 5, 2021 Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15.
• This information was also been submitted to the US FDA and the European Medicines Agency.
The expanded indication was approved by the US FDA on May 10, 2021.
• No other manufacturers of the vaccines authorized in Canada have yet made a submission of
pediatric data to regulators, and none of these vaccines are authorized for pediatric use by any of our
major regulatory partners.
• Pfizer has an ongoing study in children aged 6 months -12 years.
• Moderna also has ongoing pediatric studies.
• Manufacturers of other authorized vaccines have pediatric studies planned, but these have not
yet started or are currently on hold.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS IN GENERAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness
and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF OTHER DECISIONS
• Health Canada continues to review the Novavax and Medicago vaccines. We aim to issue a
decision in general alignment with those of our major regulatory partners.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines by
allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as it becomes available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Advance purchase agreements
The Government has announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven leading vaccine
candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson &
Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on successful completion of clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers of the vaccine candidates recommended by
the Vaccines Task Force. While regulatory approvals are separate from the procurement process, Health
Canada is expediting all vaccine drug submissions.
Status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer vaccine on December 9, 2020, a week after the UK authorized it,
two days before the US FDA, and almost two weeks before Europe.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna vaccine on December 23, 2020, 5 days after the US, and the
Janssen vaccine 6 days after the US.
Health Canada, Europe, the UK, and other jurisdictions have now authorized the AstraZeneca vaccine.
Health Canada worked closely with the European Medicines Agency on that review.
Health Canada continues to engage with all of the vaccine manufacturers to ensure that data is
submitted to Canada at the same time it is provided to other major regulators, which is supporting
similar completion timelines.
Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15 on May 5, 2021 ahead of
the US and EMA.
TAKING ACTION TO STRENGTHEN SUPPORTIVE CARE FOR CANADIANS
BUDGET 2021:
• Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment made by the Government of Canada to take any
action it can to support seniors and vulnerable Canadians across the country.
• Budget 2021 includes:
o A $3B investment over five years ($600M per year), starting in 2022-23, to ensure that provinces
and territories provide a high standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
o $29.8M over six years, starting in 2021-22, to advance the government’s palliative care strategy.
o $41.3M over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing to improve data collection and data
infrastructure in supportive care, primary care, and pharmaceuticals.
o $90M over three years to launch the Age Well at Home initiative
o An increase to Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over.
o Funding of $27.6 million over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to
support retirement saving for personal support workers.
o $960 million over three years for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program to train skilled
workers, including personal support workers.
BACKGROUND
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
• The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with partners, such as the provinces and
territories, to develop a Framework and a targeted Action Plan on Palliative Care in order to provide
end-of-life care where Canadians want it. Budget 2021 proposes to provide $29.8M over six years,
starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada to advance the government’s palliative care strategy and lay a
better foundation for coordinated action on long-term and supportive care needs, and improving access
to quality palliative care.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3M over six years, and $7.7M ongoing, starting in 2021-
22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary
care, and pharmaceuticals.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $90M over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment
and Social Development Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist
community-based organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise
vulnerable seniors age in place, such as matching seniors with volunteers who can help with meal
preparations, home maintenance, daily errands, yard work, and transportation. This initiative would also
support regional and national projects that help expand services that have already demonstrated results
in helping seniors stay in their homes.
• The government is also proposing to increase Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over,
beginning in 2022.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide funding of $27.6M over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-
Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees International Union Healthcare. The funding will
support incentives for worker participation.
• The Budget also proposes to establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by
ESDC, and funded by $960M over three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and
deliver relevant training, and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the
health sector, this would include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
• On March 1, 2021, Health Canada issued new interim orders extending the regulatory
flexibilities for expedited access to COVID-19 medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the rapid testing devices needed
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Department has prioritized the review of all types of COVID-19 tests, including rapid and
new innovative testing options and technologies.
• Health Canada continues to work as quickly as possible to approve rapid, point-of-care
diagnostic, self-testing and monitoring tests without compromising on standards for safety,
effectiveness and quality.
• As of May 17, 2021, Health Canada has authorized 68 testing devices, through its expedited
regulatory review efforts. This includes rapid tests, that can be used at home or at the point of care.
• On April 23, Health Canada authorized the first self-test kit, the Lucira CHECKIT COVID-19 Test
Kit. Since then Health Canada continues to proactively contact self-test manufacturers that have been
authorized in other jurisdictions; inviting them to submit an application in Canada.
• On May 12, Health Canada authorized an amendment to the Quidel Sofia, a rapid antigen test,
to allow for serial testing in asymptomatic populations.
• As new tests become available and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada works with provincial public health laboratories to acquire and distribute them to increase
existing on-the-ground testing capacity.
• Based on the information available to date on variants, the authorized tests continue to be
effective.
• Health Canada is monitoring the potential impacts of the new variants on the effectiveness of
test devices and will take action as necessary.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on home testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada has identified applications for self-testing technologies as being of highest
priority for review at this time.
• On April 23, 2021, Health Canada authorized the Lucira CHECKIT COVID-19 Test Kit. This is the
first complete self-test kit to be authorized in Canada.
• The single-use test kit uses self-administered nasal swabs and results are available within 30
minutes.
• A second application for a self-testing device is currently under priority review - this device is the
“Panbio COVID-19 Antigen Self- test”.
IF PRESSED… on why tests are authorized in other countries but not in Canada
• Each jurisdiction has different rules and approval processes.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing
devices available for sale in Canada have been accurate and reliable. As a result, we have avoided some
of the problems other countries have experienced, including recalling lower-quality tests.
• Health Canada accepts submissions made to another jurisdiction and assesses that data
independently.
• Once tests are approved by our international partners, we contact manufacturers to encourage
them to apply for authorization in Canada.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on saliva testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and reliable COVID-19 tests devices for use
with various samples
• At this time, Health Canada has authorized the use of gargle and spit samples for use with the
authorized Cepheid Xpertxpress SARS-CoV-2 testing device.
• Health Canada is prioritizing the review of applications for test kits that use saliva samples so
Canadians have access to new testing options.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of Spartan test kits:
• Health Canada authorized the Spartan Biosciences COVID-19 test kit under an Interim Order on
January 22, 2021.
• When Health Canada became aware of reports of inaccurate results from users of the Spartan
Biosciences COVID-19 tests, the Department requested detailed information from Spartan about the
nature of the inaccuracies, possible causes, and where the tests have been distributed.
• On March 30, 2021, Spartan initiated a voluntary recall and contacted their customers to notify
them of the issue, and Health Canada is closely monitoring the recall.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing the spread of
the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for clinical care and public health
management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the safety,
effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an application through the IO
pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based testing to reliably
diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. A number of lab-based and point-of-care
nucleic acid-based tests have been authorized for use in Canada. Health Canada has received additional
point-of-care nucleic acid-based tests which are being prioritized for review at this time.
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
Antigen tests are often rapid tests that can be offered at the point of care in disposable formats, though
one lab-based antigen test has been approved as well. Antigen testing is one of several emerging
technologies that can be used to determine if a person is infected with the COVID-19 virus.
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not aware of a
serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are not appropriate for early
diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection to develop antibodies.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories to distribute the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and
Quidel Sofia rapid tests, as well as putting in place surge support for laboratory testing.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians have access to effective
COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure tests to meet both current and future
demand as testing continues to increase across the country.
• As part of this work, we purchased five rapid tests – the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW,
Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and Quidel Sofia– and have worked with our provincial and territorial
counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• Cepheid GeneXpert tests began shipments in the spring of 2020, and the first shipment of
Abbott tests were sent in late October 2020. Shipments to provinces and territories will continue each
week as supply arrives in Canada.
• To date, 42M tests have been delivered to Canada, including over 6.5 million Abbott ID NOW
tests, 22.9 million Abbott Panbio tests, 11.6 million BD Veritor tests and 850 thousand Quidel Sofia.
These tests are being provided to provinces and territories at no cost to them.
• Provinces and territories decide how to deploy these technologies, informed by the Pan-
Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance that was released in October.
• We have also put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
• My department continues to work with colleagues in Public Services and Procurement Canada,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to identify
and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• As emerging testing and screening products or platforms become available and approved for use
in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER TESTING
• The Government of Canada has implemented robust measures at Canada’s borders to prevent
and mitigate the importation of new COVID-19 cases associated with international travel.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with various provinces, territories and partners to
implement innovative and scientifically grounded measures at Canada’s international border.
• Border testing pilot projects are a means to help generate scientific evidence to inform
development and/or enhance various policies and programs that prevent introduction and spread of
disease in Canadian communities.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial and territorial
officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and conducting laboratory testing for the
virus that causes COVID-19. As of May 1, over 33 million tests for COVID-19 were performed in Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Beginning September 3, a table outlining progress by provinces and territories in increasing their testing
capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory compared
to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement, has been published online.
As of May 10, the projected maximum testing capacity reported by provinces and territories was
240,040 tests/day, meeting the testing capacity target as articulated by provinces and territories under
the Safe Restart Agreement.
Province/ Testing Capacity Projected Max. Capacity as % of
Territory Commitment under Testing Capacity* Commitment
the SRA (tests/day) (tests/day)
BC 20,000 20,132 101%
AB 22,000 22,000 100%
SK 4,000 4,500 112%
MB 3,000 3,500 117%
ON 78,000 124,700 160 %
QC 35,000 48,098 137%
NB 2,500-3,000 3,000 100-120%
NS 2,500 10,000 400%
PE 835 850 102%
NL 2,500-3,000 2,700 90-108 %
NU N/A 300 N/A
NWT 225 110 49%
YT 160 150 94%
TOTAL 170,720 – 171,720 240,040 >100%
The federal government has activated additional laboratory capacity to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. Six federal labs are currently operational and can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 12,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as well as Correctional Services
Canada. Efforts to increase surge capacity to between 16,000 and 21,000 tests/day, about 10% of the
target of 200,000 tests/day, is ongoing.
As we move into the next phase of lifting some public health measures and re-opening some parts of the
economy, cases of COVID-19 will still occur until the population has enough immunity or a vaccine is
available to prevent the disease.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community. In this next phase, testing will be
critical for groups that are more vulnerable to complications from COVID-19. This testing will be an early
warning for our healthcare system.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
ACCESS TO TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s medical system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to treatments for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
• In September 2020, I signed an Interim Order that created a mechanism for the expedited
review of treatments, while ensuring that we maintain a high level of scientific scrutiny.
• As of May 2021, 15 submissions have been received under the Interim Order – including 8
treatments.
• On November 20, Health Canada issued its first approval under the Interim Order for a
treatment using a monoclonal antibody from Eli Lilly (bamlanivimab). Canada has secured access to 26
000 doses of bamlanivimab and provinces have received shipments since December.
• We have also authorized, with conditions, the drug remdesivir for the treatment of COVID-19. In
September, the Government of Canada secured 150 000 vials of remdesivir for Canadians. Initial
shipments to Provinces and Territories began in September and will continue this year.
• As of May 14, 2021, Health Canada continues to review 7 treatments under the Interim Order.
These include 4 monoclonal antibody therapies with proposed indications similar to Bamlanivimab (Eli
Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination, Hoffman-La Roche’s casirivimab and imdevimab
combination, GSK’s Sotrovimab and CytoDyn’s Leronlimab) and 3 others that work as antiviral and/or
anti-inflammatory drugs (colchicine and baracitinib).
• The Government of Canada continues to engage proactively with domestic and international
companies to negotiate advance purchase agreements for the procurement of treatments to ensure
timely access.
IF PRESSED ON BAMLANIVIMAB
• Health Canada is aware that US FDA has revoked the Emergency Use Authorization for
bamlanivimab, at the request of Eli Lilly
• This revocation is related to lack of efficacy against emerging variants of concern circulating in
the US, in particular the Californian variants (B.1.427/B.1.429)
• There are no safety concerns with bamlanivimab. This decision was made in the context of the
US having two combination monoclonal antibody treatments available, which work better against some
of the emerging variants
• In Canada, bamlanivimab has been distributed to all Provinces except Manitoba, New Brunswick
and the Territories
• Bamlanivimab is the only treatment currently available in Canada for mild-to-moderate COVID
infection
• The B.1.1.7 variant is the predominant variant in 94% of the cases in Canada at this time, against
which bamlanivimab is expected to retain efficacy
• However, other variants resistant to bamlanivimab are emerging, and Health Canada continues
to monitor these variants and their potential impacts on COVID-19 treatments
• Health Canada has updated the product labelling for bamlanivimab and communicated to
healthcare professionals to provide information on variants and their impact on bamlanivimab efficacy,
and has also discussed this issue with the provinces and territories
• Health Canada’s review of the combination therapy of bamlanivimab and etesevimab is ongoing
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
• Health Canada has authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment of
patients (12 years of age or older, who weigh at least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen to help them breathe. We approved this drug with conditions
for the manufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality.
• Despite the World Health Organization’s (WHO) updated guidelines advising against the use of
remdesivir, Health Canada continues to support this drug as a treatment option, which is in line with
other international regulators.
• Specifically, remdesivir modestly decreases patient time in hospital and continues to provide
benefit for patients and health care systems when used according to the authorized indication.
• Health Canada will continue to evaluate the information about remdesivir, and will take the
appropriate steps to ensure the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT AVAILABILITY
• Health Canada is closely monitoring global treatment development and is in active discussions
with manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory and scientific advice for Canadian clinical
trials and regulatory approvals.
• As of May 14, 2021, Health Canada has received 15 submissions under the interim order. This
includes 8 treatments and 7 vaccines (Moderna, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Verity
Pharmaceuticals/Serum Institute of India, Novavax and Medicago).
• On November 20, Health Canada, under the Interim Order, authorized a monoclonal antibody
from Eli Lilly.
• There are terms and conditions associated with the authorization. This means that there are
requirements for the company after authorization to provide additional data pertaining to the quality,
effectiveness and safety of the drug.
• While recognizing the urgent need for treatments, all products will undergo a rigorous scientific
review to ensure they meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER
• The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and
vaccines for Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related indications
that were not in the original authorization; and,
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
• Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety,
efficacy and quality.
• In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
• Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate
action, including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required,
to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the World Health Organization, amongst others, to
share information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based approaches for
treatments. The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay
informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
• Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health professionals and Canadians are
looking for the latest information about health products for COVID-19. The department has created a
new website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and
who to contact for questions. We are also making sure information relevant to health professionals and
Canadians is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON THERAPEUTIC INVESTMENTS
• The Government of Canada is collaborating with academia and the private sector to advance
research and development of therapeutics including pre-clinical research, bio-manufacturing and
enhancing capacity for and access to clinical trials.
• The Government of Canada is closely monitoring and reviewing emerging evidence on possible
COVID-19 treatments, such as corticosteroids, antiviral drugs and antibody treatments.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with provinces and
territories to ensure rapid and equitable access to therapeutics.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food and Drugs Act and
the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and provide the Government with additional
powers.
The amendments will:
• help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
• seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for Canadians;
and
• allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is needed to
respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered in other
jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may not fully meet some of
the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act — such as packaging requirements.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new website for the
health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for
questions. Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19
website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to COVID-19.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab for the treatment of adults
and pediatric patients 12 years of age or older with mild to moderate COVID-19, who weigh at least 40
kg and who are at high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 illness and/or hospitalization.
Bamlanivimab is the first treatment to be authorized in Canada using the Interim Order pathway for
COVID-19- drugs and vaccines. Under the Interim Order, there are terms and conditions associated with
the authorization. This means that there are requirements for the manufacturer after authorization to
provide additional data pertaining to the quality, effectiveness and safety of the drug.
The Institut national d’excellence en santé et en services sociaux (INESSS) has published a report on
healthcare system implementation that concluded that there is insufficient data to support the use of
bamlanivimab in the treatment of COVID-19. Similarly, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) released a report with their recommendations on January 14, highlighting limited
data and issues of bringing COVID-19-positive patients into healthcare settings to receive infusions,
which could impact delivery of care to non-COVID patients.
While Health Canada assesses the benefit/risk balance of new treatments based on their safety, efficacy,
and quality, INESSS and CADTH conduct independent cost-benefit analyses of new treatments that
consider other information in addition to safety and effectiveness. Given their regional mandate for
drug use and reimbursement, INESSS’s and CADTH’s recommendations may be different from Health
Canada.
Other antibody products under review
Health Canada has also received four submissions for antibody treatments with proposed indications
similar to Bamlanivimab (Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination, Hoffman-La Roche’s
casirivimab and imdevimab combination, CytoDyn’s Leronlimab and GlaxoSmithKline’s sotrovimab).
Monoclonal antibodies are being tested both as treatment for mild/moderate COVID-19, and also as
prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
Remdesivir
Health Canada has authorized with conditions the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) manufactured
by Gilead Sciences Canada, Inc. for the treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require oxygenation. As a condition of authorization, the manufacturer will submit
to Health Canada:
• post-market safety monitoring reports, as well as reports on all serious adverse drug reactions,
annual pregnancy safety reports and any foreign regulatory actions related to the safety of remdesivir;
• any further data on the safety and efficacy of the drug, including final data from ongoing clinical
trials and additional safety data on patients with liver and kidney disease; and
• further quality data confirming that the manufacturing processes and controls will consistently
produce product of suitable quality for the intended use.
Remdesivir has also been granted emergency or conditional authorization in the U.S., Europe, Japan,
Singapore, Switzerland and Australia, and the US FDA has granted it full authorization. In Canada, the
authorization included a full scientific review. There is no expiry date on the authorization.
One existing clinical trial authorized by Health Canada to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
remdesivir for use in Canada is still ongoing. This clinical trial will continue to gather more data on the
drug.
On November 20, the World Health Organization (WHO) released a guidance document, which
conditionally recommends against the use of remdesivir in patients with COVID-19, regardless of disease
severity. This follows the release of the WHO’s Solidarity trial results, which indicate that remdesivir
appeared to have little or no benefit for hospitalized patients.
Health Canada’s authorization with conditions of remdesivir was based on the National Institute for
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)’s Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial (ACTT-1) trial results and is
limited to patients with severe COVID-19 who have pneumonia requiring supplemental oxygen. The
large, randomized controlled trial ACTT-1 demonstrated clear clinical benefit for this subset of COVID-19
patients.
Health Canada continues to support the use of remdesivir according to its authorized indication and in
the context of clinical trials. Health Canada has not authorized the routine use of remdesivir in patients
outside these two scenarios.
Two new variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged in the UK and South Africa but the activity of remdesivir
against these new variants is not expected to be affected. Health Canada has contacted Gilead Sciences
for information on how they plan to assess the impact of these mutations on the efficacy and safety of
remdesivir. Regulatory action is not expected to be required at this time, which is consistent with other
international regulators.
Favipiravir
Favipiravir is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that has not been authorized in Canada.
There are currently two authorized clinical trials with favipiravir with study sites in Canada, which have
been sponsored by Appili Therapeutics Inc:
• The CONTROL trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 outbreaks in long-term care
homes. This study is led by Dr. Alison McGeer, an infectious disease specialist in the Sinai Health System.
• The PEPCO trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 in vulnerable people who have had
recent direct exposure to someone with a confirmed COVID-19 infection.
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories filed a submission to Health Canada for favipiravir
(brand name Reeqonus) for the treatment of COVID-19 under the interim order pathway.
Colchichine
Colchicine is an anti-inflammatory agent currently approved in Canada for the prophylaxis and
treatment of gout flares in adults and for Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF). The currently
recommended doses of colchicine range from 0.6 mg to 2.4 mg/day. Only the 0.6 mg tablet is approved
for use in Canada.
Colchicine is being investigated as a treatment for the reduction of COVID-19 complications in adults in
on-going clinical trials, with study sites in Canada:
• The COLCORONA trial is studying its use in non-hospitalized patients with COVID-
19. The study uses a 0.5 mg tablet strength, which is not approved in Canada but available in other
markets such as the UK and Australia.
• The ACTCOVID19 trial is studying the use of colchicine in symptomatic outpatients, as well as
hospitalized patients. This study uses the 0.6 mg tablet from SANDOZ. Depending on availability, the 0.5
mg tablet might also be used.
On January 22, 2021, the Montreal Heart Institute issued a press release on the final results of the
COLCORONA trial, followed by the sponsor, Pharmascience on January 23, 2021.
On January 25, 2021, Pharmascience filed a drug submission to Health Canada for colchicine for the
treatment of COVID-19 under the Interim Order pathway.
Baracitinib
Baracitinib is Janus kinase (Jak) inhibitor that is already approved in Canada for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis.
It is being investigated as a treatment that may reduce the complications related to the cytokine storm
as well as potentially inhibiting cell proteins that have a role in viral replication.
On May 13, Eli Lilly filed a drug submission with Health Canada under the Interim Order pathway.
Dexamethasone
Clinical trial results announced in June 2020 showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to
reduce inflammation, cut death rates by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients
admitted to hospital. As a result, the WHO has updated its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19.
Although the dexamethasone study’s results are preliminary, the researchers behind the project suggest
the drug should immediately become standard care in severely ill patients.
The oral tablet format of dexamethasone was added to Health Canada’s list of Tier 3 shortages on May
1, 2020 based on its current indications for use. Tier 3 shortages are those that have the greatest
potential impact on Canada’s drug supply and health care system. Drugs on this list are in high demand
or in shortage. Apotex and Pharmascience are the only two companies in Canada that market the
dexamethasone oral tablet. There are currently no active shortages reported by either company. Health
Canada is continuing to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis.
The IV format of dexamethasone has not been determined to be a Tier 3 shortage; a consensus
determination was made to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis. Health Canada is also
monitoring the supply situation for dexamethasone alternatives, corticosteroids such as
methylprednisolone, prednisolone and hydrocortisone.
ESSURE BIRTH CONTROL
SYNOPSIS
• Essure is an implantable permanent birth control device. Complications from the device include
pain, changes in menstrual bleeding, and allergic (immune or hypersensitivity) reactions.
• The manufacturer (Bayer) voluntarily removed the device from the Canadian market in 2017.
• Media has suggested that the company and department were not transparent enough in sharing
adverse event reports.
• A story by CBC’s The Fifth Estate on March 4, 2021, alleges that the side effects of Essure were
not shared, and that more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from Bayer in
order to seek compensation for health complications they claim resulted from the birth control device.
The piece quoted an obstetrician- gynecologist who stated “many of the doctors really don't know the
definition of what an adverse event would be associated with such a procedure”.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to protect the health and safety of Canadian women who
experienced complications from the Essure permanent birth control device?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• A medical device is authorized after Health Canada completes a scientific assessment, ensuring
that it meets requirements for safety and effectiveness, and then continues to be monitored after
approval.
• When new safety concerns with the Essure device came to light, Health Canada assessed them
and issued a safety communication to inform patients and health care practitioners of the potential risks
associated with its use.
• The Department required the manufacturer to strengthen the product labelling with clear
warnings about the potential for adverse events, and to develop a patient information sheet and
checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the device.
• Even though the product is no longer available for sale in Canada, Health Canada continues to
monitor the safety of Essure devices in women that received these implants, and will take action, as
necessary, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• Women who have concerns about an implanted device should consult their health care
practitioner.
IF PRESSED…on mandatory reporting of medical device incidents
• As of December 2019, Health Canada requires hospitals to report medical device incidents and
serious adverse drug reactions.
• The reports submitted by hospitals are a valuable source of information for the monitoring of
health products.
• Health Canada is providing support and guidance to hospitals via outreach events, and online
educational modules.
IF PRESSED… what has been done to strengthen re regulation of medical devices in Canada
• Under the Medical Devices Action Plan, Health Canada has made significant strides to further
strengthen the regulation of medical devices in Canada.
• This plan lays out a three-part strategy to deliver better health outcomes for Canadians who rely
on medical devices for their health and well-being.
• The plan helps ensure the devices Canadians rely on for their health and well-being are subject
to continued safety and effectiveness requirements.
IF PRESSED… on US court proceedings
• Health Canada is unable to comment on U.S. court proceedings, and is unaware of the country
of origin for complaints made to other international regulators, or of the Canadian incidents included in
this litigation.
BACKGROUND
Essure is a birth control device implanted in the fallopian tubes of women who want permanent birth
control.
The product was licensed as a Class III medical device in Canada in 2002. All Class III and IV medical
device license applications must be supported by evidence of safety and clinical effectiveness. Health
Canada approves license applications based on the available data and on the risks and benefits of the
device.
Symptoms experienced by some Canadian women include chronic abdominal and pelvic pain, excessive
bleeding and autoimmune responses in women who have metal allergies. Thousands of injury
complaints surfaced in 2020 only after women in the U.S. filed lawsuits against Bayer. Health Canada
maintains an online registry where patients and doctors can report complications. The CBC piece
identified 98 adverse event reports associated with Essure in the Health Canada database.
The device was voluntarily discontinued by the manufacturer (Bayer) in October 2017. Bayer stated that
the decision to discontinue was based on low consumer demand of Essure worldwide and not related to
safety or effectiveness issues. Bayer sold approximately 10,000 units of Essure in Canada. The number of
patients in Canada relying on Essure for contraception is estimated to be 9,000.
Health Canada undertook two post-market safety reviews of Essure in February 2015 and April 2016. As
a result of these reviews, Health Canada identified actions to help improve awareness of the possible
risks and complications associated with its use. In 2016 and 2017, Health Canada communicated the
risks through safety alerts, public safety reviews and Health Product InfoWatch, a publication intended
for health care professionals. Bayer was required to incorporate stronger, clear warnings in the product
information materials. This included a new “boxed warning” emphasizing that Essure is a permanent
birth control system involving several steps which must be adhered to for effectiveness, and that the
device has possible complications that can be serious. The Department also required the company to
develop a patient information sheet and checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the
device.
Despite the discontinuation of Essure in Canada, Bayer has committed to fulfill their post-market
commitments to Health Canada by submitting Canadian reports as per the Medical Devices Regulations,
as well as the results of the ongoing surveillance study required by the US FDA. The estimated
completion date for that final study report is June 2025. Health Canada reviews these results, along with
any relevant new scientific or clinical information that may emerge, to assess if further measures might
be needed.
Medical Devices Action Plan (MDAP)
Examples of advances made since the launch of the MDAP:
A Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women was established to hear from patient
advocates, physicians and researchers on issues relating to women’s health and the regulation of the
medical devices and drugs that they use.
New federal regulations came into force in December 2019 that require all hospitals across the country
to report medical device incidents and serious adverse drug reactions to Health Canada. This helps
improve the reporting of valuable information about the “real world” experiences of patients and health
care professionals who are using these therapeutic products. In 2020, almost 3,500 medical device
incidents were submitted to Health Canada by hospitals.
Health Canada launched a database of medical device incident reports that is accessible to all Canadians.
Final regulatory amendments published in December 2020 establish new post-market authorities and
requirements for medical devices that are already in effect for drugs. The amendments:
• authorize the Minister of Health to order device manufacturers to conduct post-market safety
assessments;
• authorize the Minister of Health to order additional tests and studies to provide new
information on a device;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to report regulatory actions in certain foreign
jurisdictions related to their devices within a prescribed timeframe;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to periodically review device risk and benefit
information and notify Health Canada when there has been a change in the safety profile; and,
• require device manufacturers to provide an analysis of a safety and effectiveness issue in
response to a safety signal, when requested to do so by the Minister.
The Food and Drugs Act was amended in 2019 to increase Health Canada’s post-market oversight by
providing new authorities for inspectors, such as ordering a person to provide any document,
information or sample to the inspector.
Lawsuits
The Fifth Estate story alleges more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from
Bayer, the manufacturer of Essure, in order to seek compensation for health complications they claim
resulted from the birth control device. Bayer agreed to pay $1.6 billion to settle thousands of lawsuits in
the U.S. The story states Bayer has not settled any lawsuits in Canada and does not intend to.
Youth Vaping
SYNOPSIS
• Youth vaping rates in Canada doubled over a two year period (2017-2019). Furthermore, youth
are also vaping more frequently. There has been significant media coverage and concerns expressed by
parents, educators, health professionals and non-government organizations.
• In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey
(CTNS) results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019.
While the rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be
closely monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and the Canadian Student Tobacco,
Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address the increased use and appeal of vaping products to
youth?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is concerned by the rapid rise in youth vaping, and is taking comprehensive
action to address it.
• New regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they
can be seen or heard by youth. This means that young Canadians should no longer see advertising for
vaping products in public spaces, in convenience stores or online.
• On December 19, 2020, Health Canada published proposed new regulations on nicotine
concentration. The proposed regulations would lower the maximum nicotine concentration for vaping
products sold in Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. It would be prohibited
to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than this new limit.
• Health Canada is also developing additional regulatory measures to reduce youth access and the
appeal of vaping products. These include proposed regulations that would set restrictions on flavours in
vaping products, using the best available evidence.
• We also increased investments in our national public education campaign to inform youth and
their parents about the risks and harms of vaping, and created funding opportunities to engage partners
and stakeholders in a collaborative response.
• My department also intensified enforcement of the strong set of controls that Parliament has
established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act and will continue these efforts to ensure that
industry is compliant with our regulations.
IF PRESSED ON PROPOSED NEW EXCISE TAX ON VAPING PRODUCTS…
• Through Budget 2021, Finance Canada proposed to implement a tax on vaping products in 2022
to help reduce youth vaping.
• The new federal tax on vaping products builds on recent federal regulations restricting
promotion and advertising, draft regulations to set a maximum nicotine concentration level, and
proposed regulations being developed to restrict flavours in vaping products.
• The proposed new excise duty would impose a single flat rate duty on every 10 millilitres (ml) of
vaping liquid or fraction thereof, within an immediate container (i.e., the container holding the liquid
itself). Finance Canada has requested input from industry and stakeholders on the proposal by June 30,
2021.
• Health Canada will continue to work in close collaboration with department on the
implementation of the proposal.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping.
• The campaign included digital advertising on social media and television, advertising in malls,
cinemas and on transit and print and online resources. It also included an interactive learning tour in
schools and community venues. In November 2020, the tour re- launched in an online format with live
facilitators, in response to COVID-19.
• Vaping awareness kits were also provided to all middle and high schools across Canada.
Information resources were also sent to health care professionals to share in their offices.
• An evaluation of the advertising campaign found that 26% of teens who saw the ads, report that
they decided not to vape as result of the ads.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and vaping product promotions. For example, it is prohibited to furnish a vaping
product to anyone under 18 in Canada, and lifestyle advertising of vaping products is strictly prohibited
under the Act.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove:
o lifestyle advertising or advertisements from television and in- store displays; and,
o online content from social media influencers that encouraged youth vaping.
• In 2019, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000 retailers of vaping products and seized more
than 80,000 units of non- compliant vaping products.
• Due to the COVID-19 pandemic on-site inspections were temporarily suspended, however,
vaping products are being sampled remotely and virtual inspections are being conducted online,
focussing on enforcing the promotion prohibitions under the TVPA on social media sites. Health Canada
is currently planning the resumption of on-site inspections.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of
the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The purpose of the review is to examine the provisions of the Act, and whether it is supporting
its intended objectives.
• The legislation calls for the review to begin by May 23, 2021 with the report tabled in Parliament
by May 23, 2022, and the next review will need to begin May 2023.
• Planning for the review is currently underway by the department.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to address youth
vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and enforcement of existing rules
and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. Health Canada has invested more than $13 million in the
campaign since December 2018.
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On December 19, 2020, Health Canada published the proposed Concentration of Nicotine in Vaping
Products Regulations that would lower the maximum nicotine concentration allowed for vaping
products in Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. These proposed new
regulations would prohibit the sale of vaping products in Canada if the nicotine concentration is higher
than the new limit. The consultation period for the proposed regulations closed March 4, 2021 and the
department is preparing the final regulations.
On April 19, 2021, Finance Canada announced its intention to implement a tax on vaping products in
2022 through the introduction of a new excise duty framework. The proposed framework would impose
a single flat rate duty on every 10 millilitres (ml) of vaping liquid or fraction thereof, within an immediate
container (i.e., the container holding the liquid itself). Finance Canada has requested input from industry
and stakeholders on the proposal by June 30, 2021.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, Health Canada is developing proposed regulations
setting restrictions on flavours in vaping products. A regulatory proposal has been included in Health
Canada’s Forward Regulatory Plan 2020-2022. The proposed flavour restrictions have been the subject
of a targeted letter writing campaign (more than 70,000 letters to date) to Members of Parliament by
former smokers who oppose any further restrictions to vaping products in Canada. As with any
regulatory proposal, Canadians would have the opportunity to provide comments during the public
consultation period.
There is a large consumer market for vaping products in Canada. Smoking is the leading preventable
cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-related disease is caused by the toxic and
carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping products expose users to far fewer toxic chemicals and
substances than conventional cigarettes, and are less harmful alternatives to tobacco products if they
quit smoking and switch completely to vaping.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical dependence and
youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. Moreover, the long-term health
effects of vaping are unknown.
The most recent Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) results from 2018-2019,
released in December 2019, indicate e-cigarette prevalence rates doubled among students since the last
survey with 20% of students reporting having used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days, an increase from
10% in 2016-2017. These students are also reporting using vaping products more frequently. Health
Canada has not seen a corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to be at
all-time lows. Results showed the prevalence of current daily smoking decreased among students in
Grades 7 to 12 to 0.9% in 2018-2019, down from 1.3% in 2016-2017.
In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS)
results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019. While the
rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be closely
monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and CSTADS.
Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires that the Minister perform a
legislative review of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force. This
section was an amendment to the Bill, originally brought forward by Senator Seidman (CPC) during the
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI) examination of the clause-
by-clause of Bill S-5 on April 13, 2017. The review was proposed as an opportunity for Parliament to
keep an eye on the new areas of regulatory coverage relating to vaping products, especially their impact
on youth.
