Created: 2024-01-31T18:51:37.063841
Name: Compliance_Verification_Project_2021-2022:_Toys_Regulations_(Children’s_Costumes)
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/compliance-verification-project-2021-2022-toys-regulations-childrens-costumes.html
Package ID: 546f4bbb-63b5-4db5-9624-f60a910bc788
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'compliance verification project', 'Toys Regulations', "compliance of children's-costumes", 'specific flammability-and-packaging requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of children's costumes with specific flammability and packaging requirements of the Toys Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Toys Regulations (Children’s Costumes) - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Compliance Verification Project 2021-2022: Toys Regulations (Children’s Costumes) Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report Fiscal Year 2021-2022 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Compliance Verification (CV) project was to verify industry's compliance of children's costumes with specific flammability and packaging requirements of the Toys Regulations. For this project, compliance of select children's costumes with the Toys Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors sampled relevant products from online establishments. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CV project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of children's costume companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2021-2022 fiscal year, flammability testing of 25 different products was carried out. Additionally, mechanical testing and label review was performed on the packaging of 17 of the 25 products. Eight products did not require mechanical testing or label review as they were not packaged in flexible film bags. The testing resulted in four recalls, two stop sales and six commitments to address non-compliances. There were 13 instances in which no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed, and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Claire's Rainbow Feather Wings Claire's No compliance issues detected None CTG Brand's Inc. Let's Party Feather Boa Toy Sense Did not meet warning statement requirements on the packaging Stop Sale by CTG Brands Inc. Disguise Gekko Classic Toddler Costume PJ Mask Giggles No compliance issues detected None Disguise Moana Deluxe Child Wig Glow The Event Store No compliance issues detected None Forum Novelties Inc. Children's Royal Twilight Princess Dress (lot # 41693) The Costume Shoppe Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by The Costume Shoppe Forum Novelties Inc. Children's Royal Twilight Princess Dress (lot # 47335) The Costume Shoppe Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Forum Novelties Inc. is no longer in business. Commitment by Rubies II, LLC to update warning statements Fun World Butterfly wings Just Imagine Costumes Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Commitment by Just Imagine Costumes to update warning statements Fun World Lu E.L. Pumpkin Boy Costume Oya Costumes No compliance issues detected None Garland Supply Company Ltd. Child long bright coloured wig (pink) Danson Decor Inc. No compliance issues detected None Great Pretenders Butterfly Dress with Wings and Wand Creative Education of Canada, Inc. Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Creative Education of Canada Hape Chef Apron set with accessories Granville Island Toy Company No compliance issues detected None Hop Skip Sparkle Fairy Princess Dress Toys "R" Us Canada Ltd. Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Toys "R" Us Canada Ltd. LionTouch Kings cape triple lion Presse Commerce Distribution No compliance issues detected None Lucida Handicraft Co., Ltd. Girl's Deluxe Costume (Purple and Black) Danson Decor Inc. No compliance issues detected None Montoy Fairy wings Dollarama No compliance issues detected None Rubies II, LLC Kids Skye Costume Rubies II, LLC Did not meet the flammability requirements Voluntary recall by Rubies II, LLC Rubies II, LLC Simply Santa Claus with Beard Christmas Suit Dazzling Costumes Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Commitment by Rubies II, LLC to update warning statements Rubies II, LLC Pinkie The Poodle Dog Dazzling Costumes Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Commitment by Rubies II, LLC to update warning statements Rubies II, LLC Batman Giant Tiger Stores Limited Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Commitment by Rubies II, LLC to update warning statements Rubies II, LLC Gryffindor Robe Deluxe Party Stuff! Did not meet labelling requirements for flexible film bags Commitment by Rubies II, LLC to update warning statements Spirit Halloween Soul Taker Spirit Halloween No compliance issues detected None Suit Yourself Costume Co. Classic Clown Costume for Kids Groupe Party-Expert Inc. No compliance issues detected None Suit Yourself Costume Co. Lil Witch Costume Canadian Tire Corp. (Party City) No compliance issues detected None Underwraps Costumes Ghostly Spirit Glow In The Dark Girls Costume Halloween Alley Did not meet the bilingual labelling requirement for flexible film bags Stop Sale by Underwraps Costumes Woodpecker Toys Unicorn Cape Woodpecker Toys No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CV projects are very small, the findings of CV projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety NewsMonitor Consumer Product Safety RecallsContact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2023-06-19 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy