Created: 2024-09-05T18:00:29.634667
Name: Food_Processing_Aids
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/food-nutrition/food-safety/food-additives/processing-aids.html
Package ID: 566f98da-bd48-4412-b85a-0150f9fcbbe8
Keywords: ['Food Processing Aids', 'information', 'on processing aids', 'and their use', 'in Canada.']
Notes: This section provides information on processing aids and their use in Canada.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Food Processing Aids - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Skip to section menu Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Food and nutrition Food Safety Food Additives: Overview Food Processing Aids This section provides information on processing aids and their use in Canada. On this page What are food processing aids and how are they regulated? Antimicrobial Processing Aids Specific Topics on Chemicals Used in Food Processing In this section Policy for Differentiating Food Additives and Processing Aids (2015) Policy for Issuing an Interim Letter of No Objection (iLONO) for a Food Processing Aid (2015) A Guide for Preparing Food Processing Aid Submissions Enzymes use in Food Processing Join Health Canada's Food Additives e-Notice, a free service to stay on top of issued advice as well as regulatory and scientific developments in the area of food additives and processing aids in Canada. What are food processing aids and how are they regulated? There is no explicit regulatory definition of a food processing aid in Canada. The Food Directorate informally defines a food processing aid as a substance that is used for a technical effect during food processing or manufacture but, unlike food additives, its use does not affect the intrinsic characteristics of the food and it results in no or negligible residues of the substance or its by-products in or on the finished food. How a substance is used in food processing determines how it is classified. A substance that is regulated as a food additive in one situation may be considered a processing aid in a different situation. The Food Additive webpage and the "Policy for Differentiating Food Additives and Processing Aids" provide more detail in this regard. There is no regulatory requirement for preclearance of processing aids by the Minister of Health. However, Health Canada offers opinions upon request on the acceptability of processing aid uses of specific chemicals and other substances during food processing. Such requests must be supported by a submission. The Guide for Preparing Food Processing Aid Submissions can be obtained from Health Canada. The Bureau of Chemical Safety within Health Canada's Food Directorate coordinates the assessment of food processing aid submissions. Antimicrobial Processing Aids Health Canada maintains a document called Antimicrobial Food Processing Aid for Red Meat and Poultry Meat for Which Health Canada has Expressed No Objection. This document provides a resource for Canadian meat and poultry processing establishments in particular. To obtain an electronic copy of Antimicrobial Food Processing Aid for Red Meat and Poultry Meat for Which Health Canada has Expressed No Objection [last updated on March 2, 2022], please contact our publications office or send an e-mail to hc.publications-publications.sc@canada.ca with the subject heading " hpfb BCS antimicrobial processing aids-eng". Specific Topics on Chemicals Used in Food Processing "White Blush" on Cocktail Carrots For more information Reference Listing of Accepted Construction Materials, Packaging Materials and Non-Food Chemical Products Footnote 1 Some nutrients may occasionally function as food additives. For example, ascorbic acid contributes vitamin C to foods and also acts as an antioxidant; dicalcium phosphate has several food additive functions but is added to products, such as infant cereals, because of its mineral content. Return to footnote1 referrer Page details Date modified: 2022-08-11 Section Menu Food Additives: Overview Caffeine in Foods ARCHIVED - Food Additive Dictionary Lists of Permitted Food Additives Sugar Substitutes ARCHIVED - Health Canada Requests Information from Industry on the Use of Aluminum-Containing Food Additives ARCHIVED - Health Canada Review of Dietary Exposure to Aluminum Questions and Answers Regarding Health Canada's Proposal to Amend the Food and Drug Regulations to Permit the Use of the Enzyme Asparaginase in Certain Food Products White Blush on Cocktail Carrots Food Additives e-Notice Enzymes used in Food Processing Food Processing Aids Monosodium glutamate (MSG) and other sources of glutamate in foods Priority Scheduling and Expedited Handling of Submissions that have the Capacity to Enhance Food Safety Food Additives - Submission Preparation Food additives: Food colours Food additives: Sweeteners About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy