Created: 2024-06-03T13:41:03.508685
Name: Draft_guidance_on_improving_indoor_air_quality_in_office_buildings:_Conclusion_and_appendices
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/programs/consultation-draft-guidance-improving-indoor-air-quality-office-buildings/conclusion-appendices.html
Package ID: 5813b4be-f13e-4202-b76d-dbc327513ff3
Keywords: ['Draft guidance', 'improving', 'indoor air quality', 'office buildings', 'Conclusion and appendices', 'health-and-safety issue', 'chemical-and-biological contaminants', 'a health risk', 'building occupants', 'indoor air pollutants', 'preventing IAQ issues', 'building operators-and-employers']
Notes: Indoor air quality (IAQ) is a recognized health and safety issue. Indoor air quality issues may occur in buildings when chemical and biological contaminants exist at levels that may pose a health risk to building occupants. It is also important to note that some building occupants may be considered more susceptible to health effects from exposure to elevated levels of indoor air pollutants. Preventing IAQ issues before they arise and addressing issues as soon as they are identified is the best strategy for building operators and employers.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings: Conclusion and appendices - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Health system and services Health-related consultations Consultation: Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings: Conclusion and appendices Overview Indoor air quality and health Ventilation Building stewardship Roles and responsibilities Resolution process Hiring a professional For professionals Conclusion and appendices On this page Conclusion References Appendix A: Glossary Appendix B: Sample HVAC overview checklist Appendix C: Sample HVAC inspection checklist Appendix D: Sample IAQ assessment form Appendix E: IAQ health effects reporting form Appendix F: Sample summary assessment notification Conclusion Indoor air quality (IAQ) is a recognized health and safety issue. Indoor air quality issues may occur in buildings when chemical and biological contaminants exist at levels that may pose a health risk to building occupants. It is also important to note that some building occupants may be considered more susceptible to health effects from exposure to elevated levels of indoor air pollutants. Preventing IAQ issues before they arise and addressing issues as soon as they are identified is the best strategy for building operators and employers. Good practices to maintain IAQ include the following: Eliminate or reduce sources of contaminants. Sources of contamination may be indoors (such as combustion, cleaning products, furnishings, moisture resulting in mould, or odours from occupants or activities) or outdoors near the air intake vent (such as smoking areas, vehicle idling). Maintain protocols to reduce viral and bacterial transmission between building occupants. Implement effective ventilation system design and use. Ventilation can improve air quality by removing and diluting contaminants and replacing the indoor air with filtered and conditioned outdoor air. Verify ventilation rates and make sure these rates remain relevant with respect to any changes in occupant levels, renovations, changes in purpose of use or redesigns of the space. Develop and implement a preventive ventilation system maintenance program. Maintain the ventilation system and replace filters on a set schedule to help reduce contaminants and maintain temperature and moisture levels. Install effective filtration units or filters as part of the ventilation system. Remove contaminants through appropriate air cleaners or filters. Select the correct filter efficiency for the contaminants present and the ventilation system. When possible, choose MERV-13 filters at a minimum. Use proactive housekeeping practices, including choosing low-VOC cleaning products and using a vacuuming system with a HEPA filter. Control moisture and humidity levels and ensure early intervention if mould is suspected. Remediate flooding moisture and damage, clean mould appropriately, and prevent reoccurrence by determining the cause of the moisture and addressing the issue. Implement workplace procedures to consider IAQ issues throughout procurement and renovations. Assess the potential mismatch of the intended space and occupant activities. The initial design of the space may affect ventilation distribution and air exchanges. Conduct training and education for building operators, employers and occupants. Training should include how to identify a potential IAQ issue and how to report IAQ concerns. Occupants should also be aware of issues unrelated to IAQ, such as ergonomic and psychosocial risk factors (such as relationships with co-workers, control over workload), because these can affect perceptions of IAQ. When building occupants report IAQ concerns, the building operator or employer should assemble a resolution team to perform a walkthrough and assessment. The goal of the walkthrough and assessment is to identify the issue and potential causes. Speaking with the building occupants of the affected area will assist throughout the investigation process. By understanding the potential cause of the IAQ issue, the building operator or employer can implement corrective actions to remediate the situation. It is important to take all IAQ issues seriously and communicate with building occupants throughout all activities and corrective actions. The control measures used should eliminate or reduce the IAQ issue. Follow-up assessments are important to ensure the corrective action is working as intended and that it did not create a new issue. There may be instances where additional resources, such as an external qualified professional, are required to either determine the cause of the issue or to modify the ventilation system. By following good prevention practices and addressing IAQ concerns promptly, building operators and employers can prevent or reduce many IAQ issues. References Allen, J.G., MacNaughton, P., Laurent, J.G.C., Flanigan, S.S., Eitland, E.S. and Spengler, J.D. (2015) Green buildings and health. Current Environmental Health Reports. 2(3):250-258. American Industrial Hygiene Association (AHIA). (2019). FAQs About Spore Trap Air Sampling for Mold for Direct Microscopical Examination. American Industrial Hygiene Association (AIHA). (2020). Recognition, Evaluation, and Control of Indoor Mold, 2nd edition. Edited by Hung, L.L., Caulfield, S.M. and Miller, J.D. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2009). Indoor Air Quality Guide: Best Practices for Design, Construction and Commissioning. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2019). Standard 62.1 - Ventilation for Acceptable Indoor Air Quality American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2020a). Standard 12-2020 - Managing the Risk of Legionellosis Association with Building Water Systems. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2020b). Standard 55 - Thermal Environmental Conditions for Human Occupancy. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2021). Protecting HVAC Systems from Cybersecurity Threats. American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air Conditioning Engineers (ASHRAE) (2022). ASHRAE Position Document on Indoor Carbon Dioxide. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2017). Designing an Effective PPE Program. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2018). Hazard Control. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2019a). OH&S Legislation in Canada - Due Diligence. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2019b). Scent-Free Policy for the Workplace. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2021). Indoor Air Quality – General. Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (2022). Occupational Hygiene – Occupational Exposure Limits. Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality (CCIAQ) (2013b). Guide for Indoor Air Quality. Module 3 Custodial Activities, Maintenance, Repair and Renovation. Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality (CCIAQ) (2013c). Guide for Indoor Air Quality. Module 4 Recognizing and Addressing IAQ Problems. Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality (CCIAQ) (2013d). Guide for Indoor Air Quality. Module 5 Hygienic Operation of Air-Handling Systems. Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality (CCIAQ) (2015). Guide for Indoor Air Quality. Module 10. Management Strategies for Moulds and Microbiologic Agents. Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality (CCIAQ) (2021). Addressing COVID-19 in Buildings. Module 15 - Version 2. Centres for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) (2021) Overview of Water Management Programs. CSA Group (2017). Z412-17 Office Ergonomics - An Application Standard for Workplace Ergonomics. Environment Canada (2021). Air Quality Health Index. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) (2021b). What is a HEPA filter? Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC) (2018). Legionella in heating, ventilation and air conditioning systems. Government of Alberta (2009). Indoor Air Quality Tool Kit. Health Canada (1995). Indoor Air Quality in Office Buildings: A Technical Guide. Health Canada (2006). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Formaldehyde. Health Canada (2010). Reducing Radon Levels in Existing Homes: A Canadian Guide for Professional Contractors. Health Canada (2011). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Toluene. Health Canada (2012). Guidance for fine particulate matter (PM2.5) in residential indoor air. Health Canada (2013). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Naphthalene. Health Canada (2014a). Addressing moisture and mould in your home. Health Canada (2014b). Flood cleanup: keep in mind indoor air quality. Health Canada (2016a). Relative humidity indoors: Fact Sheet. Health Canada (2016b). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Carbon Monoxide. Health Canada (2016c). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Ozone. Health Canada (2016d). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Moulds. Health Canada (2017a). Residential Indoor Air Quality Guideline: Acetaldehyde. Health Canada (2017b). Infographic: Carbon Monoxide. Health Canada (2018a). Ventilation and the indoor environment. Health Canada (2018b). Indoor Air Reference Levels. Health Canada (2019a). Infographic: What is fine particulate matter (PM2.5)? Health Canada (2019b). Radon – What you need to know. Health Canada (2020). Guide for Radon Measurements in Public Buildings: Workplaces, Schools, Day Cares, Hospitals, Care Facilities, Correctional Centres. Health Canada (2021a). Asbestos. Health Canada (2021b). Flood cleanup and indoor air quality. Health Canada (2021c). Mould. Health Canada (2021d). Ozone. Health Canada (2021e). Radon: About. Health Canada (2021f). Residential indoor air quality guideline: Acrolein. Health Canada (2021g). Residential indoor air quality guidelines: Carbon dioxide. Health Canada (2021h). Volatile organic compounds. Health Canada (2024). Using a portable air cleaner to improve indoor air Health Canada (2022b). Hard-surface disinfectants and hand sanitizers (COVID-19): List of disinfectants with evidence for use against COVID-19. Health Canada (2022c). COVID-19: Cleaning and disinfecting. Institut de recherche Robert-Sauvé en santé et sécurité (2013). Sampling Guide for Air Contaminants in the Workplace. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2002). Guidance for Protecting Building Environments from Airborne Chemical, Biological or Radiological Attacks. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2015). Hierarchy of Controls. National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (2022). Mould in the Workplace. Testing and Remediation of Dampness and Mold Contamination. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) (2021a). COVID-19: Guidance on indoor ventilation during the pandemic. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) (2021b). Using Ventilation and filtration to reduce aerosol transmission of COVID-19 in long-term care homes. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) (2021c). COVID-19: Guidance on Indoor Ventilation During the Pandemic. Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC). (2022). COVID-19: Improving Indoor Ventilation. Sundell, J., Levin, H., Nazaroff, W.W., Cain, W.S., Fisk, W.J., Grimsrud, D.T., Gyntelberg, F., Li, Y., Persily, A.K., Pickering, A.C., Samet, J.M., Spengler, J.D., Taylor, S.T. and Weschler, C.J. (2010) Ventilation Rates and Health: Multidisciplinary Review of the Scientific Literature. Indoor Air. 21(3):191-204. Appendix A: Glossary ACGIH American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists-a society of professional hygienists and educators who work to promote occupational safety and health. The organization publishes recommendations on ventilation, air sampling and threshold limit values (TLVs) designed to limit and control exposure of workers to airborne chemicals and physical hazards in the workplace. ACM Asbestos-containing materials. AHAM Association of Home Appliance Manufacturers-represents manufacturers of major, portable and floor-care home appliances and suppliers to the industry, providing the home appliance industry with leadership, advocacy and a forum for action in public policy, standards and business decisions. Air Changes Per Hour (ACH) The number of times air is theoretically replaced in a space during 1 hour. Air Conditioning (AC) The process of treating air to meet the requirements of a conditioned space by controlling its temperature, humidity, odour, cleanliness and distribution. Air Filter An air-cleaning device that removes light particulate matter from normal atmospheric air. Air Handling Unit Ventilation equipment in HVAC system (see HVAC). Air Intake A part of the ventilation system that draws outdoor air into the air handling system. Air Velocity Rate of air flow. ASHRAE American Society of Heating, Refrigeration and Air Conditioning Engineers-the primary association involved in developing IAQ guidelines and standards. The society is organized for the sole purpose of advancing the arts and sciences of heating, ventilation, air conditioning and refrigeration for the public's benefit through research, standards writing, continuing education and publications. ANSI American National Standards Institute-an American organization that produces the ANSI standards. Building Envelope Includes all the building components that separate the indoors from the outdoors. Building envelopes include the exterior walls, foundations, roof, windows and doors. CCOHS Canadian Centre for Occupational Health and Safety-Canada's national organization for promotion of workplace health and safety. Provides information, advice, training and research. CADR Clean Air Delivery Rate-indicates the volume of filtered air an air cleaner delivers, with separate scores for tobacco smoke, pollen and dust. The higher the CADR number for each pollutant, the faster the unit filters the air. As a rule of thumb, the CADR of your air cleaner should be equal to at least two-thirds of the room's area. Colorimetry Chemical analysis techniques involving reactions in which a colour is developed when a particular contaminant is present in the sample and reacts with the collection medium. The resultant colour change indicates the contaminant concentration. Condensate The water resulting from the process of condensation in HVAC systems. CSA or CSA Group Canadian National Standard Association-a national organization that develops CSA standards. Duct A conduit used for conveying air at low pressures. Due Diligence The level of judgement, care, prudence, determination and activity that would reasonably be expected of a person under particular circumstances. EPA US Environmental Protection Agency. Epidemiology The study of the occurrence and causes of health effects in human populations. An epidemiological study compares the occurrence of health effects in two groups of people who are alike except for one factor, such as exposure to a chemical or the presence of a health effect. Ergonomics The science of matching a worker with their workstation and work environment. Exhaust Ventilation The removal of air, usually by mechanical means, from any space near the source of air contaminants. Filter, HEPA High-efficiency particulate air filter that is at least 99.97% efficient in removing thermally generated monodisperse dioctyl phthalate smoke particles with a diameter of 0.3 µm. Fungus (pl. fungi) Moulds, dusts, mildews, smuts and mushrooms that grow in humid spots. Heating, Ventilation and Air Conditioning (HVAC) A common term for heating, ventilating, cooling, humidifying, dehumidifying and conditioning air for comfort, safety and health. IARC International Agency for Research on Cancer. IARC, part of the World Health Organization, is an international organization that evaluates the human cancer risk from chemical exposure. Indoor Air Quality (IAQ) Air in which there are no known contaminants at harmful levels, as determined by appropriate authorities, and with which 80% or more of the people do not express dissatisfaction (ASHRAE, 2020). IARL Indoor Air Reference Levels. ISO International Organization for Standardization-an international organization that produces the ISO standards. Makeup Air Outdoor air supplied to replace exhaust air and exfiltration. Mechanical Ventilation Refers to air flows intentionally created through the use of fans, ducting and designed openings in the building envelope. These devices include exhaust fans, clothes dryer exhausts, range hoods, and heat or energy recovery ventilators. Mould A growth of fungi forming a furry patch. NIOSH National Institute of Occupational Safety and Health-the research agency in the United States of America established by the US Congress in the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. Natural Ventilation The movement of outdoor air into a space through intentionally provided openings, such as windows, and doors, through non-powered ventilators or by infiltration. (Opening windows occasionally is not generally considered to be natural ventilation.) Occupational Exposure Limit Maximum exposure level permissible for 8 hours per day, 5 days per week. Odours Odours are often organic gases and vapours that stimulate the olfactory organs. Response varies with person, age, experience, time of exposure and other factors. Off-gassing Gradual release of vapours and gases to the atmosphere, usually from new furnishings, carpets and building materials. Outdoor Air (OA) Air taken from the external atmosphere and not previously circulated through the system. Recirculated Air Air removed from the conditioned space and intended for reuse as supplied air. Relative Humidity (RH) A measure of the amount of water vapour in air. Respirable Particles Particles less than 10 µm aerodynamic diameter. Return Air (RA) Air that is returned to the fan from the occupied space for recirculation as supply air. Safety Data Sheet (SDS) Summary documents that provide information about the hazards of a product and advice about safety precautions. Safety data sheets are usually written by the manufacturer or supplier of the product. Threshold Limit Value (TLV) Exposure guidelines established by American Conference of Government Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Ventilation The process of supplying outdoor air and removing used air by natural or mechanical means to and from any space. Volatile Organic Compounds (VOCs) Organic compounds that evaporate readily. Volatile organic compounds include aromatic hydrocarbons, halogenated hydrocarbons, alcohols, ketones, aldehydes, ethers and esters. Several hundred VOCs have been identified in indoor air. The best-known VOC is formaldehyde. Appendix B: Sample HVAC overview checklist The following is sample checklist. Always adapt any checklist to match the needs of the workplace. OK Not OK Sample HVAC Overview Checklist ⬜ ⬜ Location of outdoor air intake (to ensure no building air exhausts are nearby and their condition is clean). ⬜ ⬜ Position and condition of outside air dampers (to ensure they are open and functioning). ⬜ ⬜ Potential sources of contaminants near outdoor air intake (such as garages, loading areas). ⬜ ⬜ Air supply and exhaust fans are in good repair. ⬜ ⬜ Proper fan belts and blades are in good repair. ⬜ ⬜ Fan blades are installed properly (correct orientation). ⬜ ⬜ Duct work or intakes are free of dust and mould. ⬜ ⬜ Ducts are dry, clean and well maintained. ⬜ ⬜ Air handling units (fans, coil units, induction units) are in good repair. ⬜ ⬜ Air filters of appropriate filtration efficiency ratings and dry, clean and well-maintained. ⬜ ⬜ Condensate pans free of dirty water, slime, rust or mould. ⬜ ⬜ Drip pans are free of dirty water, slime, rust or mould. ⬜ ⬜ Humidifier reservoirs are free of mould, dirty water, foam or slime. ⬜ ⬜ [… any other information pertinent to the workplace] Appendix C: Sample HVAC inspection checklist The following is a sample checklist. Always adapt any checklist to match the needs of the workplace. General Completed Requires Action Document the preventive maintenance program and all maintenance or repairs to make sure that no steps are missed and serve as a reference if IAQ complaints arise. Inspect and keep all equipment and controls in proper working order according to manufacturer's recommendations. Ensure that repairs and adjustments to the HVAC system are completed on a regular schedule by a qualified person (such as adjustment and calibration of control system components, including sensors, thermostats, time clocks, dampers and valves). Use recommended manufacturer equipment and replacement parts. Make sure they are suitable for the intended function. Keep the interior of equipment and ductwork clean and dry. Prevent water accumulation, condensation or stagnation, especially in and around HVAC system mechanical components (such as cooling coils of air handling units, condensate drain pans, and water towers). Regularly clean and disinfect surfaces that normally involve water according to manufacturer's recommendations and using products/concentrations that are safe for occupants. When disinfection of the HVAC system is required, conduct activities while the building is vacant and allow sufficient time for off-gassing/dispersal of any harmful products. Cleaning Completed Requires Action Schedule maintenance and cleaning operations during the weekend, particularly if the procedures require turning off the HVAC system. Follow the manufacturer's recommendations regarding the cleaning schedule, which parts should be cleaned, and which cleaning products to use. Follow supplier instructions when using cleaning or disinfection products, including the use of personal protective equipment (PPE). Refer to Section 8 (Exposure Controls / Personal Protection) of the SDS if the product is a hazardous product. Thoroughly rinse and dry all coils and drip pans after cleaning to prevent contaminants from entering the air system. Water and Leaks Completed Requires Action Investigate and repair any dampness on walls, windows and ceiling and understand and remediate the cause of the moisture/wetness. Dry area immediately and remove any wet materials. Insulate pipes, ducts or other surfaces whose temperatures are expected to be lower than the surrounding air (to prevent condensation or moisture). Maintain the building to prevent water from entering (such as roof leaks, gutter/eavestrough, downspouts, exterior flashings around penetrations/windows/doors, graded soil for run off, stormwater management). Follow guidance for cleanup following a flood (Health Canada 2014b; 2021b) Filters Completed Requires Action Replace all filters on a regular basis to maintain efficiency and to prevent fungal growth and build-up of dust and particles. Place and install all filters properly (such as no gaps or cracks between filter and rack). A small opening can allow a large volume of supplied air to bypass the filters. Use filters as required and rated for the HVAC system. Use the highest efficiency filters the system pressure drops will permit, based on manufacturer's recommendations. Ceiling Completed Requires Action Keep the space above ceiling tiles clean and free of debris or loose material and ensure any hazardous materials such as asbestos-containing materials are managed according to applicable regulations. Mechanical Room(s) and Mixing Plenums Completed Requires Action Make sure that the mechanical room containing the HVAC system is clean and dry. Issues can occur when "dirty" return air is circulated through openings or unsealed seams and then back throughout the building. Do not store products that could contaminate the air, such as flammables, solvents and cleaners. Check the label and refer to Section 7 (Handling and Storage) of the SDS for advice on safe storage of hazardous products. Humidifiers Completed Requires Action Drain humidifiers and clean according to manufacturer's recommendations, approximately every 2 to 4 months. If the humidifier contains stagnant/dirty water, drain and clean and determine if there are blocked nozzles or if pumps need repair. Determine if biocides are used to control microbial growth and check dosing and choice of chemicals. Note: a steam humidification system using clean steam will avoid this issue. Remove rust and mineral deposits from HVAC system components once or twice a year, or more often if needed. Drip Pan Completed Requires Action Make sure that drip pans under cooling coils have effective drain lines so that water drains completely and does not leave standing water. Ducts Completed Requires Action Make sure ducts are tightly sealed (leakage rate of less than 3%). Clean ducts according to manufacturer's recommendations. Clean ducts when the building is unoccupied. Do not operate the air handling unit while cleaning to prevent the spread of contaminants. Run the system for at least eight air changes after cleaning is completed. Combustion Sources Completed Requires Action Make sure that air from combustion sources (such as stoves, hot water tanks, furnaces) is properly exhausted and not re-circulated. Appendix D: Sample IAQ assessment form The following is a sample checklist. Always adapt any checklist to match the needs of the workplace. Sample: IAQ Assessment Form Name(s) of investigator(s): Date: Location: Assessment OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: OK ⬜Not OK ⬜ Item Inspected: Observations: Notes: Appendix E: IAQ health effects reporting form The following is a sample checklist. Always adapt any checklist to match the needs of the workplace. Sample: IAQ Health Effects Reporting Form Date: Name: Contact information: Work area: (floor, department, location) Please indicate if any of the following applies to you: ⬜ You wear contact lenses. ⬜ You work in front of a computer screen for at least 1 hour a day. ⬜ You work next to a printer/photocopy machine. ⬜ You frequently use a photocopier (# times a week: _____). ⬜ You work near a lunchroom/cafeteria. ⬜ There is an air vent near your desk. ⬜ You use chemical products for your work (such as cleaning products). ⬜ You smoke or vape tobacco or cannabis products. Health effects experienced: ⬜ Headache ⬜ Dizziness ⬜ Nausea ⬜ Fatigue ⬜ Cold ⬜ Sinus congestion ⬜ Shortness of breath ⬜ Skin rashes and irritation ⬜ Drowsiness ⬜ Blurred vision ⬜ Wheezing ⬜ Allergies ⬜ Dry eyes ⬜ Nose and throat irritation ⬜ Other: Time of day health effects are first noticed: ⬜ a.m. ⬜ p.m. Time of day health effects worsen: ⬜ a.m. ⬜ p.m. Day of the week health effects appear or worsen: ⬜ Monday ⬜ Tuesday ⬜ Wednesday ⬜ Thursday ⬜ Friday ⬜ Weekend (specify) Frequency and duration of health effects and if/when they go away: History of health effects (when were they first noticed): Occupant's observations about building conditions that may be related to IAQ issues: Other: Appendix F: Sample summary assessment notes The following is a sample checklist. Always adapt any checklist to match the needs of the workplace. Sample: Resolution Team – Summary Assessment Notes Name(s) of investigator(s): Date: Location on floor plan: Reported health effects: Time and frequency of health effects and if/when they go away: Potential cause(s): Possible action: Location on floor plan: Reported health effects: Time and frequency of health effects and if/when they go away: Potential cause(s): Possible action: Location on floor plan: Reported health effects: Time and frequency of health effects and if/when they go away: Potential cause(s): Possible action: Page details Date modified: 2024-11-05 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy