Created: 2020-10-09T16:21:48.976420
Name: Special_Committee_on_COVID
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/5a5efcfe-8f18-4d26-94b4-b56c68b956e2/resource/4dd824d6-a32c-47d6-98de-0acea0988c89/download/cuserscelesperdesktophc-covidweek-of-june-8th-english.pdf
Package ID: 5a5efcfe-8f18-4d26-94b4-b56c68b956e2
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances at the Special Committee on the COVID-19 Pandemic (COVI) – Week of June 8, 2020
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
COMMUNICATIONS AND PUBLIC EDUCATION ON COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 Communications and public education on COVID-19 are key to maintaining
Canadians trust and confidence in the Government’s response, and ensuring
Canadians continue to be aware of the risks to their health and steps they can
take to protect themselves, their families and their communities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians are informed
about COVID-19 to protect themselves and stop the spread of this virus?
KEY MESSAGES
 Since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the Government
of Canada has worked closely with provinces and territories
and stakeholders to provide Canadians with the information
they need to protect themselves, their families, and their
communities.
 To complement online content, the Government of Canada
continues to update the Canada COVID-19 mobile app,
which provides users with information and resources on the
disease, and allows them to track their symptoms daily.
 The Wellness Together Canada portal for mental health and
substance use provides access to authoritative information
and connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
 We have also used a wide variety of channels to provide
information and updates to Canadians.
 These include:
o the dedicated website Canada.ca/coronavirus and other
linked pages on the COVID-19 response, which have
had more than 192 million visits since their launch;
o regular briefings to the media;
o a toll-free information line [1-833-784-4397] with
interpretation service available in 200+ languages open
from 7 a.m. to midnight, 7 days a week;
o regular public advisories to inform Canadians and the
media about emerging issues and to dispel
misinformation about health products [natural health
products, drugs and medical devices];
o an email notification service, which provides
subscribers with links to critical information on the
Government of Canada’s COVID-19 website;
o social media;
o TV, radio, print and digital advertising; and
o a nation-wide mail-out sent to all households across the
country to reach Canadians who may not have access
to or use online technology.
IF PRESSED ON INFORMATION AVAILABLE ONLINE
Through our website, Canadians can access:
 guidance and advice for travellers, healthcare professionals,
essential workers, Indigenous communities and all
Canadians;
 factsheets and infographics on a variety of topics, in a wide
range of languages;
 a self-assessment tool to check for symptoms of COVID-19;
 a dashboard showing how the outbreak is evolving in
Canada; and
 information on Health Canada’s regulatory actions to support
greater access to health products.
IF PRESSED ON RECOVERY STEPS IN CANADA
 During the reopening phase, we will continue to share
important information with all Canadians online on
Canada.ca/coronavirus, as well as through the Canada
COVID-19 app, email notifications, social media and regular
briefings with the media.
IF PRESSED ON THE WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA PORTAL
 During these difficult times, it is critical that Canadians have
access to effective tools to support their mental health and
well-being. The Wellness Together Canada portal provides
Canadians with free access to a virtual network of psycho-
social information services and supports in both official
languages.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA COVID-19 APP
 The Canada COVID-19 app provides access to trusted,
evidence-based information about the COVID-19 pandemic
across Canada.
 The app has more than 572,000 users as of June 4. It builds
on what provinces and territories are doing.
 It does not track personal information, nor is it a surveillance
tool. The protection of Canadians’ information is a priority for
the Government of Canada, and any tool used to collect
healthcare information undergoes a rigorous privacy
assessment.
IF PRESSED ON PUBLIC EDUCATION FUNDING
 The $50 million in funding for the Public Health Agency of
Canada is supporting ongoing communications efforts and
the implementation of a comprehensive national public
education campaign for COVID-19 that provides Canadians
with credible information and encourages behaviours that
protect individuals and overall public health.
 The public education campaign includes advertising, social
marketing, information resources, partnerships and targeted
outreach to at-risk populations.
 Of that $50 million budget, $30 million is set aside for paid
advertising around the public education campaign for
COVID-19.
 Advertising allows us to communicate important COVID-
related information with a large number of Canadians at one
time about how to stay safe and healthy during this
pandemic.
 As of June 1, 2020, PHAC spent more than $4.7 million in
advertising placements in fiscal year 2019-20 and has
committed almost $16 million in advertising for 2020-21. Of
these commitments, more than 80% of the placements were
made in Canadian media, which includes television, print,
radio, out-of-home, social media and other digital platforms.
 Public education plays a critical role in our response to
COVID-19 as it helps to:
o increase awareness and understanding about
symptoms and treatment;
o provide information on preventive measures such as
self-isolation; and
o address misinformation and public concerns.
IF PRESSED ON EFFORTS TO COMMUNICATE WITH VULNERABLE
POPULATIONS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s national public
education campaign includes targeted outreach to
vulnerable populations, such as the elderly and those with
underlying medical conditions.
 To help protect these vulnerable populations, the
Government has ensured that key information on infection
prevention is available to them and their caregivers, in clear
and relatable terms, and in multiple formats, including having
simultaneous interpretation into ASL and LSQ for all media
briefings.
 Similarly, we have been supporting outreach to language
minority populations by reproducing 20 communications
resources, including fact sheets and infographics into 33
languages, including 10 Indigenous languages.
CONTEXTE
Le gouvernement du Canada collabore avec ses partenaires de tous les paliers de
gouvernement pour prendre des mesures visant à contrer la COVID-19. La stratégie de
communication décrite ci-dessus vise l’atteinte des objectifs suivants :
 Communiquer aux Canadiens de l’information exacte en temps utile sur la
pandémie de COVID-19 au Canada et sur les risques pour leur santé, et les
convaincre de prendre des mesures particulières pour se protéger, réduire le
plus possible le nombre de malades et de morts ainsi que les perturbations de la
société.
 Communiquer les mesures prises par le gouvernement de concert avec les
provinces et les territoires pour se préparer à la pandémie de COVID-19 au
Canada et à ses répercussions ainsi que pour intervenir face à ces dernières,
afin de maintenir la confiance de la population dans les mesures prises par le
gouvernement.
 Cerner et contrer la mésinformation en présentant les dernières données
probantes afin de réduire la peur, l’anxiété, les préjugés et les autres réactions
qui peuvent amplifier les perturbations sociales, économiques, etc.
Principales statistiques
 En date du 3 juin, le nombre de visites sur le site Web s’élevait à plus de 192
millions.
 En date du 4 juin, le nombre d’utilisateurs de l’application COVID-19 s’élevait
à plus de 572 000.
 En date du 3 juin, le nombre d’appels reçus à la ligne d’information
téléphonique sans frais sur la COVID-19 depuis le lancement de cette dernière
s’élevait à plus de 152 000.
 Un document a été envoyé par la poste à 15,5 millions de ménages au
Canada.
Digital Supports and Virtual Care
SYNOPSIS
In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada is putting in place a
range of digital supports to help Canadians get the information, resources and care they
need. On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5 million to support Canadian
health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet health care needs through virtual tools
and approaches. This funding will also help to support a suite of digital tools, including
an online self-assessment tool, a mobile app to enhance self-assessments and provide
a hub for trusted information and resources and an online portal for access to virtual
psychosocial supports.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the
resources they need during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Canadians need ready access to digital tools and resources
to help during the COVID-19 pandemic, including education,
information, mental health and substance use supports,
alerts and screening tools.
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories, vendors and stakeholders to make
these tools widely available to Canadians and their families.
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced that the
Government of Canada is committing $240M to help
Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches.
 This will enable Canadians to safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-
conferencing, to have their health needs met. It also means
they can continue to access specialist services throughout
this time of uncertainty.
 As well, through this investment we have already
implemented a suite of digital health tools, including:
o An online self-assessment tool, which has been
accessed more than 4.5 million times
o A mobile app called “Canada COVID-19,” which
provides reliable information and resources for
Canadians. In addition, on the app, Canadians are
encouraged to monitor their health on a regular basis
through a daily symptom tracker.
o Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of
virtual mental health and substance use supports
available through the Canada COVID-19 app and
Canada.ca website.
 We will continue to work with all of our partners to ensure
that Canadians have access to up-to-date information, tools
and resources on COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
 The Government of Canada is working with provinces and
territories to support the rapid uptake and use of virtual care
services.
 This means that Canadians can continue to have their
regular health needs met during this unprecedented time in a
safe and secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-
conferencing, in addition to face-to-face visits.
 Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada will help
reduce the pressure on health systems and provide
Canadians with needed health services and authoritative
information in a safe and secure manner.
Health Canada is already engaging in discussions with

provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
 Privacy considerations were – and continue to be – front and
centre at every stage of these initiatives.
 Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are
inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
 The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is
creating stress and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly
those who do not have ready access to their regular support
networks.
 That is why the Government has launched a new online
portal for mental health and substance use supports:
Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for
Canadians to access self-directed tools and find credible
information on mental health and substance use issues.
 It also connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online
counselling.
 Use of the portal will be closely monitored to ensure that
updates will best align with the needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON CONTACT TRACING APPS
 Rigorous contact tracing continues to be an important part of
Canada’s strategy in response to COVID-19, recognizing its
importance to tracking the virus and preventing future flare-
ups.
 Mobile apps can support these efforts by providing
notifications to users of potential exposure to COVID-19.
 These apps, which anonymously record when users are
physically close to one another, are being explored around
the world as a supplement to manual contact tracing – but
we know they are not a replacement.
 And privacy must be a foremost consideration for the use of
any such app.
 To help manage the spread of COVID-19, our Government
is therefore currently exploring options for an exposure
notification app that could be safely used by Canadians
across Canada to provide them with information in the event
of potential exposure.
 We expect to be able to share more on this in the coming
days or weeks.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL PLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
 Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented
time for Canadians, and are continuing to explore how we
can best take action in innovative ways.
 We will continue to work closely with provinces and
territories and other partners to evaluate needs for digital
supports.
CONTEXTE
Soutien aux soins virtuels (3 mai 2020)
 Le 3 mai, le premier ministre a annoncé 240,5 millions de dollars pour soutenir les
soins virtuels et les outils numériques offerts aux Canadiens. Ce financement
facilitera le déploiement rapide des soins virtuels et des mesures de soutien
nécessaires aux systèmes de santé tandis que le gouvernement du Canada
collabore avec les provinces et les territoires pour aider les services de santé à
mettre en place des soins virtuels et à fournir des services de santé à distance.
 Santé Canada travaille avec les provinces et les territoires pour commencer à
déterminer où le soutien est le plus nécessaire en matière de soins virtuels et
d’infrastructure connexe.
Outil d’autoévaluation pour la COVID-19 (21 mars 2020)
 Élaboré en collaboration avec Santé Canada et l’Agence de la santé publique du
Canada, cet outil est à la disposition de tous les Canadiens sur le site Web
canada.ca. Plus de 4 millions d’internautes canadiens ont consulté cet outil au cours
du premier mois depuis son lancement. Il vise à compléter les outils
d’autoévaluation provinciaux et territoriaux et permet aux Canadiens de prendre des
décisions éclairées sur la pertinence des tests de dépistage de la COVID-19 et sur
le moment de faire appel à d’autres ressources comme Télésanté, les fournisseurs
de soins primaires et les services d’urgence.
 Le financement de 240,5 millions de dollars annoncé le 3 mai soutient l’outil
d’autoévaluation.
Application Canada COVID-19 (31 mars 2020)
 Accessible au moyen d’appareils mobiles sans fil et d’appareils Web, cette
application disponible à l’échelle nationale offre une plateforme intégrée sur laquelle
les Canadiens peuvent recevoir des renseignements fiables et échanger sur des
questions liées à la COVID-19. Elle est rapidement devenue l’application médicale la
plus populaire dans les magasins Google Play Store et App Store d’Apple.
 Le 11 avril, l’application a lancé son système de suivi quotidien des symptômes, qui
permet aux utilisateurs de jouer un rôle actif dans l’autogestion de leur santé grâce à
l’enregistrement quotidien des symptômes possibles de la COVID-19. Avec un
nombre suffisant d’utilisateurs, le système de suivi des symptômes fournira aux
autorités de santé publique des données utiles pour suivre les symptômes de la
population dans son ensemble, en fournissant un indicateur de l’évolution de la
maladie dans les quartiers, les régions et les provinces.
 Le financement de 240,5 millions de dollars annoncé le 3 mai soutient l’application
Canada COVID-19.
Portail de services virtuels de soutien en matière de santé mentale et de consommation
de substances : Espace mieux-être Canada (15 avril 2020)
 Grâce à ce portail, les Canadiens ont accès à des outils numériques qui les aident à
surveiller et à gérer leurs besoins en matière de santé mentale et de consommation
de substances, et accéder à des professionnels de la santé mentale qualifiés au
moyen de plateformes numériques.
 Trois grandes catégories de services de soutien sont offertes :
o Outils de triage et d’autosurveillance : Il s’agit d’outils d’autogestion destinés
à guider les utilisateurs vers des ressources de promotion ou de prévention et
à les mettre en relation avec ces dernières. Ces outils permettront aux
personnes de déterminer leur niveau de besoins ainsi que de gérer elles-
mêmes leur santé mentale et leur consommation de substances.
o Outils et ressources de promotion de la santé mentale : Ces outils et
ressources visent à promouvoir la santé mentale et à prévenir une mauvaise
santé mentale. Ce matériel mettra l’accent sur le renforcement des facteurs
de protection (p. ex., la résilience, l’adaptation, le soutien social et les
réseaux sociaux) et sur la lutte contre les facteurs de risque (p. ex., la
consommation de substances, l’isolement social, la discrimination et la
stigmatisation).
o Services de soutien psychosocial en direct : Le portail propose également
des sessions de clavardage confidentielles, des services de consultation par
téléphone ou en ligne avec des pairs aidants, des travailleurs sociaux, des
psychologues et d’autres professionnels.
 Le financement de 240,5 millions de dollars annoncé le 3 mai soutient le portail.
BlueDot
 Santé Canada et l’Agence de la santé publique du Canada ont passé des contrats
avec BlueDot pour améliorer et développer l’expertise existante afin de mieux
comprendre l’émergence et la propagation de la COVID-19 ainsi que les risques
qu’elle pose pour la santé publique.
 Le financement de 240,5 millions de dollars annoncé le 3 mai soutient ces travaux.
Obtenir les nouvelles sur la COVID-19 (30 avril 2020)
 Le gouvernement du Canada a mis en place un service d’abonnement à un bulletin
électronique appelé « Obtenir les nouvelles sur la COVID-19 ». Ce service fournira
des mises à jour précieuses aux Canadiens qui souhaitent être informés des mises
à jour concernant la situation de la COVID-19 au Canada.
Applications de notification d’exposition
 Les pays du monde entier exploitent des outils numériques pour réduire la charge
de travail liée à la recherche et à l’endiguement de la propagation de la COVID-19.
Au Canada, bon nombre de provinces et territoires envisagent également l’utilisation
de tels outils, étant donné leur valeur possible pour aider à limiter la propagation de
la maladie à mesure que les Canadiens réintègrent le marché du travail. Santé
Canada collabore avec les provinces et les territoires pour comprendre les
approches proposées.
 Le gouvernement fédéral a entamé un dialogue avec Apple et Google et avec
d’autres partenaires au sujet de la possibilité de développer des applications de
notification d’exposition.
Santé Canada continue d’étudier d’autres outils numériques en vue de fournir aux
Canadiens les renseignements et les ressources dont ils ont besoin pour demeurer en
santé et en sécurité pendant la pandémie de la COVID-19. Parmi ces outils, certaines
ressources seront destinées aux enfants, afin de les aider à mieux comprendre la
maladie et à demeurer en santé et en sécurité.
DRUG SHORTAGES
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 is creating global supply chain challenges and increased demand for
drugs used in supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly
in the context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at
risk.
 While current signals indicate that supply levels may be stabilizing, pressures
continue to exist for certain drugs. The need for vigilance in maintaining the
national drug supply for the long term continues. Health Canada continues with
its surveillance activities and engagement with key supply chain players
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does
not create drug shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication
is a top priority for the Government of Canada. Significant
efforts are being made through a whole-of-government
approach to respond to drug shortages during the COVID-19
pandemic.
 We have amplified our monitoring activities. We are
engaging provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and
patient groups - in some cases on a daily basis. Together,
we are assessing supply chain vulnerabilities to ensure
action is taken to help prevent and minimize the impact of
shortages.
 On March 30, 2020, I signed an Interim Order to allow for the
exceptional importation of products related to COVID-19.
When drugs are not available, the department has a legal
pathway to bring alternate supplies of drugs to the Canadian
market.
 We are also taking steps to help mitigate and prevent drug
shortages. Public Services and Procurement Canada has
issued eight Requests for Information signaling Canada’s
interest in procuring and building a reserve of critical drugs in
shortage.
 We are also working closely with key international regulatory
partners (US, EU, UK and Australia). This has resulted in
earlier risk identification and response planning.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES…
 Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the
impact of any drug shortages related to COVID-19.
 Through this work, we have been able to secure additional
supplies of needed drugs for Canada. For example, we
have worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to
additional supplies of drugs such as muscle relaxants (e.g.
cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g.
propofol) to help support COVID-19 patients.
IF PRESSED ON REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION (RFIs)…
 The RFIs were posted to identify additional supply that is not
already earmarked to meet Canada’s current needs.
 The initial RFIs focus on critical drugs currently in shortage –
drugs that have the greatest potential impact on the health
care system. These drugs include sedatives, muscle
relaxants and inhalers.
 The Government will also be looking to procure other drugs,
vaccines, and drugs that are showing promise in Clinical
Trials.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients
and health care professionals and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages
where possible and minimize their impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility
requiring collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners, and the federal government. When national shortages occur, Health
Canada works with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply
chain to determine the details and status of the shortage, coordinate information-
sharing, and identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory measures and
exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies
are available and whether the product is considered medically necessary are all
considered in determining the potential impact and any necessary actions by Health
Canada.
Health Canada also co-chairs the Multi-Stakeholder Steering Committee on Drug
Shortages, which mobilizes provinces and territories and key stakeholder groups to play
a lead role in advancing tools to address drug shortages.
Bill C-13, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act
On March 25, 2020, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act was brought into
force to support the availability of drugs and medical devices by providing the
Government with the authority to make regulations to address any future shortages of
therapeutic products, including drugs and medical devices. This includes the importation
of drugs and medical devices not authorized for sale in Canada to address certain
shortages, such as for personal protective equipment or drugs required to treat COVID-
19, and changes to the Patent Act to allow for compulsory licencing in health
emergencies in the period up to September 30, 2020.
Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in Relation to COVID-19
On March 30, 2020, the Minister of Health authorized an Interim Order which sets up a
regulatory framework to help prevent and alleviate shortages of drugs, medical devices,
and foods for a special dietary purpose.
It allows for the exceptional importation and sale of products that may not fully meet
Canadian requirements, such as those related to licensing and labelling, but are
manufactured according to comparable standards.
Health Canada designates the products eligible for importation and sale under the
Interim Order. Companies with an establishment licence may import these drugs and
devices after notifying Health Canada five days in advance.
The Interim Order also requires that any shortages of critical medical devices related to
COVID-19, such as ventilators, be reported to Health Canada and publicly
communicated. Public reporting of shortages help manufacturers and the health care
system plan and react to supply disruptions, in order to mitigate the impact on patients.
These new tools allow Health Canada to address critical supply issues in an expedited
manner when shortages occur and help protect the health and safety of Canadians
during the pandemic.
Through this work, Health Canada has been able to secure additional supplies of
needed drugs and medical devices for Canada. For example, the department has
worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of drugs such
as muscle relaxants (e.g. cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g.
propofol) to help support COVID-19 patients.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of
years, capacity has been built up across governments leading to a more coordinated
and effective approach to dealing with shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms in place to manage drug
shortages, including an FPT committee infrastructure to identify, report, and assess
shortages in cooperation with industry and patient groups.
Health Canada has leveraged this FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with
provincial and territorial partners to identify shortage signals earlier, especially for critical
drugs required for COVID-19.
HEALTH PRODUCTS MAKING FALSE OR MISLEADING CLAIMS
SYNOPSIS
Health Canada has identified health products making false or misleading claims to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19 through proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing about health products on the market claiming to
treat, prevent or cure COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of all Canadians is Health Canada's
top priority and we are taking measures to protect
consumers from illegal, false or misleading advertising of
products claiming to mitigate, prevent, treat, diagnose, or
cure COVID-19.
 To date, Health Canada has not authorized any product to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19. Selling health products that
make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19 is illegal in Canada.
 As a result of proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received, Health Canada has identified a wide
range of health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19. Health Canada takes this matter very
seriously and is taking action to stop this illegal activity.
 Health Canada has issued compliance letters to multiple
companies directing them to immediately stop selling such
products and remove references to these products from their
websites. Health Canada has also been working with major
online retailers to stop the posting of these products on their
sites.
 On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory
warning Canadians about the risks of buying health products
that make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19.
 To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a
table which lists products and corresponding companies or
advertising media found to engage in non-compliant
marketing, which are currently under review or have been
resolved. Health Canada took compliance and enforcement
action against these organizations, as required.
 The Department is also coordinating with other government
agencies, such as the Competition Bureau and the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, to address the issue of false and
misleading claims related to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada has followed up on hundreds of cases
regarding health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19 identified through proactive monitoring
activities or complaints received.
 Various compliance and enforcement options are available
to manage the risk posed to public health and safety by false
or misleading claims related to COVID-19, including on site
inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public
communications or product seizures.
 In certain circumstances, when the regulatory enforcement
responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance, Health
Canada may refer its findings to the Public Prosecution
Service of Canada for potential prosecution.
BACKGROUND
Status of Products to Treat or Cure COVID-10
Health Canada has not approved any product to treat or cure COVID-19. Selling or
advertising health products making false or misleading claims is illegal in Canada under
Sections 9 (1) and 20 (1) of the Food and Drugs Act . Health products that have been
authorized for sale by Health Canada will have an eight-digit Drug Identification Number
(DIN), Natural Product Number (NPN) or Homeopathic Drug Number (DIN-HM).
Health Canada’s Actions in Addressing Products Making False or Misleading
Claims
Health Canada has followed up and taken action on numerous cases regarding health
products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 identified through
proactive monitoring of online sites or complaints received.
Companies have been sent compliance letters and directed to immediately stop selling
such products and to remove references to these products from their websites. Health
Canada has been actively monitoring websites and working with major online retailers
to ensure products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 are removed
from their sites.
On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory to warn Canadians about
the risks associated with products making false and misleading claims related to
COVID-19. Canadians were encouraged to report any information on potential false and
misleading advertising or the sale of products that have not been approved by Health
Canada. To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a table which lists
products and corresponding companies or advertising media found to engage in non-
compliant marketing, which are currently under review or have been resolved. Health
Canada took compliance and enforcement actions against these organizations, as
required. This list is updated bi-weekly.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of potential non-compliance with the Food
and Drugs Act or its associated regulations, it takes steps to confirm whether non-
compliance has occurred and takes action based on the risk to the health of Canadians.
A number of compliance and enforcement options are available to manage the risk
posed to public health and safety by false or misleading claims related COVID-19
including on site inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public communications or
product seizures. Recently, Health Canada inspectors, in collaboration with the RCMP,
seized over 1500 unapproved kits from a resident in British Columbia, who had acquired
and sold some of them online without authorization. Health Canada determined that
these kits were not authorized for sale in Canada, meaning that the Department has not
evaluated their safety and effectiveness. In certain circumstances, when the regulatory
enforcement responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance Health Canada may
also refer its findings to the Public Prosecution Service of Canada for potential
prosecution.
The Department will continue to monitor and take action as needed to ensure that
health products making false and misleading claims to diagnose, prevent, treat, or cure
COVID-19 are removed from the market.
HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCE CAPACITY DURING COVID 19
SYNOPSIS
 Since early March, PTs have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms that allow
experienced health care professionals who are not currently practicing to be
deployed in the COVID-19 response. While health human resource (HHR)
capacity to respond to acute care needs appears to be sufficient for now, the
disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on long-term care facilities has created a
significant HHR challenge for some jurisdictions in a vulnerable population group.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of healthcare
providers, particularly in long-term care homes?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada has identified over
53,000 volunteers through a national volunteer
recruitment campaign. Over 6,000 of these volunteers
have expertise in long-term care support work.
 More than 24,000 referrals from the inventory have
been shared with provinces and territories to provide
surge capacity, primarily for contact tracing and
support for long-term care facilities.
 We continue to work with provinces to identify their
needs and to provide surge capacity in key areas. We
are also working with the Canadian Red Cross to
support the coordination and training of volunteers,
including in Quebec.
 When requested by provinces and territories, the
Government of Canada has also sent members of the
Canadian Armed Forces as surge support to long-
term care facilities.
 The Government of Canada remains committed to
working with provinces and territories and taking the
necessary actions to protect the health and safety of
Canadians during this pandemic.
BACKGROUND
Health is a shared responsibility between federal, provincial, and territorial
governments. Provinces and territories (PTs) are responsible for the administration and
delivery of health care and the management of their health workforces.
Provincial and Territorial Efforts to Increase HHR Supply
Since early March, PTs have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms that allow
experienced health care professionals who are not currently practicing to be deployed in
the COVID-19 response. This included physician and nurse retirees, students and some
internationally educated health professionals.
Government of Canada National Recruitment Campaign
On April 2, as part of a comprehensive response to COVID-19, the Government of
Canada created a virtual inventory for the mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide
surge capacity in key areas. As needs evolve, supports will be identified for other areas
requiring assistance. The Government of Canada is working the Canadian Red Cross
(CRC) to respond to requests for assistance through the inventory, with CRC providing
PTs with support for security and medical verifications, and training of volunteers.
To date the PSC’s National Recruitment Campaign has provided contact referrals to the
majority of jurisdictions who have made requests for contact tracing including: PE (183),
NS (1,302 referrals), SK (992 referrals), NWT (50 referrals), QC (1,353 referrals), and
ON (21,033 referrals), while MB and NU’s requests are still pending.
Some of the requests targeted specific expertise or skill sets in a particular job category.
For example, QC, NS, SK and NWT’s have placed requests seeking volunteers with
PSW experience, while ON has requested referrals for physicians and nurses. The
majority of requests however, were broader in scope, seeking contact lists of all
volunteers available. To date, no referrals have been hired.
Impacts of COVID-19 on Long-term Care (LTC) HHR
LTC facilities are facing pre-existing HHR challenges. For example, personal support
workers (PSWs) who provide the majority of hands-on care are an unregulated
workforce and characterized by low pay, poor benefits, and part-time work. These
challenges plus increased pressures due to the pandemic have led to difficulty in
maintaining staff to resident ratios. Workers with part-time positions may also work at
multiple sites, which may lead to them being a source of infection.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
SYNOPSIS
Recent figures from the Public Health Agency of Canada show that 82% of all COVID-
19 deaths in the country are connected to long-term care and seniors’ residences; some
jurisdictions have been particularly hard-hit (e.g. Quebec, Ontario, Nova Scotia).
On May 26 and 27, the provinces of Ontario and Quebec each released a Canadian
Armed Forces report that outlined key findings about the long-term care homes at which
the military has been assisting to maintain staffing levels and help with infection control
and prevention. Both reports detail serious concerns around infection prevention, safety,
staffing and levels of care.
On June 5, the day following the weekly First Ministers’ Conference Call, the Prime
Minister announced the Government is ready work on a safe restart agreement with
PTs and to contribute $14 billion to cover the next critical six to eight months. Safe
restart funding would include support for seniors and vulnerable populations and
provide additional personal protective equipment for healthcare workers on the
frontlines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What actions is the federal government taking to support provinces and territories in
addressing major issues in long-term care facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking the
necessary actions to continue to protect the health and
safety of all Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic.
 In particular, the federal government is taking a number of
steps to respond to the significant challenges faced by long-
term care facilities across the country.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided infection
prevention and control guidance to help prevent COVID-
19 infections among residents and workers in long-term care
and assisted-living facilities, as well as in home care,
including the appropriate use of personal protective
equipment.
 The Government of Canada continues to facilitate
procurement of personal protective equipment to be
used across the health care system, including in long-term
care facilities.
 The military continues to work with all levels of government,
including the governments of Quebec and Ontario, in the
fight against COVID-19. I would like to express my gratitude
to them for the tremendous work they have been doing.
 Up to $3 billion in federal funding will be provided in support
to provinces and territories to increase the wages of low-
income essential workers, which can include front line
workers in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
 Our Government recently announced we are ready to
contribute $14 billion as part of a safe restart agreement
with provinces and territories to support seniors and our
most vulnerable populations.
 We will continue working in close collaboration with
provincial and territorial governments in order to address the
crisis in long-term care institutions.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE GUIDANCE …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance on infection
prevention and control in long-term care facilities is designed
to limit the possibility of introducing COVID-19 into these
facilities by recommending that only those who are essential
to the care of residents can enter the facility.
 Staff in long-term care facilities are encouraged to take steps
to protect the residents by monitoring their health twice a
day, following routine infection control practices and wearing
a mask for the duration of their shifts.
 This guidance also recommends that staff restrict their work
to only one facility in order to prevent transmitting COVID-19
between facilities.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT…
 Ensuring health care workers have access to adequate
personal protective equipment and training has been a key
focus for our collective efforts over the past few months.
 The Government of Canada is working to ensure healthcare
workers have the personal protective equipment and medical
supplies they need. We are doing this through collaborative
bulk procurement with the provinces and territories, building
domestic production capacity, and identifying potential
alternatives and ways to extend product life.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada
have worked with provinces and territories to identify needs
of personal protective equipment in long-term care facilities
and seniors’ residences.
 While we have seen improvements in recent weeks, we
need to continue our efforts.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL VOLUNTEER RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN …
 The Government of Canada is supporting provinces and
territories by facilitating an inventory for recruitment and
mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in
the following key areas:
- Case tracking and contact tracing;
- Health system surge capacity; and
- Case data collection and reporting.
 When the recruitment campaign ended on April 24, there
were 53,769 volunteers registered in the inventory from
which provincial and territorial governments can draw upon
as needed.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL SUPPORT TO LONG-TERM CARE FACILITIES …
 The situation in long-term care facilities is not something any
Canadian wants to see to continue. We all agree that the
status quo is not an option.
 While long-term care is primarily a provincial / territorial
responsibility, the Government of Canada will continue to
work in collaboration with provinces and territories.
 Our Government recently offered $14 billion in restart
funding, which includes support to improve the situation in
long-term care facilities.
 We will seek to understand and help to support the
immediate needs in order to ensure that long-term care
residents have a dignified life and to increase the resilience
of long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
Ontario Long-Term Care Association Report:
According to the Ontario Long-Term Care Association, preliminary data shows that
three and four-bed rooms in older buildings were hardest hit among the 30% of long-
term care facilities that have experienced outbreaks in Ontario. The Ontario Long-Term
Care Association is calling on the Government of Canada to provide immediate support
to provinces by increasing procurement of personal protective equipment and access to
rapid testing, addressing workforce issues through a national human resources
strategy, and providing capital investment to build and redevelop long-term care homes
and create immediate solutions to help distancing in existing homes.
Government of Canada Actions:
Seniors are at an increased risk of more severe outcomes from COVID-19. Much like
populations in nursing homes in other countries, residents in Canada’s long-term care
homes are frail, have multiple chronic diseases, and require significant support with the
activities of daily living.
While long-term care is primarily a provincial and territorial responsibility, the federal
government is taking a number of steps to respond to the significant challenges faced
by long-term care facilities across the country in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
To help manage the spread of the virus and its impacts, the Chief Public Health Officer
of Canada worked together with provincial and territorial Chief Public Health Officers to
prepare guidance documents on the prevention and control of COVID-19 in long-term
care facilities, as well as in home care settings. These documents were released on
April 13 and April 24 respectively, and are available on the Government of Canada’s
website. Links are below:
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-
coronavirus-infection/prevent-control-covid-19-long-term-care-homes.html
https://www.canada.ca/en/public-health/services/diseases/2019-novel-
coronavirus-infection/health-professionals/infection-prevention-control-covid-19-
interim-guidance-home-care-settings.html.
Given the rates of illness and death in long-term care facilities, the federal government
is continuing to work with provinces and territories to better understand the gaps related
to personal protective equipment. In addition to recent survey of provinces and
territoires, the Government of Canada will soon launch a more comprehensive survey of
personal protective equipment allocation in long-term care facilities.
On April 5, the Government of Canada announced a National Recruitment Campaign to
seek volunteers to assist with case tracking and contact tracing, case data collection
and reporting; and health system surge capacity through building an inventory.
Information on the campaign was available online at https://www.canada.ca/en/public-
service-commission/national-covid-19-recruitment-campaign-we-need-you.html. The
campaign closed on April 24, The federal government is also working with the Canadian
Red Cross to support the coordination and training of volunteers.
The federal government has also recognized the important work done by health care
workers in long-term care facilities and has taken steps to make sure that its response
to the COVID-19 crisis addresses their needs. On May 7, the Prime Minister announced
that up to $3 billion in federal funding will be provided in support to provinces and
territories to increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which can include
front line workers in hospitals and long-term care facilities.
COVID-19 MEDICAL DEVICE AUTHORIZATIONS
SYNOPSIS
 As an emergency public health measure, the Interim Order for Medical Devices
has allowed expedited access to COVID-19-related medical devices in Canada
since March 18, 2020. Health Canada has also expedited the process for issuing
Medical Devices Establishment Licences in the fight against COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the devices
needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada will continue to leverage all regulatory tools
to ensure Canadians have access to safe and effective
health products to fight COVID-19.
 To date, we have authorized 243 COVID-19 medical devices
including:
- 23 testing devices; and
- 220 devices including personal protective equipment,
decontamination devices for N95 respirators,
ventilators, reagents, and swabs.
 A medical device is authorized after Health Canada
completes a scientific assessment, ensuring that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness.
 Health Canada also continues to expedite applications for
medical device establishment licences for products such as
masks, gowns, respirators and ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on mobilizing manufacturing capacity
 Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders who are
scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to
provide much needed tests or medical supplies.
 Across the federal government, we are mobilizing industry
and providing support for research, market approval,
manufacturing and supply.
 We are working closely with provinces and territories to
ensure that they have the medical devices that they need.
IF PRESSED … on N95 respirators decontamination
 Extending the use of personal protective equipment through
decontamination is one way of helping Canada meet supply
needs.
 Health Canada is looking at ways to safely and effectively
decontaminate single use N95 respirators.
 Health Canada has authorized devices to decontaminate
N95 respirators under the Interim Order for Medical Devices.
IF PRESSED … on issue with KN95 respirators filtration performance and US FDA
actions
 On May 7, US FDA issued a revised guidance indicating that
certain respirators from China may not provide adequate
respiratory protection.
 Health Canada will ensure that any companies that have
distributed impacted products in Canada take appropriate
action to stop selling these respirators, notify customers and
relabel existing stock as “face masks” instead of
“respirators”.
 Should additional safety concerns be identified, Health
Canada will take appropriate action and inform Canadians,
as necessary.
IF PRESSED … on investigational testing and special access
 As of June 5, Health Canada has authorized:
- four investigational testing authorizations, and four
applications are under review; and
- 38 Special Access Program applications for COVID-19
test kits, ultrasonic systems, endotracheal tubes and
ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on exceptional import and sale of COVID-19 devices
 The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and
Foods for a Special Dietary Purposes helps prevent or
alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19.
 Under this IO, as of June 5, Health Canada has added 102
medical devices to the List of Medical Devices for
Exceptional Import and Sale.
 Importers with medical device establishment licences can
import these medical devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
BACKGROUND
Streamlined regulatory processes
The Interim Order for medical devices signed on March 18, 2020, allows expedited
access to COVID-19-related medical devices, including diagnostic test kits. Health
Canada can also consider approvals granted by foreign regulatory authorities in
deciding whether to approve an application for the importation or sale of COVID-19-
related medical devices. Use of existing devices, where the approved, intended use was
not originally COVID-19-related, can also be expanded under this Interim Order.
The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in relation to COVID-19 helps prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
directly or indirectly related to COVID-19. Under the Interim Order, the Minister can
permit the exceptional importation and sale of products that do not fully comply with
Canadian requirements, but are manufactured according to comparable standards.
In recent weeks we have:
• addressed shortages by permitting the importation and sale of medical devices
that are not approved in Canada, subject to certain requirements;
• facilitated access to products that may not fully meet current regulatory
requirements, such as bilingual labelling, including personal protective equipment
(such as masks and gowns), swabs, hand sanitizers, and hard-surface
disinfectants
• amended the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent Act to support efforts to help
prevent and alleviate shortages.
Health Canada continues to monitor and assess the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
products allowed for import and sale under these special measures.
Decontamination of N95 respirators
Health Canada has authorized several decontamination systems: Stryker’s Sterizone
VP4 Sterilize,; ASP’s Sterrad sterilization systems, Cleanworks’s Clean Flow Healthcare
Mini sterilizer; and Ecolab’s Bioquell. The Department continues to evaluate new
decontamination method applications submitted under the Interim Order for medical
devices. A series of webinars was held with provincial and territorial healthcare
partners, industry and healthcare professionals to provide information and guidance on
the decontamination and re-use of N95 respirators.
INTERSECTION OF COVID-19 AND SUBTANCES USE
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating a number of long-standing challenges
regarding substance use and the overdose crisis. People who use drugs are
currently facing additional barriers to accessing health and social services,
increasing the risk of unsafe use and overdose, as well as disease spread and
mortality.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to support people who use drugs
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES:
 During the pandemic, we must not forget that many regions of the
country continue to struggle with historic rates of drug overdose and
associated harms. Tragically, in many communities, the pandemic is
compounding a deadly and ongoing public health crisis of opioid
overdose and death.
 The Government is very concerned that people who use drugs are at
increased risk of COVID-19. This is due to risks that come with
difficulties to physically distance; increased likelihood of underlying
health conditions; and increased risks of overdose when using drugs
alone.
 In response, the Government has taken important measures to
enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use as a part of its response to
the pandemic. We have made it easier for people with substance use
disorder to access the medications they need, such as those
necessary for opioid agonist treatment, like Suboxone and
methadone. We have also made it easier for overdose prevention
sites to be rapidly established in temporary community shelters.
 Health Canada is also supporting community-based projects funded
under the Substance Use and Addictions Program in order to allow
for funds to be re-directed to support immediate COVID-19 needs in
their communities.
 In addition, my department is working to identify additional areas
where federal exemptions, national guidelines or funding
opportunities could help mitigate the impacts of the dual public health
crises of COVID-19 and opioid-related overdose and death. By
providing for these new measures, vulnerable people will be better
able to get the supports they need, while respecting public health
directives for physical distancing and self-isolation.
 Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the
Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) six
national guidance documents are being developed to address the
specific needs of people who use drugs, service providers, and
decision makers in relation to the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH FUNDING
 To ensure that COVID-19 responses are based on the latest
evidence, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research also launched
a $2 million funding opportunity to support rapid knowledge synthesis
of current evidence on mental health and substance use. Results
from this research will provide timely, high quality, and relevant
evidence to decision makers at municipal, provincial, territorial, and
federal levels.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-
19 IN COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE IS CHRONIC OVERCROWDING,
INCLUDING A SHORTAGE OF HOUSING
 We understand the unique challenges associated with containing the
spread and protecting homeless Canadians from COVID-19.
 On April 6, 2020, we proactively took steps to make it easier for
overdose prevention sites to be rapidly established in temporary
community shelters for vulnerable individuals (e.g., homeless/housing
unstable) exposed to COVID-19, and to allow existing supervised
consumption site operators to adjust their services to support physical
distancing and respect public health directives.
 We have also developed a set of resources to help frontline service
providers understand and comply with existing regulations associated
with medications for substance use disorder or as a safer,
pharmaceutical grade alternative to the street supply.
 These measures will not only make it easier for people who are
staying at shelters to respect public health directives to distance and
isolate, they will also protect them from the risks and harms of
overdose.
 These efforts will help ensure vulnerable Canadians have access to
the health services they need during the serious health threat posed
by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL INVESTMENT TO ADDRESS ISSUES AT
INTERSECTION OF SUBSTANCE USE AND COVID-19
 Budget 2019 committed to address persistent gaps in harm reduction
and support communities in their response to problematic substance
use.
 Recent investments made through Health Canada’s Substance Use
and Addictions Program are helping to relieve some of the
extraordinary stresses placed on people, communities and health
organizations struggling to deal with the dual demands of overdose
crisis harm reduction and pandemic response.
 In February of this year, our Government announced funding of over
$32 million over five years to support 26 projects across the country
that will address a range of harm reduction and treatment needs,
including:
o $10 million to support 13 projects relating to Harm Reduction,
Community-led and Front Line Initiatives;
o $16 million in support of 5 projects aimed at Increasing Access
to Pharmaceutical-Grade Medications (also referred to as “safe
supply”); and,
o $6 million to support 8 projects aimed at finding Approaches to
Problematic Methamphetamine Use.
BACKGROUND
In March, 2020, jointly with the provinces and territories, the Government of Canada released
updated data indicating that 14,700 Canadians lost their lives between January 2016 and
September 2019 to apparent opioid-related overdoses.
In many regions of the country, the COVID – 19 pandemic is compounding ongoing public health crisis
related to high rates of opioid overdose and deaths as well as acute substance use harms. These crises
are exacerbated in communities where there is chronic overcrowding, including a shortage of housing or
other shelters. At the intersection of these public health crises, people who use drugs (PWUD) are
experiencing a number of increased risks:
• Mortality due to COVID-19 given higher prevalence of underlying health conditions (respiratory
illnesses, immune comprised, etc)
• Spread of COVID-19 due to multiple close contacts, including in the community to support drug-
seeking behaviours and/or within primary care system for harm reduction/treatment
• Other severe health risks such as drug withdrawal for those who must self-isolate or quarantine
• Overdose and other harms related to an increasingly toxic illicit supply
Substance use, mental health, and pain and are inter-connected and it is often challenging to manage
one without attending to the others. Many people who live with pain are coping with underlying health
conditions or receiving pain treatments (ongoing use of opioids and other medications, steroid injections
used in pain interventions), which are immune suppressing, placing people living with pain at higher risk
of contracting and experiencing severe illness due to COVID-19. Public health measures required to
respond to the pandemic have also increased the risk of social isolation, mental illness, and suicidality,
which are already prevalent among people with chronic pain. Health and social services that help
maintain function and keep disability at bay, such as psychological supports, physical therapies, and self-
management options are more difficult to access. Canadians living with pain are therefore reporting
decreased functional capacity and quality of life, fear and anxiety, cancellations of needed in-person care,
surgeries and diagnostics, and drug shortages of certain pain medications (i.e., opioids,
hydroxychloroquine).
Federal actions to date on this issues have been:
Increasing the reach of health system, including enabling Opioid Agonist Treatment (OAT)
Issued on March 19, 2020 exemptions that, if permitted within the applicable provincial/territorial scopes
of practice: permit pharmacists to extend and/or transfer prescriptions; permit prescribers to issue verbal
orders to extend or refill a prescription; and permit pharmacy employees to deliver prescriptions of
controlled substances to patient’s location. These measures facilitate self-isolation or quarantine to
prevent the spread of COVID-19.
 Fully implemented in BC, AB, SK, ON, QC, NB, NS; Partially implemented (no verbal
prescriptions) in PEI, NL; Being considered in MB, YU, NU; No information NWT
Flexible access to harm reduction services
Issued on April 6, 2020 class exemptions for all provinces and territories, for a duration of 6 months,
allowing them to modify the operations of existing supervised consumption sites and establish new
temporary spaces for the safe consumption of drugs, without having to apply to Health Canada. This
saves valuable time for local officials who want to establish temporary overdose prevention services
within shelters or other temporary sites to house homeless or housing unstable people.
 No formal notice of implementation in any provinces to date, however Health
Canada has requested to be informed if provinces implement. We have not
received formal notification.
Disseminating information and guidance
Developed and disseminated new “tool kit”, on May 5, 2020, to support service provides and PWUD to
socially distance and self-isolate:
 Providing an easy-to-understand summary of the various exemptions now in place for health
care practitioners (HCP) and allied HCP which facilitate flexible models of care during the
pandemic;
 Consolidating prescribing and practice guidelines for HCP to foster an increase in
prescribing of medications to address symptoms of withdrawal experienced by PWUD,
including Suboxone, methadone and medications considered “safer supply” (hydrophone,
prescription grade heroin); and
 Assisting PWUD, harm reduction advocacy groups and families who support PWUD to
understand how to effectively navigate the changing healthcare environment to secure
medications and treatment supports as well as educate on harm reduction measures.
Increasing access to mental health supports, including those for problematic substance use, and provide
advice for overall well-being during the pandemic to reduce risk of overdose death and prevent spread of
COVID-19
Leveraging the existing mental health as well as crisis lines and services, including the Federal COVID-19
– Mental Health and Substance Use Portal, to provide support for substance use and people
experiencing chronic pain, including referrals to community services.
Two of the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) six national guidance documents
are now available (telemedicine for addiction services; supervised consumption and safer supply in
emergency shelters). The other four will be available mid-June (harm-reduction worker safety; supporting
recovery services; acute care services for PWUD; supporting patients to self-isolate).
HEALTH PLAN TO SUPPORT RESTARTING THE ECONOMY
SYNOPSIS
 Canada, along with Provinces and Territories, has taken decisive measures to
slow and contain the spread of COVID-19 infections. These strong public health
measures have had a major impact on Canada’s economy.
 Epidemiological data now suggests that some jurisdictions may be past their
peaks and planning is underway to safely restore economic activity while
protecting the health of Canadians.
 Until there is a vaccine or effective treatment, strong measures must be in place
for this new normal phase of living with COVID-19 to control future waves or
outbreaks and to protect both citizens and economies across the country.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the government doing to allow Canadians to return back to normal?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is working in collaboration with provinces
and territories on a coordinated approach to gradually restart
the economy while protecting the health and safety of all
Canadians.
 On April 28th, the federal, provincial and territorial
governments released a set of common principles, criteria,
and measures to help guide governments as they restart,
economic activity, based on a public health approach.
 First Ministers acknowledged the importance of restarting
the economy through a gradual and phased approach with
specific focus on protecting health of Canadians; protecting
high-risk groups; ensuring public health capacity remains
strong and supporting a broad range of economic sectors.
 Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, all orders of
government have been working together to slow and contain
the spread of virus.
 As the first wave of virus’ activity passes, provinces and
territories will move at their own pace to safely restore
economic activities within their jurisdictions, while protecting
the health of Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
 The specific criteria and thresholds underpinning our health
plan have been developed by the Chief Public Health Officer
working in consultation with her colleagues from across the
country as part of the Special Advisory Committee.
BACKGROUND
Since the onset of the COVID-19 epidemic in Canada, the federal government has been
working closely with PT governments to manage the epidemic. Many wide-ranging
public health measures have been taken, which has resulted in a reduced and delayed
peak of infections. Epidemiological evidence suggests that some jurisdictions are
beyond their initial peak of infections leading the way for planning to safely restore
economic activity, while protecting the health of Canadians.
Until there is a vaccine or effective treatment, strong and continued FPT collaboration
will be required. PT governments will make decisions suited to their jurisdictions,
geography and disease activity, but these decisions will be informed by experiences in
other countries in Asia, Europe, and around the world – particularly those who had
outbreaks earlier than Canada and who have achieved demonstrable successes. A
shared key objective by all PTs is to minimize the risk of another wave of COVID-19 that
forces governments to reimpose severe restrictions, further damaging the social and
economic fabric of communities.
FPT plans to gradually lift restrictions will have a shared focus on:
 Protecting the health of Canadians;
 Easing restrictions gradually;
 Protecting high risk groups (e.g. those vulnerable due to age, protecting high-risk
groups (e.g., those vulnerable due to age, underlying health
conditions, remote location, close living spaces and temporary or unstable living
spaces);
 Ensuring our public health capacity remains strong to prepare for and respond to
any
future waves of the pandemic, including through enhanced testing and contact
tracing; and,
 Supporting a broad range of economic sectors.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
 On March 18, 2020, the Minister of Health approved an Interim Order (IO) to
expedite the review of medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the testing
devices needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Early diagnosis is critical to slowing and reducing the spread
of COVID-19 in Canada.
 The Government of Canada is ensuring quicker and more
flexible approval to import and sell medical devices that are
necessary for Canada’s response to COVID-19. This
includes test kits.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada reviewers to ensure that it is
supported by evidence showing it meets standards for safety
and effectiveness.
 Health Canada has authorized 23 test kits through an
expedited regulatory review process under the Interim Order
for medical devices issued on March 18, 2020.
 Only tests authorized by Health Canada can be imported or
sold in Canada. Unauthorized tests may not produce
accurate results, leading to potential misdiagnosis.
IF PRESSED… on authorization for serological tests:
 Health Canada has authorized 20 nucleic acid-based tests
and three serological tests as of June 5.
 Nucleic acid based testing diagnoses COVID-19 infection
and detects the virus itself. Public health laboratories across
Canada and worldwide use it to detect active infections of
COVID-19.
 Following priority scientific review, Health Canada has now
authorized the sale of three serological tests - the DiaSorin
LIAISON® test (May 12), the Abbott ARCHITECT SARS-
CoV-2 IgG Assay (May 14) and the Roche Elecsys Anti-
Sars-Cov-2 (June 5).
 Serologic tests are not used to diagnose COVID-19. They
detect antibodies developed against the virus and could be
useful in assessing the extent of COVID-19 spread in the
population.
 The US FDA has faced criticism on allowing the marketing of
ineffective serological tests. They announced on April 30th a
new "umbrella" pathway for serology tests under which these
tests can be submitted for validation by an interagency
testing group.
 My department is working with leading regulators and world-
renowned national laboratories to identify serological tests
that will produce accurate and reliable results.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of serological tests
 Following priority scientific review, Health Canada has now
authorized the sale of three serological tests - the DiaSorin
LIAISON® test (authorized May 12), the Abbott ARCHITECT
SARS-CoV-2 IgG Assay (authorized May 14) and the Roche
Elecsys Anti-Sars-Cov-2 (authorized June 5).
 These both tests are authorized to detect antibodies specific
to the virus. Serological tests provide evidence of a previous
exposure to the virus that causes COVID-19 by testing for
the presence of antibodies.
 A condition is applied to the authorization issued to serology-
based tests to monitor the ability of the test to perform as
intended once in use by the Canadian health care system.
 Serology-based tests will play a key role in determining the
degree/extent of exposure to the virus though sero-
surveillance studies.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of the test kits:
 Health Canada has maintained a science-informed approach
to managing the pandemic.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada to ensure that it is supported
by evidence showing it meets standards for safety and
effectiveness.
 As with all medical devices, Health Canada will assess and
monitor the safety and effectiveness of the tests once they
are on the market.
IF PRESSED… on the accuracy of Spartan test kits:
 Health Canada completed its scientific review to ensure that
the device was supported by evidence that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness. The scientific
review relied on analytical data from laboratory studies
provided by the company, and took into consideration that
further clinical validation would be carried out by public
health laboratories in order to determine performance in
clinical settings.
 Clinical trials are key in identifying any performance issues
that could not have been identified in a laboratory setting.
The report identified that while the device performed in a
laboratory setting, as per manufacturer specifications, there
were performance issues identified in the clinical trial.
 It’s important to note that the company informed the
Department that none of the tests were used for diagnosis
purposes.
IF PRESSED… on fraudulent test kits:
 Health Canada has identified companies engaging in non-
compliant advertising activities associated with COVID-19
and unauthorized products including test kits.
 In these cases, Health Canada works to verify compliance
and will take action should any non-compliance be identified.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing
the spread of the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for
clinical care and public health management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the
safety, effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an
application through the IO pathway are waived.
The majority of submissions received by Health Canada are for two types of testing
devices:
1. nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the virus)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based
testing to reliably diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. The review
of diagnostic tests using nucleic acid technology has been prioritized to increase the
number of tests available in Canada to detect active infections of COVID-19.
2. serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not
aware of a serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are
not appropriate for early diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection
to develop antibodies.
On May 12, Health Canada issued the first authorization for the sale of a serological test
in Canada under the Interim Order process. On May 14, an additional serological test
was authorized for sale in Canada under the Interim Order process. The DiaSorin
LIAISON® test, the Abbott ARCHITECT SARS-CoV-2 IgG Assay and the Roche
Elecsys Anti-Sars-Cov-2 are authorized to detect antibodies specific to the SARS-CoV-
2 virus. They are not authorized for diagnosis but rather theyi provides evidence of a
previous exposure to the SARS-CoV-2 virus. Health Canada's position regarding
serological assays is in line with the World Health Organization's (WHO) view that
serological assays will play an important role in research and surveillance but are not
currently recommended for case detection. Serological tests will play an important role
in an overall testing strategy for Canada as they will provide evidence in assessing the
true extent of COVID-19 in the general population.
Health Canada collaborates with the National Microbiology Laboratory and provincial
public health laboratory partners and will leverage the studies of immune responses and
serological technologies underway in Canada and internationally. The uses for which
serological technologies are authorized will depend on the type of evidence that Health
Canada receives from the manufacturer and from these studies.
ACCESS TO DRUGS AND VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
medical system, and there is a need for drugs and vaccines to support the
response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to drugs and
vaccines for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history. Health Canada is proactively
doing all it can to respond to the pandemic in its role
as a health product regulator.
 At this time, there are no drugs or vaccines that have
been proven safe and effective for the treatment or
prevention of COVID-19. Several new promising
therapies are in development, and existing drugs are
being assessed for this potential.
 As of June 1, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 38
clinical trials for treatments targeting COVID-19
including the first clinical trial in Canada for a vaccine
specifically developed to prevent COVID-19. An up-
to-date list of all these trials is available on Health
Canada’s website.
 Health Canada is expediting the review of all drugs
and vaccines to address COVID-19. Further, on May
23, 2020, we introduced an Interim Order that makes
clinical trials for COVID-19-related drugs and medical
devices more flexible for sponsors and more
accessible to Canadians. We are taking these actions
while continuing to ensure that these products are
safe, effective and of high quality.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE AVAILABILITY
 Health Canada is closely monitoring global vaccine
development and is in active discussions with several
vaccine manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory
and scientific advice for vaccine trials that may launch in
Canada.
 On May 15, 2020, Health Canada approved the first clinical
trial for a vaccine targeted against the virus that causes
COVID-19. The safety and optimal dose for the CanSino
vaccine will be assessed before it is used in larger groups of
volunteers. Health Canada will monitor the progress of this
trial closely.
 Earlier this month, Health Canada also approved another
clinical trial using a vaccine known as BCG vaccine, which
may have a role in reducing the severity of COVID-19.
 While recognizing the urgent need for a vaccine, Health
Canada will require all products to demonstrate a high level
of safety, efficacy and quality before coming to the Canadian
market.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
 Since no drugs have yet been proven safe and efficacious
for COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that any
potential treatments for this disease be investigated through
clinical trials. The Department is working hard to facilitate
and expedite as many of clinical trials for COVID-19 in
Canada as possible, without compromising the quality
standard of these trials.
 On May 23, 2020, I approved an Interim Order, which
supports clinical trials investigating new products, or
repurposing marketed products, for COVID-19. Among its
benefits, the Interim Order reduces the administrative burden
for sponsors without compromising the safety of participants,
and makes it easier to set up trials across Canada to
facilitate access.
 Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new drugs
are safe and effective in humans. Clinical trials ensure the
quality of the study, protection of the patient, and the proper
collection and retention of outcomes. It is the best
mechanism to provide trial volunteers access to new drugs
before they are approved.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL DRUG TREATMENTS
 At present, there is insufficient evidence to recommend any
specific anti-COVID-19 treatment for patients outside of
clinical trials.
 Results from large, well-designed studies are needed to
make any conclusions on the safety and efficacy of any
drugs or vaccines.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
 Health Canada has been closely monitoring developments
for potential treatments for COVID-19, including the
experimental drug remdesivir. Some early clinical trial
evidence coming from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in the US suggests that it may
help patients to recover sooner.
 Health Canada is aware that the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the Japanese Ministry of Health, Labour
and Welfare have given emergency authorization for
remdesivir. We are working collaboratively with our
international counterparts and share scientific information
and align requirements for safety and efficacy where
possible to expedite the review process.
 Remdesivir is still considered an experimental therapy. To
date, Health Canada has approved two clinical trials for
remdesivir in the context of COVID-19 in Canada.
 Remdesevir has also been accessed on a case-by-case
basis through Health Canada’s Special Access Program
(SAP), which provides emergency access to medications for
serious or life-threatening conditions.
IF PRESSED ON CHLOROQUINE AND HYDROXYCHLOROQUINE
 Hydroxychloroquine is being used to treat patients with
COVID-19 within and outside clinical trials, with mixed
results being reported so far.
 Since the use of this medication to treat COVID-19 is still
investigational, Health Canada recommends that healthcare
practitioners prescribe it through a clinical trial. Our
regulations ensure that authorized clinical trials are subject
to strict requirements to protect the health and safety of
participants.
 Health Canada communicated with all clinical trial sponsors
following the Lancet publication, which has now been
retracted. While no safety concerns have been identified,
additional safety measures are being implemented in some
trials where appropriate.
 Health Canada will continue to closely monitor the safety
and effectiveness of hydroxychloroquine and other drugs
used in the treatment of COVID-19, and will take appropriate
and timely action, including informing Canadians if and when
any new health risks are identified.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with the US Food and Drug Administration, the
European Medicines Agency, and the World Health
Organization, amongst others, to share information and to
raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for vaccines and treatments. The objective is to
work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to
stay informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the
health product industry to proactively identify, track and
provide support to sponsors of clinical trials for vaccines and
treatments for COVID-19.
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health
professionals and Canadians are looking for the latest
information about health products for COVID-19. The
department has created a new website for the health product
industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval
and who to contact for questions. We are also making sure
information relevant to health professionals and Canadians
is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON UNAPPROVED PRODUCTS
 The most appropriate way to determine what treatments may
be effective for COVID-19 is through properly designed and
conducted clinical trials. Health Canada is expediting the
review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food
and Drugs Act and the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and
provide the Government with additional powers.
The amendments will:
 help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
 seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for
Canadians; and
 allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is
needed to respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered
in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may
not fully meet some of the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act —
such as packaging requirements.
Mobilizing manufacturing capacity
Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders in other sectors of our economy,
many of which are scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to provide much
needed tests or medical supplies. We are taking a whole-of-government approach to
mobilize industry, providing them with information and support for research, market
approval, manufacturing and supply.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new
website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory
approval and who to contact for questions. Information relevant to health professionals
and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials, potential
diagnostic tests, treatments and vaccines related to COVID-19.
Clinical Trials
Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials
are conducted to determine whether new drugs, diagnostics or treatments are both safe
and effective in human beings. Several existing drugs have been repurposed to assess
their potential in treating or preventing COVID-19, while other new drugs are under
development. Since no drug treatments have been proven safe and efficacious for
COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that any treatments be investigated in clinical
trials.
Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15
days. As of June 1, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 38 clinical trials for treatments
targeting COVID-19, most of which are repurposing existing drugs.
Until a vaccine or drug is available on the Canadian market, another option for access is
Health Canada's Special Access Program. This Program is available to practitioners
requiring access to unapproved drugs that could be used in the treatment of the
infection. Our goal is to ensure that Canada is prepared for whatever challenges come
our way.
Remdesivir
On May 1, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) granted emergency use authorization
(EUA) for the investigational antiviral remdesivir to treat COVID-19. According to their release,
“the authorization is temporary and does not take the place of the formal new drug application
submission, review and approval process. The EUA allows for the distribution and emergency
use of remdesivir only for the treatment of COVID-19; remdesivir remains an investigational
drug and has not been approved by FDA.”
On May 7, the Japanese Pharmaceutical and Medical Devices Agency (PMDA) followed the
FDA’s decision and granted remdesivir a Special Approval for Emergency for treatment of
COVID-19, with approval conditions to allow the access to the potential treatment of this
disease. Throughout this Special Approval for Emergency, the PMDA will continue to evaluate
its efficacy and safety and disseminate its information, while taking necessary actions
immediately.
Health Canada is in active discussions with Gilead Sciences Canada, Inc., the manufacturer of
remdesivir, to discuss an expedited regulatory pathway, including the rolling review flexibility
recently made available by Health Canada, and to provide advice on how best to file an
application seeking market access in Canada.
Hydroxychloroquine
Hydroxychloroquine is an antiparasitic drug approved in Canada for the treatment of
malaria, as well as autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis and lupus. Health
Canada has authorized clinical trials on the use of this drug in COVID-19, and is aware
of other ongoing clinical trials across the world.
Like all medications, hydroxychloroquine is associated with known risks, in this case
with cardiac arrhythmias. Since its use in treating COVID-19 is still experimental, Health
Canada recommends that healthcare practitioners prescribe it through a clinical trial,
which remains the best approach to determine whether it has a benefit in
preventing/treating COVID-19, and whether this benefit is greater than the risks
associated with its use.
The effect of hydroxychloroquine may differ depending on the intended usage
(prevention or treatment of mild disease, or treatment of serious disease in hospitalised
subjects). Between January 1 and May 21, 2020, Health Canada received one adverse
event report for hydroxychloroquine indicated for COVID-19. The patient experienced
rhabdomyolysis (breakdown of muscle tissue). As of the date of reporting, the patient
was recovering.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
 Management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health
care system?
KEY MESSAGES
 As a result of the unprecedented efforts taken so far to
implement public health measures across Canada and to
free up hospital capacity, Canada’s hospitals have not been
overwhelmed by COVID-19 as was initially feared.
 Provinces and territories moved early to free up capacity to
meet projected needs, such as cancelling elective surgeries
and transferring patients into other settings.
 As provinces and territories resume health care services,
such as elective surgeries, they are being cautious and
taking into account the need to maintain sufficient capacity to
meet demand from COVID-19 cases.
 Provinces and territories also continue to use publicly funded
virtual care services and online screening assessments to
take pressure off of emergency departments and supporting
physical distancing.
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5 million in
funding to develop, expand, and launch virtual care and
mental health tools to support provinces and territories in
their work.
 These investments will be used to, among other things,
create digital platforms and applications, improve access to
virtual mental health supports, and expand capacity to
deliver health care virtually, including projects to reach
vulnerable Canadians.
 Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have
worked with provinces and territories to model potential
pressure points related to the availability of beds and
ventilators, which in turn informed decisions on how to
allocate resources.
 We will continue to work with provinces and territories as
they implement their recovery plans to ensure health care
system capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health
system capacity
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model
demands on health systems under different modelling
scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national
level with support from the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
 At this time, provinces and territories have indicated that
they have sufficient hospital capacity to address COVID-19
for their epidemic control scenarios.
 But we know too that in our worst case scenario models, our
systems would be severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
 That is why governments are now thinking very carefully
about how best to de-escalate public health restrictions in a
way that will avoid future spikes in demand for health
services as we live with COVID-19 in the new normal.
BACKGROUND
 A committee of federal/provincial/territorial Deputy Ministers of Health is meeting
regularly to address challenges in responding to the pandemic and to share best
practices for the health care system response.
 This joint work builds on the work provinces and territories are already doing to put
into action the pandemic plans and procedures they prepared for use in times like
this, based on international experiences and guidance. Provinces and territories
have taken a range of actions to increase system capacity and meet projected
needs. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically reconfiguring spaces to
fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
 Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care
services and online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on
emergency departments and is also complementing physical distancing measures.
Provinces and territories are also running training exercises and simulations, and are
hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
 At the same time, because the surge of COVID-19 cases has been lower than
predicted by provinces to date, there is currently capacity sitting idle. Once the
services cancelled to free up extra capacity are reintroduced into the system – like
elective surgeries – addressing pent up demand for those services will pose its own
challenges for system capacity. Governments will share best practices for when and
how best to ease restrictions in a way that will best balance the needs of COVID-19
and non-COVID-19 patients.
ENGLISH-ONLY LABELLING ON CERTAIN IMPORTED HEALTH
PRODUCTS
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
health care system, and there is an urgent need for certain health products, such
as hand sanitizers and disinfectants, to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why is Health Canada temporarily allowing English-only labelling on some
imported health products during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of
Canadians, and the Department is doing everything possible
to facilitate access to products needed to slow the spread of
COVID-19.
 In light of the unprecedented demand and urgent need for
products to help limit the spread of COVID-19, Health
Canada is facilitating access, on a temporary basis, to
certain imported health products labelled in only one official
language to increase access to products that are in high
demand.
 Many global suppliers have indicated that they are labelling
products in English only to expedite production and that they
will ship only to countries that will accept English-only
labelling.
 Importers are now required to post bilingual label text on
their websites and provide sellers with a means to inform
consumers, at the point of sale, of where they can access
bilingual information on the product.
 All new importers of these products through the interim
measure are required to have bilingual labelling text
available to consumers. Previously authorized importers are
required to have bilingual label text available on their
websites and a means for sellers to inform consumers of this
website at the time of sale by June 8, 2020.
 All new Canadian manufacturers of these products must use
bilingual labelling. Canadian manufacturers of hand
sanitizers who are currently licensed and are using unilingual
labelling under the interim measure are required to move to
bilingual labelling by June 8, 2020.
 Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing
any non-compliance identified.
 Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular
supply stabilizes.
IF PRESSED…
Technical Grade Ethanol
 Health Canada is aware that there is a critical shortage of
pharmaceutical and food-grade ethanol for use in hand
sanitizers. To meet this shortage, we have temporarily
authorized the use of certain sources of technical-grade
ethanol in hand sanitizer products.
IF PRESSED…
Bilingual Language Requirements for Domestic and Imported Products
 Health Canada is focused on expediting review and approval
of hand sanitizers and disinfectants to address the COVID-
19 pandemic, while continuing to ensure that these products
are safe and effective for Canadians.
 All new importers of these products through the interim
measure must have bilingual labelling text available to
consumers. Importers previously authorized are required to
have bilingual label text available on their websites and a
means for sellers to inform consumers of this website at the
time of sale by June 8, 2020.
 All new Canadian manufacturers of these products must use
bilingual labelling. Canadian manufacturers of hand
sanitizers who are currently licensed and are using unilingual
labelling under the interim measure will be required to move
to bilingual labeling by June 8, 2020.
BACKGROUND
Interim measures
In March and April, 2020, Health Canada implemented a number of interim measures to
facilitate expedited access to products that do not fully meet regulatory requirements
(e.g., labelling) set out in regulations under the Food and Drugs Act. These measures
have enabled access to the Canadian marketplace, health care settings, and
commercial and industrial settings.
The interim policies include facilitating the importation of:
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are already authorized for sale in
Canada but are not fully compliant with Health Canada requirements (e.g.,
English-only labelling, different packaging from what was authorized); and
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are not authorized for sale in Canada,
but are authorized or registered in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory
frameworks and quality assurances.
Some of these products may have unilingual labelling, or labelling in English or French
and another language.
Importers of disinfectants and hand sanitizers are required to post bilingual labels on
their website and to provide sellers with a means to inform consumers, at the time of
sale, of the website where bilingual label text is posted. This could be made available
through a sticker applied directly to the products, or posters or signage with take-away
pamphlets at the point of sale.
Domestically, one of the specific requests from industry was a flexibility for small local
distilleries that did not have the capacity for bilingual labelling to be able to use
unilingual labelling in non-bilingual regions.
Given the increase in availability of hand sanitizers, domestic manufacturers of new
hand sanitizers require bilingual labelling on their products. Existing product licence
holders using unilingual labels under the interim measure are required to move to
bilingual labelling by June 8.
Health Canada acknowledges that it may take some time before bilingual labelling or
information directing consumers to the company’s website for bilingual content will
appear on retail shelves. Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing
any non-compliance identified.
Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular supply stabilizes.
Stakeholder Engagement
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the natural health product and
food industry to proactively identify, engage and provide support to manufactures,
packagers, labelers and/or importers of hand sanitizers and disinfectants in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Health Canada brought together industry partners to facilitate the supply of key
ingredients and to maximize the domestic production of hand sanitizers and
disinfectants, and companies who do not typically operate in health product
manufacturing such as distilleries, breweries and refineries producing hand sanitizers.
International Collaboration
Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships and working with the
United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive and the United States Food and Drug
Administration to share information on best practices and evidence-based approaches
for hand sanitizers and disinfectants.
CANCELLATION OF CIHR SPRING GRANT COMPETITION
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 continues to draw public, political and media attention with most
recent scrutiny on funding decisions for non-COVID-19 and COVID-19 research,
notably CIHR’s Rapid Research Response and the Spring 2020 Project Grant
Competition.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Why did CIHR cancel its Spring 2020 Project Grant Competition?
 How were Covid-19 research grants selected and approved for funding?
KEY MESSAGES
Spring 2020 Project Grant Competition
 I want to assure you that CIHR did not take the decision
lightly to postpone the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition
and consulted closely with the research community when
considering options in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 In March, it became clear that asking hundreds of
researchers to travel to Ottawa to review thousands of
applications was not the right thing to do. Physical distancing
had to be respected and researchers were preoccupied with
the closing of their labs across Canada.
 This is why, instead of launching the Spring Competition,
CIHR decided to act quickly to support the research
community in this difficult time and granted extensions to
researchers who currently hold a CIHR grant.
 No funding from the Spring Competition was used in the
funding of research related to COVID-19; all remaining funds
will be reinvested in future Project Grant Competitions.
Rapid Research Response to COVID-19
 As you know, research is a critical component of both
domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19- and
the Canadian research community has risen to the
challenge.
 With respect to CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Research
Response, standard processes were expedited though, as
per usual, each application was subjected to rigorous peer
review.
 And I want to thank the research community for responding
in record time to identify the most promising research
projects to fight this virus. To keep the COVID-19 funding
competition moving quickly, many researchers volunteered
their time and effort to peer review the applications CIHR
received.
 As such, I have confidence that the research funded through
CIHR’s Rapid Research Response to COVID-19 represents
projects that have the greatest potential to help Canada
address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
Why did CIHR cancel the Spring 2020 Grant Competition?
CIHR made the decision to cancel the spring competition following consultations with its
partners at the U-15, Universities Canada, HealthCareCAN, and the University
Delegates Network, among others. CIHR made this decision for the following key
reasons:
 Virtual review is currently not feasible. With the situation continuing to evolve, we
could not be certain about the reliability of the critical infrastructure required to
deliver a high-quality competition.
 Many of our peer reviewers are clinician scientists and health professionals who
have heeded the call to lend a hand as resources are stretched thin on the
ground. It would have been irresponsible for CIHR to divert their attention at this
critical time of need.
 With researchers following public health advice to curtail travel and self-isolate,
carrying out face-to-face peer review for the Spring 2020 Project Grant
competition would have been contrary to all public health advice.
 Our pool of peer reviewers is made up of many professors who are now faced
with the task of modifying their courses and final exams to switch to delivering
them in an online format. This shift will entail a great deal of work, and we do not
want to add to their burden.
 Finally, we know that, just as we all are, the researchers who would normally
peer review for this competition are occupied with looking after the health and
safety of their families and loved ones, as well as additional care-giving roles,
which need to be their top priority.
How will the funds from the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition be
redistributed to the research community?
CIHR had planned to invest $275M in this competition and, as with all competitions, this
investment would have been made over multiple fiscal years. Similar to the measures
taken when the Spring 2017 Project Grant competition was delayed, CIHR will use
some of the funds that were planned for the Spring 2020 competition to financially
extend all existing investigator-initiated research grants scheduled to expire between
June 30, 2020 and March 30, 2021, for one year. This extension applies only to
Nominated Principal Applicants (NPAs) with a grant expiring within the date range who
applied to the Spring 2020 competition, as these applicants were applying for a grant to
replace one that was expiring. Additionally, CIHR will financially extend all bridge grants
provided to NPAs in the Fall 2019 Project Grant competition who also applied to the
Spring 2020 Project Grant competition.
These measures are anticipated to cost $31M and will be taken from the $275M that
was planned for the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition. The remaining amount
(approximately $244M) will be allocated to the Project Grants program to help mitigate
the effects of increased application pressures for future competitions. In addition,
CIHR’s emergency funding for COVID-19 research was not taken from the Project
Grant envelope. It is specifically a component of the Government of Canada response
to this crisis and is new money to CIHR (i.e., not from our base budget). The specific
budgets available for those future Project Grant competitions will be announced when
the next funding opportunity launches this summer.
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to the global response to COVID-19 and
is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research
funding agency, has moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research
community and deliver programs while maintaining rigour in funding the most
outstanding research.
Canadians will benefit from this research through enhanced prevention, detection, and
treatment options for COVID-19 as well as an evidence base on which to inform
effective social and public health policy responses.
To mobilize Canada’s research community, CIHR and its federal and provincial partners
accelerated their timelines to launch the initial two COVID-19 Rapid Research
Response competitions, totaling $54.3M that translated into 99 research grants.
The medical countermeasures funding accounts for 52 of the 99 projects funded for a
total of $36.5M, including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics,
therapeutics and clinical management. The social and policy countermeasures funding
accounts for 47 of the 99 projects funded for a total of $17.7M, including research into
coordination, governance, and logistics; public health response and its impact; social
dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
 CIHR used the priorities identified by the WHO and GloPID-R to inform this
initiative.
 Hundreds of researchers volunteered their expertise to peer review the
applications received so that the funding competition could be completed in
record time.
 Grants funded for two-year terms and with an agreement that data and findings
would be openly shared.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR was approved for an additional $114.9M in funding through the
Prime Minister’s announcement of new support for countermeasures against COVID-19.
Building on the initial investment of $54.3M to support 99 research projects on COVID-
19, the majority of the new investment of will enable researchers to accelerate the
development, testing and implementation of medical and social countermeasures to
mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
PROTECTING CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY
INSPECTORS FROM COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 Concern has been raised over Canadian Food Inspection Agency inspectors
becoming infected with COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency doing to protect inspectors in
meat processing plants, as well as the Canadian food safety system?
KEY MESSAGES
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is committed to

protecting the health and safety of its employees while
maintaining critical inspection services.
Masks and face shields are made available to all

Canadian Food Inspection Agency meat inspectors who
cannot practice physical distancing.
When cases of COVID-19 occur in a food processing or

meat slaughter establishment, the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency (CFIA) works with local public health to
help determine the level of risk of exposure for CFIA
employees, and their need for self-isolation and/or referral
to health services for testing.
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has been

made aware of 38 CFIA employees having tested positive
for COVID-19 between March 23 and June 4.
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has taken

a number of measures to protect the food supply without
putting undue pressure on its existing workforce, which
include bringing back former CFIA employees, leveraging
provincial and territorial inspectors, as well as hiring new
inspectors.
IF PRESSED…
 The Canadian food safety system is strong and the
Government of Canada is working to ensure that Canadians
have continued access to safe, high-quality foods.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency continues to
maintain an appropriate number of inspectors in meat
establishments.
BACKGROUND
In any establishment where there is a COVID-positive case, Canadian Food Inspection
Agency (CFIA) employees are asked to immediately 1) notify their manager, 2) prepare
to leave the workplace, and 3) self-isolate and self-monitor for symptoms while they wait
on the provincial/local public health authorities to assess the situation and provide
additional instructions.
Only in cases where a CFIA employee’s risk of exposure is determined to have been
low by provincial/local public health authorities (example: CFIA employees were not
present in the part of the plant where the COVID-positive employees were working) will
they be permitted to safely return to work at the establishment.
CFIA looks to provincial/local public health authorities to perform a contact investigation
and provide a risk assessment of any employees that should move to (continue to) self-
isolate.
CFIA has issued guidance and instructions to its employees relating to prevention and
wellness. Employees have been instructed to self-assess their own condition on a daily
basis before reporting to work and to be diligent in monitoring their own personal
condition in order to minimize any risks to their health and that of others in the
establishments they report to.
CFIA employees (including inspectors) who are exhibiting any signs or symptoms of
illness have been advised to contact their managers and stay home.
To further protect the health and safety of its employees, CFIA has also provided
specific written guidance and instructions (posted online) to meat slaughter and
processing establishments across the country on prevention measures and response
protocols when there are suspected and confirmed cases of the virus amongst plant
employees.
CFIA has asked all establishments to be prepared to share their response plans in the
case of confirmed or suspected positive cases of COVID-19 in an effort to trace back
exposure risks and determine needed next steps.
CFIA expects that each third party establishment operator is complying with the advice
and guidance provided by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), as well as that
from local public health authorities in addressing the COVID-19 outbreak.
The decision to suspend operations is the result of an establishment’s cooperation with
directions or recommendations from local and provincial health authorities, and CFIA
does not have jurisdiction in that area. This includes the assessment of mitigation and
control measures the determination on workplace conditions (presenting a high risk for
infection) or the assessment.
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada has put in place successive border measures in
response to COVID19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to prevent imported cases of COVID19? How are
you protecting Canadians at the border?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action at the border to
limit the introduction and spread of COVID-19 and to protect
the health of Canadians.
 We have enacted emergency orders under the Quarantine
Act to restrict discretionary entry into Canada from abroad,
including the U.S., and to strengthen measures to reduce the
importation risk from other countries.
 All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no
matter their country of origin or mode of entry – are required
to quarantine for 14 days.
 There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine so
that critical infrastructure, essential services and economic
supply chains continue between Canada and the United
States. Essential workers will be permitted to enter Canada,
including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
 Anyone not excluded from mandatory quarantine or isolation
when entering Canada must have a plan and suitable
location where they can isolate or quarantine for 14 days.
They must wear an appropriate non-medical mask or face
covering while in transit to their final destination.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
 Individuals who do not have an appropriate isolation or self-
quarantine plan will be directed to a federally designated
Quarantine Facility.
 Hotels have been designated as Quarantine Facilities in a
number of cities, including Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto, and
Montreal.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WE SCREEN TRAVELLERS
 As travellers enter the country, they receive information on
the symptoms of COVID-19. They must acknowledge that
they understand the quarantine requirement and provide
contact details for follow-up.
 Border Services Officers conduct preliminary screening of all
travellers based on criteria and questions developed by the
Public Health Agency of Canada. Those who show
symptoms of COVID-19, or who indicate that they do not
have a suitable plan for quarantine, are directed to an official
from the Public Health Agency of Canada for further
assessment.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH ALBERTA TO DATE
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is collaborating with
provinces, including British Columbia and Alberta, towards a
more integrated model at airports, minimizing duplication of
effort, and streamlining information collection. The Public
Health Agency of Canada is also exploring the possibility of
shared quarantine space with some provinces and
territories.
 As the COVID19 situation continues to evolve,
supplementary health screening measures, such as those
implemented by other jurisdictions, may be considered.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the
RCMP and provincial law enforcement agencies to verify
compliance with the Mandatory Isolation Order.
 The Government takes a compliance promotion approach to
inform Canadians of their obligations. Overall, we have
found that Canadians have been responsive.
 We aim to contact all travellers subject to mandatory
isolation by phone. If travellers cannot be reached or show
indication of non-compliance with their obligations, they are
referred to local law enforcement for follow-up.
 We also provide handouts at the border, and contact
travellers through e-mail and text message throughout their
isolation to remind them of their obligations.
 Penalties include a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment
for 3 years, or both, for failure to comply with this Order.
Fines for non-compliance typically range from $275 to
$1000. At the Public Health Agency of Canada’s
recommendation, local law enforcement may choose to
issue warnings prior to issuing a ticket.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
 We recognize the importance of having sufficient presence
of the Public Health Agency of Canada at Canadian points of
entry.
 As of May 21, the Public Health Agency of Canada has an
initial presence at 17 key points of entry, including the four
major international airports designated to receive
international flights (Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto, and
Montreal).
 By June 30, PHAC will have a presence at 36 points of
entry, which cover 90% of all traffic into Canada.
 All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7
access to quarantine officer support through the remote
centralized notification system (CNS).
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL EXEMPTIONS FOR FAMILY REUNIFICATION
 In response to concerns expressed by Canadians, as of
June 8, 2020 23:59 EDT, the Government of Canada is
permitting foreign nationals who are immediate family
members of Canadian Citizens and Permanent Residents
entry to allow them to reunite with their families.
 This applies to immediate family members who do not have
COVID-19 or exhibit any signs or symptoms of COVID-19
and who intend to remain in Canada for at least 15 days.
 Family members who are admitted into Canada must
quarantine for 14 days.
BACKGROUND
Since February 3, the Governor in Council has made fourteen Emergency Orders under
the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce
risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the
border to reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and
provincial partners to facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods
and services, while continuing to protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
 All foreign nationals entering Canada by air;
 All travellers from the United States (U.S.), across all modes, for non-essential
travel including recreation and/or tourism purposes;
 Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than
the U.S., with some exceptions, including temporary foreign workers and
international students; and
 Foreign nationals entering from the U.S. with signs or symptoms of respiratory
illness.
Canada has updated its temporary border agreement with the U.S. until June 21, 2020.
All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no matter their country of origin
or mode of entry - are REQUIRED to isolate or quarantine for 14 days in a suitable
location.
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, (many of which have low volumes of
travellers), 12 international airports, 4 commercial marine ports, and 3 rail stations.
PHAC is increasing the presence of designated officers, including quarantine officers, at
priority points of entry across Canada. By June 30, PHAC officers will be deployed to 36
high volume points of entry, including major land borders that cover 90% of travellers.
There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine/isolation which permit essential
workers to enter Canada, including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including
food and medical supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services
Agency (CBSA) is working with other federal partners to share information with
commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that commercial traffic is not impeded.
Enforcement:
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement linked to ensuring that travellers are
abiding by the requirement to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where
compliance cannot be confirmed, referrals are made to the RCMP. Maximum penalties
for failing to comply with the mandatory isolation/quarantine order include a fine of up to
$750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person
while willfully or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be
liable for a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
The Contraventions Act has now been changed to give law enforcement partners
(including RCMP, provincial and local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to
people who do not comply with the Quarantine Act, with fines ranging from $275 to
$1000.
Announcement from Alberta Government:
On May 20, 2020, Alberta announced new safety measures for travellers arriving at the
Calgary and Edmonton international airports from outside Canada. These travellers will
be required to pass through a provincial checkpoint where they will need to complete an
Alberta isolation plan. Travellers will undergo a thermal scan, as elevated body
temperature is a potential symptom of COVID-19.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial Special Advisory Committee:
The Government of Canada continues to work collaboratively with partners at all levels
of government to respond to COVID-19 in order to protect the health of Canadians.
The Special Advisory Committee, composed of the Council of Chief Medical Officers of
Health and senior public health officials from all jurisdictions, has been activated since
January 2020 to focus on coordination of federal, provincial and territorial response
efforts across Canada.
The Committee is co-chaired by Canada’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Theresa
Tam, and by Dr. Saqib Shahab, Chief Medical Health Officer of Saskatchewan.
The Committee focuses on policy and technical public health aspects of the response
as per the FPT Public Health Response Plan for Biological Events, informed by lessons
learned from past public health responses and approved by all jurisdictions in 2017.
On May 1, 2020, the Special Advisory Committee released recommendations on next
steps for Canada in a document entitled Foundations for Living with COVID-19 in
Canada: Lifting of Restrictive Public Health Measures. One criteria for lifting of
restrictive public health measures identified by the Committee is avoiding the risk of
importation of cases.
The Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19 reports to the Conference of Deputy
Ministers of Health and to Health Ministers from all provinces and territories.
Deputy Ministers and Health Ministers have been working closely bilaterally and through
their respective multilateral tables on key aspects of the pandemic response, such as
the provision of personnel protective equipment and other supplies, testing and sharing
of best practices. Engagement is taking place frequently (several times a week).
EARLY HISTORY (WARNINGS AND STEPS TAKEN) IN COVID-19
OUTBREAK
SYNOPSIS
Warning of a respiratory illness in Wuhan, China was received on December, 31, 2019.
The Government of Canada quickly alerted provincial Chief Medical Officers of Health
followed by enhanced border measures. The World Health Organization confirmed on
January 12, 2020 the novel coronavirus following which the Government activated its
emergency operations centre and posted signage at airports. Chief Medical Officers of
Health were convened well in advance of the first Canadian presumptive case identified
on January 25, 2020.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What warnings did the Government of Canada receive regarding COVID-19, and
what steps were taken in response?
KEY MESSAGES
 Timely intelligence gathering, in collaboration with both
domestic and international partners, allowed early and
coordinated action by the Government of Canada.
 Canada took a number of concrete steps in advance of its
first presumptive case of COVID-19 in late January,
including posting signage at airports, issuing a travel alert,
and convening Ministers of Health and Chief Medical
Officers of Health from across the country.
 Subsequent, rapid actions were taken to mobilize Canada’s
national and provincial public health emergency response
infrastructure as new information became available, and the
risk to the health and safety of Canadians became clearer.
IF PRESSED…
 On December 31, 2019, Canada received its earliest
warning when the Public Health Agency of Canada was
alerted from the Global Public Health Intelligence Network
(GPHIN) of an illness originating in Wuhan, China. The virus
did not match any other known virus.
 The Chief Public Health Officer of Canada informed all
provincial Chief Medical Officers of Health on January 2nd,
2020 well before Canada’s first presumptive case was
identified on January 25th, 2020.
 On January 12th, the World Health Organization received
confirmation that the respiratory illness that developed in
Wuhan, China, was caused by a new coronavirus.
 On January 20th, the Chief Public Health Officer advised the
public that the Government of Canada was actively
monitoring a novel coronavirus that originated in Wuhan.
 Since January 24th, I have convened calls regularly with my
provincial and territorial counterparts to ensure national
coordination in the response to COVID-19.
 On January 26th, in a televised press conference, the Chief
Public Health Officer confirmed the first case related to travel
in Wuhan.
 The situation in Canada is changing rapidly, and we continue
to learn more about COVID-19 every day. The Public Health
Agency of Canada is committed to providing Canadians with
access to accurate and up-to-date information about the
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Since the outset, the Public Health Agency of Canada has
been working with public health authorities at all levels of
government to ensure our preparedness and response
measures are based on the latest science for this rapidly
evolving situation.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has taken many steps
to keep Canadians as informed as soon as possible. In
January, the Government of Canada launched the novel
coronavirus website, and opened a 1-833 number for
Canadians to ask questions regarding the novel coronavirus.
 Since early days of this response, the Public Health Agency
of Canada has directly responded to tens of thousands of
Canadians on various aspects of COVID-19 to address their
questions and concerns.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) operates the Global Public Health Intelligence Network
(GPHIN), which is an early-warning and situational awareness system for potential public health threats
worldwide—including outbreaks of infectious disease.
Canada first became aware of a respiratory illness originating in Wuhan, China through an alert through
GPHIN received on December 31, 2019. This information was shared by the Dr. Tam, the Chief Public
Health Officer of Canada on January 2, 2020, with all provincial and territorial Chief Medical Officers of
Health of Canada.
The World Health Organization (WHO) posted its first event notification on January 5, 2020, to its secure
Event Information Site (EIS) for International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Points regarding a
cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology reported in Wuhan City, Hubei Province of China. The WHO
found there was limited information to determine overall risk and advised against the application of any
travel or trade restrictions against China.
Precautionary steps were taken as Canada sought additional information from the WHO. On January 7,
2020, PHAC issued a Travel Health Notice, and on January 9, 2020, PHAC issued a Public Health Alert
on the Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence, an extranet for communication with public health
partners.
Confirmation of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China was announced by the WHO on January 12,
2020. On January 14, 2020, Dr. Tam convened a special teleconference of the Council of Chief Medical
Officers of Health (CCMOH) to discuss situational updates and domestic preparedness in relation to the
outbreak. PHAC activated its Health Portfolio Operations Centre on January 15, 2020 to Level 2, to
actively monitor early warning signs and to prepare for possible containment and mitigation of a possible
outbreak. On January 22, 2020, the Canada Border Services Agency implemented signage at major
airports to raise awareness for passengers arriving from China.
Progressive escalation followed Canada’s first presumptive case. Canada’s first presumptive case
was identified on January 25, 2020. Following this, critical public health emergency management
infrastructure was mobilized for the COVID-19 response, including:
- First meeting of the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19
(January 28, 2020, followed by meetings on January 30 and 31, bi-weekly or tri-weekly through
February and tri-weekly since March);
- First meeting of Federal-Provincial-Territorial Ministers of Health was January 24, and have met
regularly on a weekly or biweekly schedule since then; and,
- G7 Ministers of Health (weekly, starting February 3, 2020).
In addition, the following travel measures were implemented:
- Travel advisory against non-essential travel to China (January 29, 2020); and,
- Enhanced screening measures at major international airports including all travellers from the
Province of Hubei, China (February 9, 2020).
Canada reached its 100th confirmed case on March 11, 2020.
COVID-19 MODELLING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture. Modelling
is used for planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The Government
uses data and modelling to guide Canada’s response to COVID-19, and to help inform
public health and policy decisions to control Canada’s COVID-19 epidemic. Some
provincial and territorial public health authorities are also conducting their own modelling
to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19 related cases and deaths to aid in
their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and
provincial governments?
KEY MESSAGES
 Modelling is one of the tools that support planning our
response to the COVID-19 epidemic. The Public Health
Agency of Canada is conducting modelling studies that tell
us the number of COVID-19 cases that could occur
nationally depending on how effective we are in controlling
the epidemic.
 Surveillance data indicate that the measures we are taking
to slow the spread of COVID-19 are working, but models and
the experience of other countries suggest that we need to
continue to be vigilant.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works with the
provinces and territories to share their data to inform the
national COVID-19 model.
 We know that the COVID-19 epidemic varies across
provinces and territories. There is alignment with the national
level modelling results, but provincial models provide more
specific projections for planning within each of the provinces.
IF PRESSED…
 Many factors contribute to regional differences in the
epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
 These include differences in the timing and patterns of
community spread, changes in laboratory testing practices,
and differing timelines for introduction of a range of public
health measures.
 Notwithstanding these variables, we are observing slowed
epidemic growth of COVID-19 across Canada, with a
declining epidemic in some, but not all, jurisdictions.
BACKGROUND
The COVID-19 epidemic in Canada comprises a number of different epidemics in the
different provinces and territories. The Public Health Agency of Canada regularly uses
data to update models for guiding public health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates
in the short-term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing
of public health measures to control the epidemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic
models. Forecasting models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in
Canada to estimate forward on how many new cases might be expected in the coming
week. Dynamic models do not use actual real-life case data, yet are useful in that they
permit a longer-term view based on our knowledge of how the virus behaves – this
helps us to visualize potential epidemic growth scenarios and impacts of control
measures that mitigate growth over time.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE (NESS)
MANAGEMENT
SYNOPSIS
A recent media story highlighted the disposal of approximately 2 million expired masks
and 440,000 expired gloves during the closure of the NESS warehouse in Regina in
2019. The masks and gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had passed the limit of
five years for their use, as recommended by the manufacturer.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 How can we be sure that the Government of Canada has the right system in
place to have the necessary stockpile of health supplies to support Canada in
pandemics and other emergencies?
 Why did the Public Health Agency of Canada dispose of N95 masks and gloves
in 2019?
 Why did the Public Health Agency of Canada close federal stockpile locations?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories to procure the necessary health
supplies to continue responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) was
initially built on the assumption that provincial, territorial and
local governments would be prepared for the most common
emergencies. Consequently, it was designed to provide
health emergency assets when local and provincial and
territorial resources were exhausted.
 Jurisdictions have traditionally sourced Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) directly from known suppliers, and the
NESS has historically only carried relatively small amounts.
 With the unprecedented nature of the current pandemic, the
NESS quickly stepped into a much more active role in
procurement. As we move forward, we will adjust, and
lessons learned will inform the future of the NESS.
IF PRESSED ON INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 The NESS reviews its stock regularly. Expired, obsolete, or
unusable items are disposed of as per Treasury Board
policy.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to explore
ways to optimize product life cycle management and
minimize the disposal of expired stock.
IF PRESSED ON WAREHOUSE FOOTPRINT
 A decision was made in 2013 to modernize and optimize our
warehouse national footprint.
 Currently, the Public Health Agency of Canada has
warehouses in six cities.
IF PRESSED ON STOCKPILING OF PPE AND THE CANADIAN PANDEMIC
INFLUENZA PLAN
 The Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan is a federal,
provincial, and territorial guidance document for the
healthcare sector. Its purpose is to assist jurisdictions with
their emergency planning.
 The most recent guidance from 2011 recommends that
availability of PPE supply should be addressed during
pandemic planning, and that stockpiling should be
considered.
 Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for
ensuring the provision of medications, supplies, and
equipment required for provision of pandemic health care
services.
 The NESS is intended to provide health emergency assets
when local and provincial and territorial resources have been
exhausted. It has historically carried only relatively small
amounts of PPE.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING LEVEL
 Since 2012-13, the operating budget of the NESS, including
salaries and operating has consistently been around $3
million annually.
 On top of the NESS core operational budget, there have
been investments made for particular initiatives, stocks of
supplies and medical countermeasures. Over the last 10
years, these investments have varied year over year, and
have amounted to over $79 million.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that
provinces and territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease
outbreaks, natural disasters and other public health events, when their own resources
are not enough. These supplies include a variety of items such as: medical equipment
and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
NESS Mandate
The fundamental assumption underpinning emergency management is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to a reasonable extent for the most
common emergencies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is
twofold:
 It provides surge capacity to provinces and territories at their request when their
own resources are not sufficient; and
 It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health
emergencies, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
NESS Funding
Since 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS has remained stable and has
been approximately $3 million a year. This funding is included in the overall funding
identified for the Health Security Infrastructure program area reported in Public
Accounts.
Additional funding has historically been provided to the NESS through internal
reallocation decisions and incremental funding decisions where the Public Health
Agency of Canada has received funding linked to specific purchases such as a four-
year investment in medical countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began
in 2015-16.
NESS Deployments
Over the past decade, the NESS has deployed assets to assist with a range of events
and emergencies, including the 2010 Olympics, 2013 Alberta Floods, Operation Syrian
Refugees, the Fort McMurray wildfires, and the 2018 G7 Summit in Quebec. The NESS
has also made international donations in support of the West African Ebola Outbreak,
Hurricane Harvey, and to China during the current COVID-19 outbreak.
NESS Requests for Assistance
We have so far been able to respond within 24 hours to all requests for assistance from
provinces and territories. Requests are assessed in consultation with the provinces and
territories and delivery dates and quantities are based on the availability of requested
supplies and urgency of the request.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and
warehouses strategically located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved
from nine warehouse locations across Canada to six. An independent assessment
indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’ role as timely surge
support.
As of 2019, all NESS holdings were consolidated in eight warehouses in six cities. In
Spring 2020, two additional warehouses were leased in Ottawa, given the volume of
supplies being donated to and purchased by the NESS as part of the federal
government’s COVID-19 response.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while
obsolete and expired supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
Regina Closure
In 2019, approximately 2 million expired masks and 440,000 expired gloves were
disposed of during the closure of the NESS warehouse in Regina. The masks and
gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had passed the limit of five years for their use,
as recommended by the manufacturer.
Canadian Pandemic Influenza Plan PPE Guidance
The 2006 CPIP stated that plans are required to allow for a consistent 16-week supply
(i.e. two pandemic waves) of both influenza and non-influenza related materials to
address sporadic interruptions of supply chains (e.g. resulting from mail and courier
disruptions, border closures, supply limitations).
The 2011 CPIP indicates that methods to estimate PPE requirements are beyond the
scope of the CPIP, and notes that P/T governments are responsible for ensuring the
provision of medications, supplies, and equipment required for provision of pandemic
health care services.
Guidance on the Use of Personal Protective Equipment
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work closely with Provinces and
Territories to provide infection prevention and control guidance for a variety of health
care settings, including long-term care facilities. The Agency has also provided advice
to workplaces and businesses on how to reduce the risk of COVID-19 infections in the
workplace, which may include the use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Why isn’t the Government recommending PPE, including N-95 masks, for all front-line
workers?
KEY MESSAGES
 The appropriate use of personal protective equipment or
PPE is one component of infection prevention and control.
 Working closely with provinces and territories, the Public
Health Agency of Canada has developed evidence-based
guidance on infection prevention and control for acute care
and long-term care settings, as well as home care settings,
including the appropriate use of PPE.
 The Agency has also provided advice to workplaces and
businesses outside the health sector on how to reduce the
risk of COVID-19 infections in the workplace, which may
include the use of PPE in some workplaces.
 The Government of Canada continues to emphasize that,
physical distancing, hand hygiene and coughing or sneezing
into your arm or sleeve are the most effective ways to
prevent transmission of the COVID-19 virus.
 Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering when you
cannot maintain a 2-metre physical distance from others, is
recommended as an additional measure you can take to
prevent further transmission of the virus to others.
 Non-medical masks for face coverings are not PPE, but they
are a way to prevent spread of the COVID-19 virus to others.
IF PRESSED ON USE ON NON-MEDICAL MASKS FOR HEALTHCARE WORKERS:
 Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical,
medical procedure masks and respirators such as N95
masks.
IF PRESSED ON WHY POSITION ON MASK USE BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC HAS
CHANGED:
 Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has
been changing as the evidence base and our understanding
of COVID-19 rapidly evolves. We are continually looking at
the evidence as it is being produced and working with our
partners across the country and around the world to learn
more.
 Wearing a non-medical mask is an additional measure we
can take to protect others, particularly when physical
distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g., grocery
shopping, in close settings such as public transit).
BACKGROUND
Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has been adjusted as the
evidence base and our understanding of COVID-19 evolves.
Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical, medical procedure masks
and respirators such as N95 respirators. It is extremely important that we have enough
supply of medical masks for healthcare workers where it is urgently needed for medical
procedures and to care for individuals who have COVID-19.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in healthcare settings
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) interim guidance on infection prevention
and control in acute healthcare settings was updated to ensure we provide
comprehensive recommendations based on the best available evidence. The guidance
emphasizes the need for environmental and administrative controls in facilities to
protect healthcare workers and patients, as well as the fundamental importance of
training in the use of PPE. It indicates that droplet and contact precautions are
appropriate for most patient care. Aerosol-generating medical procedures require N95
respirators along with other PPE. The guidance remains interim as it is subject to
revision based on new scientific evidence.
In new technical guidance, PHAC recommends that all healthcare workers in acute care
hospitals wear medical masks and eye protection/face shields for the full duration of a
shift in acute healthcare settings. Wearing a medical mask throughout the duration of a
shift is an important measure to help reduce the risk of transmission from a healthcare
worker to a patient. This recommendation applies to healthcare workers who are in
direct contact with patients, as well as environmental services staff working in patient
care areas. In addition, any healthcare workers who have COVID-19-related symptoms
should immediately go home and only return to work following the advice of their local
public health units.
Healthcare workers should refer to their province or territory’s guidance, as well as
facility policies on the use of masks, eye protection, and other PPE, including any PPE
conservation strategies that are in place.
Public use of non-medical face coverings
Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering in the community has not been proven to
protect the person wearing it. However, with the emerging information regarding pre-
symptomatic and asymptomatic transmission, and the goal to stop the spread of
COVID-19, wearing a non-medical mask is recommended to protect others when
physical distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g., grocery shopping, in close
settings such as public transit).
Wearing a non-medical mask in the community does not mean you should stop
practicing the public health measures that are known to work, such as physical
distancing. All of the recommendations regarding physical distancing, and hand
hygiene are based on what is known to work best to protect from infection. Non-medical
masks will not prevent COVID-19 spread without consistent and strict adherence to
good hygiene and public health measures, including frequent handwashing and physical
distancing.
PPE may be an important component of infection prevention efforts in non-healthcare
workplaces. However, the choice and use of PPE is based on occupational health and
safety advice specific to the job and workplace. PHAC provides information to help
employers and employees determine what infection prevention and control measures,
which might include PPE, are necessary in their workplaces.
COVID-19 TESTING REAGENT PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 5, 2020, 1,824,781 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average of 27,658 individuals were tested a day in Canada. Global shortages
of testing reagents have resulted in the Government of Canada implementing an
aggressive procurement strategy to supply reagent to meet current and future demand.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Has the Government of Canada procured a sufficient supply of reagents to meet
current and future demand for COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action on all fronts to
mitigate the impact of the global shortage of testing reagent
on Canada’s testing capacity.
 We are procuring testing supplies both domestically and
abroad. We are investing to build sustainable capacity in
Canada.
 Public-private collaborations are helping us meet reagent
needs. For example, a testing reagent developed by the
National Microbiology Laboratory is being produced by
LuminUltra, a New Brunswick-based company that will
supply extraction reagent for 500,000 tests a week for the
next year.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
laboratory testing they need in response to the serious
health threat posed by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON CAPACITY TO TEST MORE CANADIANS
 Canada has and will continue to test symptomatic
individuals, as part of our evidence-based approach, while
considering the evolving science on other testing scenarios.
As the science evolves, our approach will keep pace, and
policies and protocols will be updated accordingly.
 As new products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire new products and platforms to augment existing
testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT OTHER STEPS CANADA HAS TAKEN TO ENSURE THERE
IS SUFFICENT REAGENTS FOR TESTING
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has also worked
closely with provincial public health laboratories to provide
access to different test platforms. This enables provincial
public health laboratories to leverage other platforms to
mitigate reagent shortages.
 The Government of Canada is investigating other in-Canada
options for the production of reagents for testing purposes.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) National Microbiology Laboratory (NML)
is working in close collaboration with provincial and territorial public health laboratories
to perform diagnostic testing for the virus that causes COVID-19.
As of June 5, 2020, 1,824,781 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Testing in
Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak of COVID-19 spreads.
PHAC works with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing strategy that will
help us maximize the impact of our testing resources and delay the spread of COVID-19
in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Reagents are chemicals that are used to extract, amplify, and/or detect the virus.
Internationally, there has been a shortage of reagents to support laboratory testing.
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to
oversee the coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys and research
that will tell us how widely the virus has spread in Canada and provide reliable
estimates of potential immunity and vulnerabilities in Canadian populations. The
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is under the guidance of a Secretariat led by Dr. Tim
Evans of McGill University, along with a Leadership Group representing provincial and
territorial stakeholders and expertise, and co-chaired by Drs. David Naylor and
Catherine Hankins. Over the next two years, at least one million blood samples will be
collected and tested for the presence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Knowledge of the
level of immunity in the general population, and in vulnerable populations such as the
elderly and healthcare workers, will guide important public health decisions and
immunization strategies once a vaccine becomes available.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 When will the testing for the surveys begin?
 Who will be part of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force Leadership Group?
 How will privacy and confidentiality concerns regarding the results of these blood
tests be addressed?
 How will research projects be chosen for funding under the COVID-19 Immunity
Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is studying how
widespread COVID-19 infection is in the Canadian
population.
 Their studies will estimate the potential level of immunity in
the population as a whole and in groups that are at higher
risk of infection, such as health care workers and older
Canadians.
 The scientific findings will help us put strategies in place to
re-open the economy while preventing a resurgence in
infections.
 As we await the availability of a vaccine, the COVID-19
Immunity Task Force will provide data needed to plan
vaccination programs.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is actively connecting
Canada with international work and research, contributing to
and benefiting from findings of serological studies conducted
in other countries.
 We are allocating up to $300 million for this work.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
 The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will
reflect key agencies of the Government of Canada and
include representation from several provincial Ministries of
Health as well as experts from across Canada in matters
related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology,
infectious diseases, public health, and clinical medicine.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will operate under the
direction of a Leadership Group composed of experts who
are recognized for their scientific leadership,international
public health experience in knowledge translation and
networks, and experience leading complex initiatives.
 The Leadership Group, which includes Canada’s Chief
Public Health Officer and Canada’s Chief Science Advisor,
had its first meeting on April 28th, 2020, where the initial
roles and priority areas of work and processes were
established.
 The Leadership Group’s four Working Groups have
advanced the methodologies, survey designs, and identified
priority populations for serological testing, and focussed
serological and immune research.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will put in place the
necessary mechanisms to ensure that privacy, confidentiality
and ethical considerations are guiding the direction and
implementation of this initiative.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website provides
details of activities and findings, connects and engages
scientists within Canada and globally, and links with
CanCOVID Network, a platform mandated by Canada’s
Chief Science Advisor to expedite communication and
collaboration between the scientific, healthcare and policy
communities during the COVID-19 crisis.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website has a new web
portal called “Sero-Tracker”, that makes Canada part of a
global collaboration that tracks and summarises serological
studies and provides their findings from around the world.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is actively interacting
with various groups to ensure representation and input,
including an Indigenous Advisory Circle, Federal, Provincial
and Territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health, and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force is collaborating with the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) in agreeing
to review a subset of grant proposals in a current CIHR
competition for potential funding, as well as establishing their
own processes to launch calls for research proposals that
address COVID-19 priorities as per their mandate.
 On May 12th, 2020, Health Canada authorised the first of a
number of anticipated commercial serological tests for
COVID-19, which will allow the COVID-19 Immunity Task
Force to focus on processes to initiate testing of samples in
the sero survey studies.
BACKGROUND
As the first wave of COVID-19 begins to peak in Canada, it is important not only to
marshal all available resources to manage the immediate surge of patients needing
care, but also to anticipate what lies beyond the peak. In Canada, we do not know the
degree of immunity to COVID-19 in the population.
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of
large numbers of people will provide the data needed to understand the scale of
infection in the Canadian population. This approach will help us capture not only
symptomatic individuals, but also asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic people who we
are not aware of as they did not seek healthcare. The importance of coordinated, rapid
and representative national surveys cannot be understated. They provide critical
information on the current spread of COVID-19, and help us prepare for possible future
waves of infection, both in the general population or vulnerable groups.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific
groups such as public-facing workers or among children and youth can inform the best
timing of decisions for safe return to work and to school. They can help to direct
proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or even disease-
preventing therapies should they become available. And they inform targeted
surveillance efforts to contain and stop further outbreaks before they become
epidemics.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19
serology surveillance, is being established to catalyze, support, and harmonize the
design and rapid implementation of population-based studies that will generate reliable
first estimates of SARS-CoV-2 immunity, overall and in vulnerable populations across
Canada. This work will also contribute to what is happening globally. For example, as
part of the World Health Organization global initiatives that provide standardized
protocols: Solidarity II (pool findings from large-scale antibody studies around the
world); and Unity Studies (population based sero-prevalence, household transmission).
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 5, 2020, 1,824,781 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average of 27,658 individuals were tested a day in Canada. Shortages of
testing supplies will present a barrier to the significant ramp up of testing anticipated in
provinces and territories as we enter the recovery phase of the epidemic and begin to
open up the economy.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by a lack of testing capacity
in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response. We are supporting provinces and territories as
they deploy testing to detect and control the spread of
COVID-19.
 Canada is implementing an aggressive procurement strategy
to meet both current and future demand as testing continues
to ramp up across the country.
 On March 18, 2020, the Government of Canada approved
an interim order to expedite the review of medical devices,
including test kits. An interim order is one of the fastest
mechanisms available to address large-scale public health
emergencies.
 We are working with industry to put in place made-in-
Canada solutions to testing supply and support increased
testing capacity.
 We continue to work towards accessing testing reagents and
supplies, evaluating rapid point-of-care tests, and accessing
authorized test kits to help ensure that provinces and
territories are equipped to ramp up testing, according to their
requirements.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
 My health portfolio continues to work with colleagues in
Public Services Procurement Canada and Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada to identify new
products and platforms.
 As new test products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
testing they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON SEROLOGY TESTING
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working on
developing a number of in-house serological tests in addition
to evaluating a variety of commercial tests for COVID-19.
 Developing and applying a serological test for COVID-19
poses challenges as this is an emerging virus and the
performance of new tests require additional time and
research.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory, working with Health
Canada and other partners, is currently assessing a number
of serological tests to evaluate and identify serological tests
that will produce accurate and reliable results.
IF PRESSED ON FALSE NEGATIVES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is aware of the Annals
of Internal Medicine study findings. A 20% false negative
rate is in line with our expected performance of COVID-19
tests.
 Several factors can result in a false negative test result. That
is why health care providers always assess risk and
symptoms when diagnosing infectious diseases and do not
rely only on laboratory tests.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of
June 5, 2020, 1,824,781 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last
week, an average of 27,658 individuals were tested a day in Canada.
Testing in Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with
COVID-19. Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak spreads.
PHAC continues to work with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing
strategy that will help maximize the impact of testing resources and delay the spread of
COVID-19 in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for
commercial diagnostic devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic
capacity.
VACCINE RESEARCH AND TIMELINES
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the timely development of a
COVID-19 vaccine. On April 23, 2020, the Prime Minister announced more than $1
billion in support of a national medical research strategy to fight COVID-19 that includes
vaccine development, the production of treatments, and tracking of the virus.
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to protecting the
health and safety of Canadians and has invested more than
$1 billion in support of a national medical research strategy
to fight COVID-19.
 Through this investment, the Government of Canada is
supporting several research teams as well as multiple
organizations who are working at unprecedented speed to
develop candidate vaccines.
 In Canada, there are currently at least 30 candidate vaccines
in early development and it is anticipated that several of
these will advance to human clinical trials in the coming
months.
 On May 15, 2020, Health Canada authorized CanSino
Biologics Inc, a Chinese company with a growing Canadian
presence, to conduct a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in healthy
adults in Canada. The trial will be conducted in collaboration
with the Canadian Immunization Research Network at the
Canadian Center for Vaccinology at Dalhousie University.
IF PRESSED…
 New funding announced on April 23 builds on the previous
Government of Canada investment of $275 million to support
COVID-19 vaccine and therapeutics research and
development.
 For example, vaccine development investments to date have
been announced for Quebec-based Medicago and
Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac.
 Our Government is also investing in research teams at the
Universities of Manitoba, Alberta and Western Ontario
amongst others who are working on the development of
vaccines for COVID-19 through the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
 We continue to work closely with academia and the private
sector to advance research and development of candidate
vaccines by partnering on pre-clinical research, bio-
manufacturing requirements to support large-scale
production, enhancing capacity and access for clinical trials,
and seeking solutions for domestic capacity.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine development is a highly complex and long process that typically takes over 10
years due to the extensive research required to ensure a safe and effective product for
human use. Global efforts are underway to develop a COVID-19 vaccine and work is
progressing at an unprecedented pace. At present, there are over 100 COVID-19
candidate vaccines at different stages of development by academia and industry. As of
June 4, 2020, ten of these candidate vaccines have demonstrated promise and have
advanced to Phase 1 clinical trials in China, the U.S., Europe, and Australia, with early
results expected as early as July 2020. Additionally, one of these candidate vaccines
has also entered Phase 2 clinical trials in China and another candidate has recently
received approval to launch a Phase 2/3 trial in the UK later this spring.
Government of Canada investments
On March 11, 2020, the Government of Canada announced a $1 billion package to help
Canadians cope with the COVID-19 outbreak, which included $275 million for
coronavirus research and medical countermeasures, including research on vaccine
development. Major investments to date include supporting vaccine development efforts
by Quebec-based Medicago and Saskatchewan-based VIDO-Intervac. On April 23,
2020, the Prime Minister announced more than $1 billion in support of a national
medical research strategy to fight COVID-19 that includes vaccine development, the
production of treatments, and tracking of the virus. Investments were announced for the
National Research Council of Canada to enhance its bio-manufacturing capacity to
prepare for production of a COVID-19 vaccine, while investments through the Strategic
Innovation Fund continue to support COVID-19 vaccine and therapy research and
development led by the private sector. Funding will also support academia and research
networks to conduct vaccine-related research and clinical trials, and to enhance
Canada’s capacity to monitor vaccine safety and effectiveness. These investments
contribute to Canada’s commitment to the Coronavirus Global Response, an online
global pledging event that aims to raise more than $8 billion (USD) to help researchers
and innovators develop solutions to test, treat, and protect people, and to prevent the
further spread of COVID-19.
Vaccine research and development in Canada
In March 2020, as part of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) Rapid
Research Response to COVID-19, CIHR and partners provided funding for six research
teams working to identify candidate vaccines through different animal models. These
projects are targeting a range of vaccine strategies and, in some cases, involve industry
partnerships (e.g., Medicago; Inovio) or are supported by the Public Health Agency of
Canada. It is anticipated that some of these candidate vaccines could be suitable for
future clinical trials in humans. It is also important to note that on April 23, 2020, CIHR
and partners launched another COVID-19 research funding competition to support the
scale-up of promising projects, including the development and testing of vaccines. The
results of this competition are expected in the coming week.
As of June 4, 2020, of the 100+ global candidates noted above, there are currently at
least 30 candidate vaccines in early development in Canada. It is expected that several
will advance to Phase 1 clinical trials in the coming months.
On May 15, 2020, Health Canada authorized CanSino Biologics Inc. (CanSinoBio)
vaccine candidate for a Phase 1/2 clinical trial in healthy adults Canada. Referred to as
Ad5-nCoV, the vaccine candidate received Chinese regulatory approval earlier this
year, allowing CanSinoBio to move ahead with human clinical trials in China. It was the
first candidate vaccine to enter Phase II human clinical trials.
On May 12, 2020, the National Research Council of Canada (NRC) announced the
collaboration with CanSinoBIO to advance bioprocessing and clinical development in
Canada of a candidate vaccine against COVID-19. CanSinoBio and the NRC are aiming
to pave the way for future clinical trials in Canada, in collaboration with the Canadian
Immunization Research Network at the Canadian Center for Vaccinology in Halifax,
Nova Scotia. The Government of Canada has already announced $44 million in funding
to support upgrades to the NRC’s facilities in Montreal to enable compliance with Good
Manufacturing Practice (GMP) standards, to ensure readiness for Canadian
bioprocessing of potential vaccine candidates as they become available.
While every effort in Canada is being made to expedite vaccine development - safety,
efficacy and quality must not be compromised. However, the Government of Canada is
reviewing its regulatory pathways to help expedite access to safe and effective vaccine
for Canadians.
We are also working with international regulators and partners to help fast-track clinical
trials and applications for vaccines, treatments and diagnostic tests and share
information on any signals of global supply disruptions.
Preparing provinces and territories for COVID-19 vaccine deployment
Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine
public health requirements in their jurisdictions, while considering national vaccine
expert advice. Early planning is underway with Canada’s National Advisory Committee
on Immunization (NACI) to prepare for vaccine availability and administration through
public immunization programs.
In addition, we are working with provinces and territories to ensure that the health care
system is prepared to roll out a national vaccination program when a COVID vaccine
becomes available, including ensuring that we have sufficient supplies such as needles
and syringes, for vaccination clinics.
SPARTAN BIOSCIENCES
SYNOPSIS
Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan Biosciences,
Health Canada authorized the sale of the Spartan diagnostic test device on April 11,
2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders from Spartan
Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92 million tests in order to
ensure access to point of care testing in regions where it is needed to support rapid
turn-around of test results. Before distributing testing devices for clinical use, the
National Microbiology Laboratory conducts clinical validation to ensure satisfactory test
performance in the real-world clinical setting. On May 1, the National Microbiology
Laboratory shared the findings of their clinical validation of the Spartan device with
Health Canada. In light of the poor results of clinical performance of the device, Health
Canada is amending the Interim Order authorization of this device to “for research use
only”. On May 5, 2020, Spartan Bioscience issued a recall on the Spartan Cube,
Spartan Test Kits, and Spartan Swabs.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by the results of the Spartan test
kit?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking all action necessary to
protect the health and safety of Canadians during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response.
 The Government of Canada is working in collaboration with
provinces and territories to procure and deploy approved
rapid test devices and test kits to support testing in rural and
northern communities.
 The Spartan test is a point of care test that offers rapid test
results and is expected to be particularly useful in northern
and remote communities.
 As soon as problems were identified with the performance of
the Spartan test, Health Canada amended its authorization
to limit use of the test to research purposes only. All testing
devices that had been sold to date were for research use.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory worked with other
public health laboratories to validate the Spartan test and
has provided data to Spartan to assist the company with test
improvements.
 Canada is implementing an aggressive procurement strategy
to meet both current and future demand as testing continues
to ramp up across the country.
BACKGROUND
Spartan Biosciences, an Ottawa-based company, created a made-in-Canada rapid
COVID-19 analyzer, the Spartan Cube, and test reagents. Spartan’s research is
supported by the National Research Council of Canada’s Industrial Research
Assistance Program. The company was awarded a Government of Canada contract to
accelerate the development of the rapid COVID-19 diagnostic test.
Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan Biosciences,
Health Canada completed a scientific review of the Spartan diagnostic test device on
April 11, 2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders from Spartan
Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92 million tests in order to
ensure access to point of care testing is in regions where it is needed to support rapid
turn-around of test results.
PROCUREMENT OF PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
SYNOPSIS
The global COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented shortage in personal
protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies. To support the needs of
Canada’s frontline healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination
with the provinces and territories, launched a significant bulk procurement, engaging a
diverse number of new suppliers and manufacturers both internationally and through the
Government of Canada’s domestic “Call to Action” to increase domestic production.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of PPE and other
medical supplies?
 How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare
workers with the PPE required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of
COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is continuously working to
secure critical personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies
and medical equipment, and to expedite delivery of supplies
to our frontline healthcare workers.
 Canada is receiving PPE shipments, and is working rapidly
to allocate the supplies to the provinces and territories as per
an approach agreed upon by federal-provincial-territorial
Ministers of Health.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is also deploying PPE
and ventilators from its National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile in response to urgent requests for assistance from
provinces and territories.
 In addition, the Government of Canada is also receiving
offers of donations from international and domestic
organizations via the donations portal on the Government of
Canada COVID-19 website.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
GLOBAL SHORTAGE OF PPE SUPPLIES
 The Government of Canada, through the leadership of
Public Services and Procurement Canada, and Innovation
Science and Economic Development Canada, has
galvanized Canadian industry to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to
produce PPE and medical equipment and supplies, including
ventilators and rapid testing kits.
 Public Services and Procurement Canada has confirmed
contracts for a variety of PPE and other medical supplies
including over 100 million N95 respirators and equivalents
(e.g., KN95 respirators; FFP2), 315 million surgical masks,
130 million protective gowns, and 30 thousand ventilators.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving staggered
delivery of shipments, and to date, has allocated
approximately
2.5 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95
respirators; FFP2), 100 million surgical masks, 26.5 million
pairs of nitrile gloves, 12 million face shields, and 2 million
protective gowns to provinces and territories, and more is
expected to arrive and be distributed in the coming days.
 Additionally, the Public Health Agency of Canada has also
distributed to provinces and territories donations of over
590 thousand N95 and equivalent respirators, 700 thousand
surgical masks, 400 thousand pairs of gloves, 60 thousand
protective gowns, and 60 thousand face shields.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ENSURING THE
QUALITY OF PPE SUPPLIES
 Due to intense global competition for PPE and other medical
supplies, countries have needed to engage with a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers.
 As a result, PPE and medical supplies received by the Public
Health Agency of Canada, whether procured internationally
or domestically, are verified to meet the technical
specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 prior to
distribution to provinces and territories. The process is the
same for donations.
 For example, a KN95 respirator undergoes visual inspection
to verify for defects in design and construction, and is tested
to confirm performance expectations. Surgical masks
undergo a fluid resistance and a breathing resistance test.
 Supplies that do not meet specifications are subsequently
assessed for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
 To date, a large majority of the products received by the
Government of Canada have met the technical specifications
for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response; however, as
a result the Public Health Agency of Canada’s stringent
review process, approximately 9.9 million KN95 respirators
were assessed as not meeting the technical specifications.
IF PRESSED ON ACCEPTING AND DISTRIBUTING PPE LABELLED FOR NON-
MEDICAL USE
 The Government of China has implemented a number of
export controls aimed at addressing quality control over
exported products.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is assessing the
operational impacts of these measures and is working with
Health Canada, as well as provinces and territories to
implement appropriate mitigation strategies.
 All PPE supplies that are distributed by Public Health
Agency of Canada to provinces and territories are confirmed
to meet the Government of Canada’s technical specifications
for healthcare settings and are labelled as such.
BACKGROUND
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care
response to COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach
of interdepartmental coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), Health Canada, National Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the
Department of National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC),
and Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED).
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Bulk Procurement
ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian industries to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce equipment and supplies
including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role,
conducting technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of
Canada technical specifications for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell
website.
Urgent need is further facilitated by Health Canada, expediting regulatory approvals of
product reviews and licenses through the Interim Order for Medical Devices signed by
the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. As the regulatory authority, Health Canada
also continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all medical devices for use
in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as
provinces and territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada.
Manufacturers and importers are also now required to notify the Minister of Health of
medical device shortages of devices considered critical. Health Canada is closely
monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-19 and working with
companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before
distribution to provinces and territories (P/Ts). This process is supported by testing
capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with
suppliers to address issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers
in the future once issues are identified.
Government of China Export Controls
In light of recent international criticism concerning medical supplies and PPE exported
from China, the Government of China has implemented a number of export controls
aimed at addressing quality control over the exported products. This has culminated in a
joint declaration requirement that must be signed by both the exporter and the importer
(e.g., PHAC) before the product can leave China, as well as new labeling requirements
for select products.
The resulting outcome of this attestation is that products not medically certified in China
must be labeled in Simplified Chinese as “not for medical use”. This labelling has been
found both on the outer shipping boxes and inside individual product packages. In order
to remove the inserts from each individual product package, the packaging needs to be
opened and searched through, potentially requiring the receiver to re-package the
product.
As noted above, all supplies procured internationally continues to undergo quality
verification by PHAC prior to distribution to P/Ts and is labelled accordingly.
KN95 Respirators
On May 7, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued revised
guidance, indicating that certain filtering facepiece respirators from China may not
provide adequate respiratory protection. The FDA still considers KN95 respirators
medical devices equivalent to N95s, but authorization for KN95 respirators will require
additional validation and review by FDA.
Health Canada Medical Devices has subsequently updated its regulatory guidance,
Optimizing the use of masks and respirators during the COVID-19 outbreak, and issued
a recall for over 60 companies as identified on the U.S. National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) website. Similar to the FDA, Health Canada
will continue to authorize KN95 medical respirators in Canada through the Interim Order
for Medical Devices pathway but as of May 7, Health Canada will request test results
from independent testing facilities to validate the effectiveness of these respirators.
On May 8, CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators received
by the Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out of China,
8 million did not meet the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for
healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1 million met specifications, and 1.6 million
were pending testing results. This number not meeting specifications has since
increased to approximately 9.9 million as results are received for the remaining 80
thousand. PSPC has suspended shipments from this supplier and is pursuing the
appropriate recourse on behalf of the Public Health Agency of Canada.
Reuse and sterilization
Due to increased demand of N95 respirators, PHAC has also been working closely with
Health Canada, the NRC, and ISED on identifying companies with experience
manufacturing the equipment used in reprocessing in order to authorize these
technologies to safely and effectively reprocess N95 respirators.
Health Canada issued its first authorization under the Interim Order for Medical Devices
to Stryker for its Sterizone VP4 on April 5, 2020, and has since authorized additional
devices including Sterrad and Steris sterilizers that are widely available and distributed
across Canadian hospitals.
F/P/T Allocation and Distribution
As agreed to by F/P/T Ministers of Health, PHAC is allocating procured PPE using an
80/20 formula—80% is distributed to P/Ts on a per capita basis and the remaining 20%
replenishes the inventory of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS),
including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada. The purpose of the NESS is
to provide surge capacity to P/Ts when their own resources are not sufficient.
To support distribution, PSPC awarded a contract with Amazon valued at up to $5
million. This contract is primarily for use of the Amazon interface to push out the
allocation of supplies to P/Ts. Amazon is working with the Canadian Armed Forces,
Canada Post and Purolator.
On May 4, to facilitate the intake and distribution of large volumes of PPE and medical
supplies, a Letter of Interest (LOI) / Request for Information (RFI) notice was posted on
the PSPC Buy and Sell website to solicit interest from major logistics service providers.
This new expression of interest relates to a multimodal logistics solution in Canada,
going beyond distribution and includes warehousing, customs documentation and
brokerage, and inventory management. The RFP closed on May 7, and the review of
the expressions of interest is now underway.
COVID-19 OUTBREAK IN KEARL LAKE, ALBERTA
SYNOPSIS
An outbreak of COVID-19 was declared at the Imperial Oil Kearl Lake, Alberta worksite
on April 14, 2020. There are 113 cases linked to this worksite, 43 of which are
residents in jurisdictions outside of Alberta (BC, SK, MB, NS, NB and NL). Three cases
have been hospitalized. There are no deaths reported.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to help minimize the impact of this
outbreak on Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with Alberta
and the other affected provinces and territories in preventing further
spread associated with this outbreak.
 Industry stakeholders and Alberta Health Services have put
measures in place to reduce transmission, protect their workforce and
prevent further spread of COVID-19 to the community.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to provide
increased capacity for epidemiological and laboratory analysisto our
provincial and territorial colleagues.
BACKGROUND
Kearl Lake is a large oil sands worksite approximately 70 km north of Fort McMurray.
Numerous companies have workers on the site, with Imperial Oil being the largest. The
site also has a work camp for employees – accommodations provided by Civeo
Corporation. The work camps function as a residence for workers, most of whom fly in
from across the country for seven-day on, seven-day off shifts.
Cases of COVID-19 began to emerge on the site in mid-March. An outbreak was
declared by Alberta Health (AH) on April 14, 2020. Of the 113 cases that have been
observed:
- 43 cases are residents from other jurisdictions (including BC, SK, MB, NS, NB
and NL);
- 88% are male;
- Cases between 24 and 68 years of age;
- Three cases have been hospitalized, two of which have been admitted to ICU;
and,
- No cases have died.
Control measures
Public Health Alerts (PHA) on the outbreak have been issued to all provinces and
territories by AH throughout the duration of outbreak.
As part of COVID-19 preparedness activities, the site had undertaken a number of
precautionary measures prior to the outbreak (such as: closing the buffet at the camp,
increasing cleaning measures, enforcing hand hygiene practices, and temperature
screening) to prevent the emergence of COVID-19.
Since the outbreak was declared on April 14, further control measures were put in place
by Alberta Health Services (including the masking of food service workers, and the end
of communal dining). The latest illness onset was May 17, 2020. AH considers the
outbreak ongoing at this time and outbreak measures will remain in place at the site.
Mass voluntary testing was undertaken for asymptomatic individuals on the site from
April 19 to 23, 2020. A total of 1,888 tests were completed and 28 individuals tested
positive from this mass testing.
On April 25, 2020, the government of Alberta released the COVID-19 Information
Guidance for Managers and Operators of Industrial Work Camps.
Jurisdictions are providing a range of public messaging and advice to workers returning
from Kearl Lake, from self-monitoring to mandatory self-isolation for 14 days.
Cases in other jurisdictions
Forty-three of the 113 cases are being reported by BC, SK, NS, MB, NB and NL. A
cluster of cases linked to the Kearl Lake worksite have been identified in the First
Nations community of La Loche, Saskatchewan. The Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) is working with Saskatchewan to understand the size of the cluster.
AH has shared a list of personnel who were on the site or at the work camps with
affected jurisdictions to facilitate contact tracing. AH will be receiving daily line list of all
people on the site moving forward. PHAC is currently working with Alberta Health and
all other jurisdictions, to determine the process for notification of personnel on site
moving forward.
PHAC’s National Microbiology Lab is supporting with genetic sequencing of the cases to
help understand transmission, and to help identify any sub-clusters of transmission
among the cases.
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international
partners bilaterally, through the G7 the G20 and the World Health Organization, to help
inform our domestic response and to contribute to global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 With the outbreak evolving rapidly around the world, we are
working closely with our international partners, including the
World Health Organization, to protect the health and safety
of Canadians and the global community.
 We remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government
and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19. The Prime
Minister and my cabinet colleagues are also engaged with
their international counterparts.
 Since early February, I have been engaging my G7
counterparts on a weekly basis to share information on
public health measures, to learn from others’ experiences
and best practices and identify possible joint actions to
tackle this outbreak.
 Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international
counterparts, including the United States and the United
Kingdom, to discuss our respective COVID-19 responses.
These discussions are valuable opportunities to learn from
each other and strengthen our domestic and international
responses.
 On the research front, our Government has been working
closely with many international partners, such as the World
Health Organization and the Global Research Collaboration
for Infectious Disease Preparedness, to support the
development and testing of vaccines, therapies, diagnostics
and public health responses to COVID-19.
 On May 4th, Canada also joined several countries in co-
hosting the launch of the Coronavirus Global Response, an
online pledging event to raise $8 billion US to help
researchers and innovators develop solutions to test, treat
and protect people and to prevent the further spread of
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the U.S. Terminating its Relationship with the WHO
 Canada is aware of the recent decision from the White
House to immediately terminate their relationship with the
WHO. Canada remains strongly committed to constructive
engagement in multilateral institutions, including the WHO,
which are now, more than ever, essential to help us
accomplish together more than any one country can do
alone. We will continue to work with other Member States to
ensure that the WHO is a strong, accountable and well-
governed institution.
 Canada has no plans to cut funding to the WHO. Canada
has and will continue to be a strong supporter of the WHO.
Since February 11, our government has provided $15.5
million to WHO, and a further $1.5 million to Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), the regional WHO office for the
Americas, to prepare and respond to COVID-19 events.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global
response
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest
in making it a strong, accountable, and well-governed
institution.
 This includes after-action reviews, which will be important at
all levels following this crisis and can provide critical insights
to support necessary change
 As highlighted in the Resolution recently adopted at the
World Health Assembly, a comprehensive post-crisis review
of the global response should be undertaken when the time
is right – as soon as feasible.
IF PRESSED on Dr. Bruce Aylward’s appearance before HESA
 Dr. Aylward is an international civil servant employed by the
WHO as a Senior Advisor to the Director General; he does
not represent the Government of Canada at the WHO and is
not a Government of Canada employee.
 We understand that the WHO has received such requests
from several different countries, and that WHO makes efforts
to answer technical questions from interested parties where
possible.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
 I have engaged regularly with my U.S. counterpart,
Secretary Azar, through the G7 forum. I have also held
bilateral calls with him to discuss our respective COVID-19
responses, including testing, guidance for essential workers,
supply chains and research.
If pressed: Interim Report of the Independent Oversight and Advisory
Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health Emergencies Programme
 The recommendations of the IOAC provide a good
foundation for further post-crisis discussions as to how
global responses to health emergencies can be improved.
 For example, the IOAC recommends an independent
assessment of the COVID-19 response, examining both
Member States and the WHO Secretariat, should be
undertaken “at an appropriate time”, to assess performance
during the response and to identify lessons for the future.
Canada has made it clear for many weeks now that it would
support a comprehensive review of the global response
post-crisis.
 There will many lessons that the global community will learn
from this pandemic, and the IOAC has an important role to
provide independent, evidence-based recommendations in
this regard.
BACKGROUND
Canada has engaged with international partners to learn from the experience of others
and best practices, to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts to fight against COVID-19. For instance, Canada, through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role in establishing the World Health
Organization (WHO) global research and innovation roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is
also supporting the Canadian Treatments for COVID-19 Trial (CATCO), which is the
Canadian arm of the WHO SOLIDARITY trial seeking to find effective treatments for
COVID-19. Further, CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Diseases (GloPID-
R), which continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-moving collaboration that is
needed across a multiplicity of players domestically and internationally. Since February,
Canada has participated in weekly G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19,
which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the
U.S. Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s impact across sectors, the Prime Minister
and other Ministers are engaging regularly with their international counterparts,
including Finance, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Employment.
On May 4, Canada joined the European Union, France, Germany, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Japan, Saudi Arabia as the current G20 presidency and Italy as the future
G20 presidency in co-hosting an international online pledging event, the Coronavirus
Global Response. Canada is pledging over $850 million towards the fundraising target
of $8 billion USD to support the development of rapid coronavirus diagnostics,
treatments and vaccines.
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the World Health
Organization (WHO), averaging over $70 million annually for the past 10 years in
assessed and voluntary contributions to support the work of the organization. The WHO
has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the COVID-19
response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their preparedness and
response efforts. Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and evidence-based guidance
during this rapidly evolving pandemic.
On April 14, U.S. President Donald Trump announced that the U.S. will temporarily
suspend funding to WHO while the U.S. Administration conducts a review of the
organization due to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the pandemic and a
perceived bias towards China.
Canada supports an independent, comprehensive review of the global response post-
crisis, which would consider the actions of all actors and partners, including the WHO.
However, Canada’s view is that undermining the credibility of the WHO and its ability to
at this point in time is not helpful. The focus should continue to be on the global
pandemic response and the health of people in vulnerable situations around the world,
with an emphasis on facts and evidence based approaches.
The Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health
Emergencies Programme, which provides oversight and monitoring of the development
and performance of the Programme, recently published an Interim report on WHO’s
response to COVID-19: January-April 2020.
The Interim report is a compilation of observations of how various structures and
processes functioned during the early months of the pandemic. It provides an overview
of the first months of the pandemic before issuing a series of recommendations on the
International Health Regulations (IHR, 2005), the WHO’s Health Emergencies
Programme and the WHO Incident Management System, leveraging of the WHO
Collaborating Centres, access to therapeutics and vaccines, ongoing public health
measures support and independent review of the COVID-19 response.
Dr. Theresa Tam is a member of the IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity
and exercise their responsibilities with full regard for the paramount importance of
independence.
FEDERAL CORRECTIONAL FACILITIES
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has taken measures to prevent introduction of COVID-19
into federal correctional institutions across Canada; as well as to strengthen their
capacity to rapidly identify and contain any outbreaks that may occur; and to ensure that
federal inmates have access to appropriate COVID-19 health care as all Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the federal government doing to prevent the introduction and transmission of
COVID-19 in federal corrections facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work
closely with Correctional Service Canada to strengthen
measures to prevent introduction and transmission of
COVID-19 into federal correctional institutions across
Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada and Correctional
Service Canada are working with local and
provincial/territorial public health authorities across the
country to ensure that all of the appropriate public health and
infection prevention and control practices are in place to
prevent or rapidly control further outbreaks.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working with
Correctional Service Canada and provincial public health
laboratories to ensure that federal correctional institutions
have access to the COVID-19 laboratory testing capacity
necessary to rapidly identify and manage cases.
 Correctional Service Canada is collaborating closely with
local and provincial/territorial public health authorities to
ensure that federal inmates have access to appropriate
COVID-19 health care, including hospital based care if it is
required.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 OUTBREAKs AT Federal Correctional Institutions …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
officials at Correctional Service Canada, as well as with local
and provincial public health authorities to bring outbreaks at
federal correctional facilities under control.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is in daily contact with

Correctional Service Canada, and has mobilized experts in
epidemiology, infection prevention and control,
environmental and workplace health and safety to
institutions that have experienced COVID-19 outbreaks to
support Correctional Services Canada and local public
health authorities in bringing those outbreaks under control.
 In addition to site visits and reviews of Correctional Service
Canada practices regarding infection prevention and control,
environmental health, and workplace health and safety, the
Public Health Agency of Canada has developed a suite of
supporting materials including an institution self-assessment
tool, standardized assessment templates and webinars for
Correctional Service Canada personnel.
BACKGROUND
Correctional Service Canada (CSC) and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
are focusing on preventing and containing the spread of the virus across correctional
institutions by:
 Assessing and strengthening measures to prevent and contain the transmission
of the virus;
 Reviewing infection prevention and control practices;
 Reviewing workplace health and safety practices;
 Implementing recommendations to improve infection prevention and control,
environmental health, and workplace health and safety measures;
 Establishing a proactive laboratory testing strategy to test all inmates and staff at
outbreak sites; and
 Establishing a proactive sentinel laboratory testing strategy for CSC staff located
in communities experiencing increase COVID-19 transmission.
COVID-19 Outbreaks
CSC has been working in concert with PHAC, as well as with provincial and local public
health authorities to identify and implement additional measures required to control
outbreaks at facilities in British Columbia and Quebec, and to prevent or contain
outbreaks elsewhere.
CSC has 43 federal correctional institutions located in 7 provinces across Canada. As of
May 28, there have been outbreaks in 5 facilities. Only one outbreak, at the Federal
Training Centre Medium Institution in Quebec is currently active, but is resolving. All
others have resolved (Joliette QC, Port Cartier QC, Grand Valley Institution ON, Mission
BC).
CSC data on testing of inmates is available publicly at: https://www.csc-
scc.gc.ca/001/006/001006-1003-en.shtml.
DATA SHARING AND COLLECTION
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on COVID-19 cases, including
deaths, through agreements with the provinces and territories, and is working to collect
additional data to improve our understanding of the overall impact of COVID-19 in
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How does the federal government work with provinces and territories on the
collection of data on deaths and active cases and have any improvements been
made to date throughout the COVID-19 crisis?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada recognizes the critical
importance of data to enable our evidence-based response
to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada receives data on
COVID-19 cases, including deaths, through agreements with
the provinces and territories.
 Federal/Provincial/Territorial data sharing is cooperative, and
the Government of Canada as well as the provinces and
territories are sharing all available data relevant to the
COVID-19 response.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada, together with other
federal and provincial and territorial partners, is working to
collect additional data to improve our understanding of the
overall impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
If pressed on issue of unreported tests in Ontario:
 We have been made aware of the two hospitals in Ontario
that have failed to notify about 700 positive COVID-19 tests
dating back as far as April.
 This oversight means that contact tracing was not performed
and that has likely resulted in ongoing transmission.
 The federal government will continue to work with provinces
and territories to improve COVID-19 data gathering and
sharing across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON MLISA
 The Multi-Lateral Information Sharing Agreement (MLISA) is
a Federal/Provincial/Territorial legal agreement that covers
information sharing for infectious disease surveillance,
response, and case management, as well as information
sharing for public health events and public health events of
international concern.
 All provinces and territories signed on to this agreement by
2016.
 Federal/Provincial/Territorial COVID-19 Special Advisory
Committee and its Technical Advisory Committee determine
data collection protocols and oversee data-sharing
requirements during this outbreak.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) works collaboratively with provincial and
territorial (PT) public health authority partners to collate data related to COVID-19 in
Canada. The COVID-19 national case report form includes data on cases and deaths.
PTs transfer a minimal data set to PHAC daily that includes reporting of new identified
cases. All provinces and territories are sharing their data in an electronic format, which
is then uploaded into the national COVID-19 surveillance database. On a weekly basis,
PTs send more complete case report forms to PHAC; however, not all data fields are
always completed. As new information is collected by the PT on a case’s disposition
(i.e., whether the individual has recovered or died), the PT may update the case report
form and transfer this information to PHAC.
These data provide the Agency with an ability to asses the overall impact and burden on
the health system, as data include information on severity of illness, including mortality
and hospitalizations, admissions to intensive care units (ICU) and the number of cases
on mechanical ventilation.
The limitations of this data source are the lack of data completion for some data fields,
and the lack of race-based and socio-economic data. The Agency is working with
various partners and stakeholders to expand the information sources to better
understand the impact of COVID-19 on different populations.
The federal government and the provinces and territories have a long history of
cooperating and sharing information in the face of infectious disease outbreaks and
public health events of international concern. The Multi-Lateral Information Sharing
Agreement (MLISA) was finalized in 2015. All provinces and territories, as well as the
federal Government, are signatories to this agreement. MLISA provides a formal
framework for collaboration, for example, ensuring consistency in level of detail of
information shared and setting out the allowed uses of the information exchanged.
During the COVID-19 outbreak, the Federal/Provincial/Territorial COVID-19 Special
Advisory Committee and its Technical Advisory Committee determine data collection
protocols and oversee data-sharing requirements.
F/P/T data sharing is voluntary and is effective. All jurisdictions have been cooperatively
sharing relevant and available data related to COVID-19. Any identified data gaps are
the result of data availability. All jurisdictions recognize the importance of working
together to increase our collective knowledge of COVID-19.
Race-Based and Sociodemographic Data
PHAC recognizes the importance of information on race or ethnicity. The Agency is
working with PTs and other national partners to determine the feasibility of collecting
and sharing an expanded list of information including risk factors, race/ethnicity and
other socio-economic factors. These indicators will help to further PHAC’s
understanding of COVID-19 among vulnerable populations and to monitor trends going
forward.
PHAC is also in the process of developing tools that will incorporate existing data from a
variety of sources on key populations who are more vulnerable to COVID-19 and its
impacts, including subgroups by social, economic and demographic factors.
ACCUSATIONS OF PHAC RETALIATION AT HESA
SYNOPSIS
At HESA on May 20, 2020, a witness raised the issue of retaliation by the Public Health
Agency of Canada (and other federal departments) for speaking critically of the
pandemic response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Has the Public Health Agency of Canada threatened, punished, intimidated or
harassed individuals for criticizing the government’s pandemic response?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works with research
partners to advance the science of COVID-19.
 Diverse perspectives and respectful debate are integral to
science and the Public Health Agency of Canada
participates in these processes as a regular part of the
conduct of science.
 The Government of Canada will continue to work
collaboratively with partners and promote scientific dialogue
in our COVID-19 response.
IF PRESSED ON HARRASSMENT
 There is no evidence of intimidation in the Public Health
Agency of Canada’s conduct of our work with partners.
Collaboration is a cornerstone of public health.
IF PRESSED ON ENGAGEMENT AND KNOWLEDGE
 Public Health Agency of Canada scientists evaluate their
contributions and role on research teams in light of their
expertise and in alignment with PHAC priorities.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada respects the role of
external principal investigators in assembling their research
teams.
 The Chief Public Health Officer and the President of the
Public Health Agency of Canada were not aware of and
were not involved in any of the discussions related to this
grant application.
Acute Inflammatory illness in children temporally linked with COVID-
19 (Kawasaki Disease)
SYNOPSIS
Reports of multi-system inflammatory disease in children with COVID-19 have been issued in the U.K.,
Italy and the U.S and around the world. Alerts cite features of toxic shock syndrome and incomplete
Kawasaki disease, with some children experiencing gastrointestinal symptoms and cardiac inflammation.
In Canada, there have been media reports of children with the syndrome at Ste. Justine hospital in
Montreal, Quebec, at Sick Kids in Toronto, and in Alberta as well as other places. Several provinces had
made it a reportable condition and are attempting to quantify numbers.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
 Acute inflammatory illness in children is being reported in
Canada and abroad, and we are working with our network of
pediatricians to keep Canada’s physicians informed of these
cases to support detection of cases and care of children.
 We are advising Canadians to contact their healthcare
provider if their child shows symptoms, such as fever,
gastrointestinal illness or their child seems very unwell.
 We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable
information about COVID-19 to prevent the further spread
and to protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
BACKGROUND
An acute inflammatory illness has recently been reported in a small number of children
worldwide, temporally associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In Canada, there have
been media reports of children with the syndrome at Ste. Justine hospital in Montreal,
Quebec, at SickKids hospital in Toronto, and in Alberta and other places.
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include persistent fever, inflammation, poor function in one or more
organs, and other clinical and laboratory features not attributable to other infections.
Many affected children were hospitalized and some required intensive care. To date, all
children affected in Canada have done well and recovered. Some children have
required ICU admissions.
Linkage to COVID-19
Many children with this inflammatory syndrome did not test positive for COVID-19.
Globally, nasal tests for the COVID-19 virus were often negative, however blood tests
for antibodies were sometimes but not always positive. While the tests themselves may
have had varied accuracy, the fact that patients who tested negative for COVID-19 virus
and sometimes test positive for antibodies suggests that inflammatory complications
were delayed, occurring when the virus was no longer detectable on nasal swabs.
Clinicians in Canada are aware of this potential syndrome and must maintain a high
index of suspicion to identify cases. What is causing them, is unknown. It is suspected
an immune response to COVID-19 activates an inflammatory process in genetically
susceptible children. But other mechanisms are possible as well. The global pediatric
medical community is rapidly studying this issue.
So far, children have had far less COVID-19 disease than adults. Even young people
can have serious outcomes or potentially death, so it is important that everyone take
precautions to prevent infection.
Surveillance
As part of the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) surveillance of COVID-19,
there have been three different ways the disease activity in children have been
monitored:
 the reporting of all cases to provinces, then to PHAC;
 a network of Pediatric Emergency Department physicians in Children’s hospitals
who report on COVID-19 cases; and
 the Canadian Pediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a collaboration between
PHAC and the Canadian Paediatric Society.
The CPSP COVID-19 surveillance protocol is being modified to capture cases of this
Kawasaki-like syndrome/multi-system inflammatory syndrome, even in the absence of a
positive test for COVID-19 to increase available data concerning this emerging
condition.
Federal Role
PHAC continues ongoing monitoring, intelligence gathering and international
engagement to inform Canadian public health action. Canada also continues to
collaborate with federal, provincial, and territorial partners to share information about
COVID-19 in Canada. PHAC has a number of systems in place to monitor community
spread and severe outcomes related to COVID-19 in pediatric populations.
