Created: 2024-03-28T18:33:38.111065
Name: Adverse_Reaction_Reporting_Information
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/adverse-reaction-reporting/adverse-reaction-reporting-adverse-reaction-reporting-information.html
Package ID: 5dac30f9-775f-4b6c-ba35-21f89944c77c
Keywords: ['adverse effects', 'report', 'form', 'medeffect', 'industry', 'mandatory']
Notes: Health Canada information related to adverse reaction reporting of drugs and health products on the Canadian market
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Adverse Reaction Reporting Information - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Skip to section menu Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Drugs and health products Report a side effect of a health product, drug or medical device Adverse Reaction Reporting Information Who Can Report an Adverse Reaction? What to Report? When to Report an Adverse Reaction? Why Report an Adverse Reaction? Who Can Report an Adverse Reaction? Anyone -- including consumers, patients, caregivers, physicians, pharmacists, nurses, and dentists can report an adverse reaction to drugs or health products on the Canadian market. Reporting is voluntary for the general population, but is mandatory for Market Authorization Holders (MAH) as required by Canada's Food and Drugs Act. What to Report? You do not have to be certain that a health product caused the reaction in order to report it. Adverse reaction reports are, for the most part, only suspected associations. Health Canada wants to know about all suspected adverse reactions, but especially if they are: unexpected (not consistent with product information or labelling), regardless of their severity; serious, whether expected or not; or related to a health product that has been on the market less than 5 years. When to Report an Adverse Reaction? You should report an adverse reaction soon after the reaction occurred, even if you are not certain that a particular health product was the cause. Why Report an Adverse Reaction? All marketed drugs and health products have benefits and risks. Although health products are carefully tested before they are licensed in Canada, some adverse reactions may become evident only after a product is in use by the general population. When you submit a suspected adverse reaction report, you contribute to the ongoing collection of information that occurs once health products are on the market. Your report may contribute to: the identification of previously unrecognized rare, or serious adverse reactions; changes in product safety information, or other regulatory actions such as the withdrawal of a product from the Canadian market; international data regarding benefits, risks or effectiveness of drugs and health products; and, health product safety that benefits all Canadians. Page details Date modified: 2010-03-04 Section Menu Report a side effect of a health product, drug or medical device Mandatory Adverse Reaction Reporting Form for Industry Adverse Reaction Reporting Information Mandatory Medical Device Problem Reporting Form for Industry Canada Vigilance Postage Paid Label Side Effect Reporting Form Mandatory reporting requirements for hospitals Report an adverse reaction to a health product Report a side effect of a drug Report a medical device problem or incident Report a side effect or adverse reaction to a vaccine Report a side effect or adverse reaction to a natural health product Report a side effect of a cannabis product Report a side effect of a veterinary drug About medical device problems About adverse reactions (side effects) Health products post-market surveillance cycle About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy