Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:27.419112
Name: Industry_guide:_Importing,_exporting_or_transhipping_consumer_products_and_cosmetics_for_commercial_purposes_-_Summary
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/legislation-guidelines/guidelines-policies/importing-exporting-commercial.html
Package ID: 7100d770-ae41-49a8-8302-613a09aae0c0
Keywords: ['industry guide', 'importing', 'exporting', 'transhipping', 'consumer-products and cosmetics', 'commercial purposes']
Notes: This guide provides general information to any person - an individual or an organization - that is involved in the import, export or transhipment of consumer products and cosmetics for commercial purposes.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Industry guide: Importing, exporting or transhipping consumer products and cosmetics for commercial purposes - Summary - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Consumer product safety reports Industry guide: Importing, exporting or transhipping consumer products and cosmetics for commercial purposes - Summary From: Health Canada Related acts and regulations Canada Consumer Product Safety Act Food and Drugs Act Cosmetics Regulations Related program Consumer products and cosmetics Overview This guide provides general information to any person - an individual or an organization - that is involved in the import, export or transhipment of consumer products and cosmetics for commercial purposes. It describes Health Canada's position about this subject within the context of the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act and the Food and Drugs Act and it may help you to understand your responsibilities with respect to products you move into and out of Canada for commercial purposes. Who this guide is for Importers, exporters and transhippers of consumer products and cosmetics for commercial purposes Other regulated parties who are affected by the regulations In this guide About this document 1. Purpose 2. Scope 3. Policy objective Guidance 4. What is importing or exporting for commercial purposes? 5. Import into Canada: Importing requirements of consumer products or cosmetics into Canada for commercial purposes 6. Export from Canada: Exporting consumer products or cosmetics from Canada for commercial purposes 7. Tranship through Canada: Transhipping consumer products or cosmetics through Canada Additional information 8. Guiding principles 9. Roles and responsibilities Industry’s role Consumer’s role 10. Contact us Health Canada’s Consumer Product Safety Program Canada Border Services Agency Appendices Appendix A – Glossary Acronyms Terms Appendix B – Consumer products with specific regulatory requirements and their associated guides Appendix C – References View complete guide Download PDF (891 KB, 24 pages) Details and history Published: September 11, 2019 Updated: September 11, 2019 For assistance For further information contact the Health Canada Consumer Product Safety Office via email (cps-spc@hc-sc.gc.ca) or telephone at 1-866-662-0666 (toll-free within Canada and the United States). Page details Date modified: 2022-01-06 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy