Created: 2023-07-19T17:51:47.727761
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_health_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(C)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/712323c9-cb90-4a8d-a72e-d0a3075e8579/resource/3b59468c-c1ba-4dcd-84c4-4b59a153bca8/download/hesa-supps-c-proactive-disclosure-binder-duclos-eng.pdf
Package ID: 712323c9-cb90-4a8d-a72e-d0a3075e8579
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'Budget', 'health']
Notes: Appearance of the Minister of Health Before HESA on the Supps C
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Minister Duclos
Supplementary Estimates (C)
Main Estimates 2023-2024
Departmental Reports
Thursday, March 23, 2023
HESA – Supps C / Mains / Departmental Plans Appearance
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Minister Duclos
March 2023
A – OVERVIEW DOCUMENTS
1. Scenario Note
2. Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates C Overviews
a. Health Canada Supps C Overview
b. PHAC Supps C Overview
c. CFIA Supps C Overview
d. CIHR Supps C Overview
3. Supplementary Estimates C Line Items Crosswalk
a. Health Canada Supps C Crosswalk
b. PHAC Supps C Crosswalk
c. CFIA Supps C Crosswalk
d. CIHR Supps C Crosswalk
4. Health Portfolio’s Main Estimates Overviews
a. Health Canada ME Overview
b. PHAC ME Overview
c. CFIA ME Overview
d. CIHR ME Overview
5. Health Portfolio’s Crosswalk of Mains Transfers
a. Health Canada Mains Crosswalk
b. PHAC Mains Crosswalk
c. CFIA Mains Crosswalk
d. CIHR Mains Crosswalk
B – HOT ISSUES
Healthcare and Drugs
6. Healthcare Funding
7. Canada Health Act – Privatization and Compliance Issues
8. Drugs for Rare Diseases
9. Dental
10. MAID
11. PMPRB
12. Pharmacare
13. HHR Crisis
14. Abortion Access
15. Biomanufacturing
16. LTC Homes/Standards
COVID
17. Pandemic Response
18. Designated Quarantine Facilities – Costs / OPQ-1197 Response
19. COVID Origins
20. Pandemic Instrument Negotiations
Regulation of Health Products and Pesticides
21. Breast Implants
22. Pediatric Analgesics
23. Pesticides
Public Health Issues
24. Atypical Neurological Syndrome
C – HEALTH CARE
25. Palliative/Home Care
26. Territorial Health Investment Fund
D – CANNABIS
27. Cannabis
28. Medical Access Program
E – PHARMACEUTICALS (INCLUDING REGULATION)
39. Regulating Pediatric Medicines
F – SHORTAGES
30. Health Product Shortages
31. Infant Formula Shortages
G – COVID RELATED ISSUES
32. Global COVID-19 Efforts
33. Post-COVID Condition
34. Security at the NML
H – TOBACCO AND VAPING
35. Smoking and Tobacco
I – SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH
36. Sexual and Reproductive Health
37. Support for 2SLGBTQI+
J – RESEARCH
38. Cancer Research
39. CIHR-Funded COVID-19 Research
K – FINANCIAL
40. Departmental Plans
a. Health Canada
b. PHAC
c. CFIA
d. CIHR
SCENARIO NOTE [MINISTER DUCLOS]
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (HESA) – SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (C)
2022-2023, MAIN ESTIMATES 2023-2024 and DEPARTMENTAL PLANS
March 23, 2023
MEETING SCENARIO
• You will be supported by the following officials who will appear with you at the meeting:
o Health Canada
Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
Jo Voisin, Assistant Deputy Minister (Strategic Policy Branch)
Dr. Supriya Sharma, Chief Medical Advisor
o PHAC
Heather Jeffrey, President
Dr. Howard Njoo, Deputy Chief Public Health Officer
o CIHR
Dr. Michael Strong, President
o CFIA
Sylvie Lapointe, Vice-President, Policy and Programs
The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will have 5 minutes to deliver.
You will then take questions from Committee members for the remainder of the hour.
o The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
o In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5
minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• This will be the 58th time that HESA has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the 44th
Parliament. They are currently conducting the following two studies concurrently:
1. Children’s Health
2. Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of COVID-19
• There are three studies that the Committee has adopted motions to undertake which have not
become active yet.
1. Oversight of Medical Devices (Breast Implants)
2. National Three-Digit Suicide Prevention Hotline (988)
3. Women’s Health
• The Health Committee has recently tabled Report 10 entitled “Addressing Canada’s Health
Workforce.” The Report follows from the Committee’s study on Canada’s Health Workforce. A motion
was adopted on March 9 to study the Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB). You are
expected to appear in mid-April alongside former PMPRB officials. The Committee has also taken an
interest in the supply of pediatric medications, including children’s analgesics. The Department has been
providing biweekly updates to the Committee on medications imported since November 2022 and is
scheduled to do so until the end of May.
• The Opposition role at the Committee is led by the Conservative Party, who have placed several
key critics, “shadow ministers,” on the Committee. Dr. Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health,
Laila Goodridge is the Shadow Minister for Addictions, and Matt Jeneroux is the Shadow Minister for
Supply Chain Issues. Mr. Jeneroux was previously Shadow Minister for Health during the first months of
the COVID-19 Pandemic. The Conservatives remain critical of COVID-19 mitigation measures. Dr. Ellis has
raised these concerns at several meetings, even on issues that are seemingly not connected. The
Conservatives have also raised shortages of pediatric medicines and backlogs for health services. In last
year’s appearance on the Main Estimates, Conservative members spoke critically about the Wellness
Together Canada portal and the government’s policies regarding safer supply.
• The Bloc Quebecois presence is led by BQ Health Critic, Luc Theriault. In general, the BQ
advocate for strong protection of matters under provincial jurisdiction and increased federal health
transfers. BQ MPs have repeatedly emphasized a general skepticism about the ability of the federal
government to deliver programs that may be similar to those already existing in Quebec. For example,
during the debate on the interim Canada Dental Benefit, BQ members argued that the money being
spent on the federal benefit should be provided to Quebec in the form of an additional transfer. Mr.
Theriault’s concerns about federal health transfers have been reflected in other venues. In recent
briefings regarding the Canada Health Act, Mr. Theriault raised concerns about the methodology used to
forecast future health spending and mirrored earlier statements criticizing conditional health funding for
Quebec. Mr. Theriault has also expressed an interest in studying breast implants. The order of reference
for the Committee’s study on breast implants follows from a motion put forward by the member on
February 9, 2022. Mr. Theriault noted past attempts to establish a breast implant registry, saying “since
there’s no registry, the women who are dealing with the problems or who are unaware of any potential
problems can’t verify what was implanted in them.” In last year’s Main Estimates appearance before the
Health Committee, Mr. Theriault commented on medical assistance in dying. The member expressed
concerns about the then-forthcoming report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness.
• The New Democratic Party presence is led by Don Davies, the party’s health critic and long-
standing member of the Committee. The NDP have recently pushed for the Committee to study the
PMPRB with Mr. Davies being the originator of the motion the Committee ultimately adopted to move
forward with hearings. Mr. Davies also supported the interim Canada Dental Benefit at the Committee
and has raised the issue of dental care in conjunction with the NDP’s support of a national pharmacare
program. NDP members attending the Committee have also brought attention to the overdose crisis
where they have been critical of the Government for not pursuing the decriminalization of simple
possession of drugs.
NEXT STEPS
• The Supplementary Estimates (A) 2023-2024 will be reviewed by the Committee in late Spring.
You and Minister Bennett will be invited to appear in the weeks following their tabling in the House of
Commons The Department endeavours to respond to any follow-up commitments made at the meeting
within 2-3 weeks of the appearance.
Health Canada Overview
(In dollars)
Previous Estimates to Date
Supplementary Estimates (C) Proposed Authorities to Date % Change in Proposed Authorities
Due to these estimates % Change in Proposed Authorities
to Date
This Year Over
Last Year
Transfers Adjustments
Voted 3,963,792,180 (1,769,200) 180,260,493 4,142,283,473 4.5% (54.2)%
Statutory 1,953,810,712 - 324,977,893 2,278,788,605 16.6% 1,109.8%
Total Budgetary 5,917,602,892 (1,769,200) 505,238,386 6,421,072,078 8.5% (30.5)%
Health Canada has proposed a net increase of $503.5M in the 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C),
bringing its proposed authorities to date to $6,421.1M. These Supplementary Estimates include:
Voted Appropriations of $178.5M:
New Funding [$180.3M]
• $106.5M – Funding for the renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation
of cannabis in Canada;
• $52.2M – Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit Plan;
• $12.9M – Funding to continue to improve the accessibility of therapeutic products through
regulatory system investments;
• $5.5M – Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office; and,
• $3.1M – Funding for federal nuclear emergency preparedness.
Transfers [-$1.8M]
Transfers to Health Canada (+$0.7M)
• $645.0K – From the Public Health Agency of Canada in support of vaccine record interoperability
across Canada; and,
• $54.0K – From the Public Health Agency of to support the development and updating of vaccine
related standardized medical codes used in immunization registries.
Transfers from Health Canada (-$2.5M)
• -$40.0K – To the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development international research project on the economic assessment of social
benefits of chemicals management;
• -$145.0K – To the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organisation for Economic Co-
operation and Development activities related to pesticides and biocides;
• -$218.2K –To the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the harmonization and
standardization of the good manufacturing practices training at an international level;
• -$765.0K – To the Department of Indigenous Services to support Indigenous knowledge
exchange on medical assistance in dying and palliative care; and,
• -$1.3M – To Statistics Canada to advance the oral health component of the upcoming Canadian
Health Measures Survey.
Statutory Appropriations of $325.0B
• $298.5M – Payments for dental benefits pursuant to the Dental Benefit Act; and,
• $26.5M – EBP amounts related to approved Treasury Board submissions:
o $22.3M – Funding for the renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of
cannabis in Canada;
o $2.7M – Funding to continue to improve the accessibility of therapeutic products through
regulatory system investments;
o $0.9M – Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit Plan;
o $0.4M – Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office; and,
o $0.1M – Funding for federal nuclear emergency preparedness.
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Public Health Agency of Canada
(In dollars) Authorities to Date Supplementary Estimates (C) Proposed Authorities to Date
Transfers Adjustments Total
Voted 11,703,981,624 (2,598,901) 32,665,996 30,067,095 11,734,048,719
Statutory 80,762,066 - 2,729,421 2,729,421 83,491,487
Total Budgetary 11,784,743,690 (2,598,901) 35,395,417 32,796,516 11,817,540,206
The Public Health Agency of Canada is seeking an increase of approximately $32.8 million to its
reference levels:
New Funding ($32.7M):
• To strengthen Canada’s ability to detect and respond to public health events and emergencies
through data and risk assessment ($18.4M);
• To maintain access to the Canadians COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential to support
mobility and the application of public health measures ($13.6M); and
• Renewal for the existing Federal Framework for the legalization and regulation of cannabis in
Canada ($704K).
Transfers to/from Other Government Departments (-$2.6M):
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the harmonization and standardization of the
good manufacturing practices training at an international level ($218K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development activities related to pesticides and biocides ($145K);
• Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organisation for Economic Co-operation
and Development international research project on the economic assessment of social benefits of
chemicals management ($40K);
• Transfer to the Department of Health to support the development and updating of vaccine
related standardized medical codes used in immunization registries (-$54K);
• Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to support
mental wellness in Inuit communities affected by the COVID-19 pandemic (-$200K);
• Transfer to the Department of Employment and Social Development for the Indigenous Early
Learning and Child Care Transformation Initiative (-$358K);
• Transfer to the Department of Employment and Social Development to support the Indigenous
engagement on the Disability Inclusion Action Plan and the National Autism Strategy (-$400K);
• Transfer to the Department of Health in support of vaccine record interoperability across Canada
(-$645K); and
• Transfer to the International Development Research Centre to support a vaccine clinical trial
against the Sudan Ebolavirus (-$1.3M).
Internal Transfers (zero impact on reference levels):
• From operating to capital to procure diagnostic testing equipment ($16M).
Statutory Appropriations ($2.7M):
• Employee benefit plan adjustments
Canadian Food Inspection Agency Overview
(In dollars) Supplementary Estimates (C) % Change in Proposed Authorities
Due to Supplementary Estimates (C) % Change in Proposed Authorities
to Date
This Year Over
Last Year
Transfers Adjustments Total
Voted - 27,615,848 27,615,848 3.6% 7.4%
Statutory - 4,278,475 4,278,475 2.7% 1.0%
Total Budgetary - 31,894,323 31,894,323 3.5% 6.3%
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has proposed a net increase of $31.9M in the 2022-23 Supplementary
Estimates (C) based on:
Voted Appropriations of $27.6M:
Adjustments – increase of $27.6M
• $14.7M – Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital
transformation.
• $4.9M – Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine
fever.
• $4.8M – Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island.
• $2.7M – Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade
of regulated animals other than livestock.
• $0.5M – Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and
Drug Regulations.
Statutory Appropriations of $4.3M:
Employee Benefit Plan adjustments related to increased Supplementary Estimates (C) salary funding for
the following:
• $2.4M – Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital
transformation.
• $0.8M – Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island.
• $0.5M – Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine
fever.
• $0.5M – Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade
of regulated animals other than livestock.
• $0.1M – Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and
Drug Regulations.
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates C
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
ADJUSTMENTS TO CIHR’S AVAILABLE AUTHORITIES
(In $ millions)
Vote 1
Operating Expenditures1 Vote 5
Grants Subtotal Statutory Items2 Total
Authorities to Date 74.2 1,269.3 1,343.5 9.1 1,352.6
Supplementary Estimates (C) 0.2 10.3 10.5 0.1 10.6
Proposed Authorities to Date 74.4 1,279.6 1354.0 9.2 1,363.2
As a result of Supplementary Estimates (C), CIHR’s overall available and statutory authorities for 2022-23
will increase by approximately $10.6 million to a total of $1,363.2 million.
Adjustments from Treasury Board Submissions - Increase of $12.0 million
• $10.6 million for the Canada First Research Excellence Fund (horizontal item)
• $1.4 million to support efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health (Budget 2022)
Transfer from Other Departments and Agencies – Increase of $0.1 million
• $0.1 million to reflect an adjustment in the expected cost to explore the development of a
common grants management solution.
Transfers to Other Departments and Agencies – Decrease of $1.5 million
• $1.5 million to support a vaccine clinical trial against the Sudan Ebolavirus
Statutory Authorities – Increase of $0.03 million
• $0.03 million for contributions to employee benefit plans related to New Voted Appropriations
Health Canada’s 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Health Canada Key Messages
Purpose /Objectives
Expected Results
Voted Statutory
Funding for the renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of cannabis in
Canada
Total: $128,814,252
CSCB
• Health Canada is the lead department for the horizontal Cannabis Program. The other
four departments are the Public Health Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, the Royal Canadian
Mounted Police, and the Canada Border Services Agency.
• This funding supports continued implementation and administration of the federal cannabis
framework. • Canada’s legal framework for cannabis was implemented in 2018 and is
designed to strictly regulate and restrict access to legal cannabis, to mitigate public health and public
safety risks and to provide a diverse and competitive legal industry made up of small and large players to
displace the illicit market.
• Renewed funds will enable Health Canada to continue delivery of the Cannabis Program,
specifically administering the Act and regulations, licensing the cannabis industry for both medical and
non-medical purposes, conducting regulatory compliance, enforcement and inspections activities,
directing research, and delivering public education and awareness. • Cannabis is kept out of
the hands of Canadian children and youth.
• The illegal cannabis market is reduced. 106,519,778 22,294,474
Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit Plan
Total: $53,145,464
SPB/Dental
• The Government of Canada has passed legislation that enables Health Canada and the
Canada Revenue Agency (CRA) to proceed with the implementation of the interim Canada Dental
Benefit. Funding provided is enabling Health Canada, in close collaboration with the CRA, to oversee the
implementation and delivery of the interim benefit and allowing Health Canada to lead development
and implementation of a long-term dental care program.
• These funds are also allowing the CRA to deliver the benefit and utilize existing tools to conduct
verification and collections activities to ensure compliance with regards to eligibility and use of funds
provided through the interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• Available funds are not supporting benefit payments to Canadians. These payments are being
funded via separate statutory funding provided specifically for this purpose. • On November
17, 2022, an Act respecting cost of living relief measures related to dental care and rental housing
(formerly Bill C-31) received Royal Assent. This includes the Dental Benefit Act, which provides authority
to the Minister of Health to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit. New funding was required to
enable Health Canada and CRA implementing and delivering this new benefit for Canadians.
• Given their expertise in delivering essential benefits to Canadians, the interim Canada Dental
Benefit is being administered by the CRA on behalf of the Government of Canada.
• Statutory funding provided for the purpose of supporting implementation and delivery of the
Canada Dental Benefit will cover costs associated with employee benefit plans for public servants hired
to support this work. • Implementation and delivery of the interim Canada Dental Benefit and
development and implementation of a long-term program that will follow the interim benefit.
• The CRA began receiving applications and processing payments for the interim Canada Dental
Benefit starting on December 1, 2022.
• The CRA will also utilize its full suite of compliance tools to support the administration of the
Canada Dental Benefit to ensure compliance with regards to eligibility and the use of funds for dental
care services. 52,224,911 920,553
Funding to continue to improve the accessibility of therapeutic products through regulatory system
investments
Total: $15,610,771
HPFB
• Adapting to changes in health care delivery while giving Canadians faster access to the
drugs and medical devices they need is a priority for the government.
• Over the past five years, Health Canada has made important progress on the Regulatory Review
of Drugs and Medical Devices, an initiative powered through significant investment in Budget 2017 to
improve access, affordability, and appropriate use of medicines.
• Through Supplementary Estimates (C), Health Canada is seeking an additional year of funding to
facilitate the continuation of this work until the Department is positioned internally to sustain these
activities. • The Regulatory Review of Drugs and Medical Devices initiative has facilitated
several enhancements to adapt Health Canada’s regulatory processes to account for rapid changes and
innovation in the health sector and address patient needs.
• Specifically, the funding has enabled strong partnerships within the health system,
improvements to the use of real-world evidence, investments in regulatory capacity and infrastructure,
and targeted measures to improve timely access to products. While these activities have now
transitioned into regular operations, they require heightened levels of coordination, partnership and
engagement to sustain.
• The Department initially planned to continue funding this work beyond the initial investment
through additional revenues generated by updated fees charged to industry in respect of drugs and
medical devices. However, a decision was made in 2019-20 to delay the fees update, originally planned
for April 1, 2019, by one year, and phase it in over four years until March 2024. Supplementary funding is
now required as the increased revenues from those fees had been earmarked to cover the costs of this
initiative. • Overall, this initiative will continue to help make Canada’s regulatory system
efficient, better connected, and more timely. For example:
o Partnerships to align review processes, provide early advice to companies, and participate in
work sharing projects will help companies efficiently enter the market without compromising safety.
o Improvements to existing priority review pathways, as well a focus on ways to better regulate
generics, biosimilar drugs and biologics will improve access to these products for patients and healthcare
partners.
o Improvements in the use of real-world evidence will allow the Department to understand the
real-world performance of marketed products to help inform decision making.
o Modern and flexible operations will pave the way to make the existing regulatory system more
efficient and sustainable. 12,927,878 2,682,893
Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office
(TB Sub + Reprofile)
Total: $5,914,986
SPB
• The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) was established in spring 2021 to
provide dedicated capacity to work with provinces, territories and key stakeholders on options for a
Canadian Drug Agency (CDA); supported by a Budget 2019 investment.
• Funding will support CDATO activities/ staffing in 2022-23 to advance the early development of
proposed functions for the CDA with key partners. • Provide dedicated capacity, leadership,
and resources to develop a mandate and plan to establish a CDA that will improve pharmaceutical
system coordination and support related work.
• Deliver on commitments as outlined in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, Budgets 2019,
2021 and 2022, and the Supply and Confidence Agreement. • Funding will support the CDATO
in delivering on its mandate to develop a future CDA in partnership with provinces, territories and key
stakeholders.
• This funding will also support the CDATO’s early development of functions for a future CDA, in
collaboration with key partners.
• A future CDA would have the governance and initial capacity to address pharmaceutical system
gaps. 5,474,213
440,773
Funding for federal nuclear emergency preparedness
Total: $3,252,913
HECSB
• Health Canada will receive $3,252,913 to stabilize key components of federal nuclear
emergency preparedness.
• The funding will be used to stabilize and expand current monitoring and surveillance activities
and to stabilize current risk assessment activities that support nuclear emergency preparedness and
response. • Stabilize funding for the operation and maintenance of Health Canada’s
radiation monitoring stations, labs, and associated activities.
• Expand funding to maintain and increase data gathering capacity and reliability.
• Stabilize funding for Health Canada’s radiation health risk assessment expertise. •
Improve availability of near real-time radiation monitoring network data through an enhanced
Government of Canada platform.
• Improve operations of Health Canada’s radiation monitoring stations.
• Increase nuclear emergency preparedness in Canada. 3,113,713 139,200
Payments for dental benefits pursuant to the Dental Benefit Act
Total: $298,500,000
SPB/Dental • In addition to funding provided to explicitly support the implementation and
delivery of the interim Canada Dental Benefit, statutory funding has also been provided for the purpose
of providing direct benefit payments to Canadians eligible for the interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• As of February 8th, payments for dental benefits pursuant to the Dental Benefit Act have been
provided to over 196,000 children reducing barriers for children accessing dental care.
• It is estimated that over 500,000 Canadian children a year will benefit from this targeted
investment. As this is an estimate, funding set aside for the interim Canada Dental Benefit includes a
buffer in case the actual number of eligible parents applying is higher. The cost of the dental benefit is
fully covered by the funding announced for dental care in Budget 2022. • Statutory funding
provided for the interim Canada Dental Benefit allows parents to access direct payments totalling up to
$1,300 per eligible child under 12 (up to $650 per year for two years) to support the costs of dental care
services.
• Applications opened for the interim Canada Dental Benefit on December 1, 2022. The benefit
covers dental care expenses retroactive to October 1, 2022, for qualifying children and families who
were eligible as of the December 1, 2022. Applications for a second benefit period open on July 1, 2023.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit is a temporary benefit available for children without
access to private dental insurance and with an adjusted family net income under $90,000.
• It is anticipated that the interim Canada Dental Benefit will enable applicants to pay for a basic
level of care for their eligible children. 298,500,000
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health in support of vaccine
record interoperability across Canada
Total: $645,000
SPB
• Funding transferred from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of
Health, will support the advancement of public health measures.
• Through a contribution agreement with Canada Health Infoway, funds will support the
organization’s work with CANImmunize to strengthen vaccine record interoperability and maintain pan-
Canadian access to the Canadian Vaccine Catalogue. • This funding will allow Canada Health
Infoway to support the continuation of a Canadian licence for CANImmunize’s Canadian Vaccine
Catalogue to ensure it remains available online, free of charge, to anyone wishing to access it, by
maintaining a standardized and mapped terminology and coding database of Canadian vaccine products.
• Funding will also enable CANImmunize to enhance the Canadian Vaccine Catalogue by
incorporating singular bilingual terminology for vaccines. • Canada Health Infoway will
support the continuation of a Canadian licence for CANImmunize’s Canadian Vaccine Catalogue and
enable enhancements. 645,000
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health to support the
development and updating of vaccine related standardized medical codes used in immunization
registries
Total: $54,000
SPB
• Funding transferred from the Public Health Agency of Canada to Health Canada will
support the advancement of public health measures.
• Through a contribution agreement with Canada Health Infoway, funds will be used to allow the
organization to remain the point of access for pan-Canadian SNOMED CT content on vaccine terminology
standards. • In supporting the Public Health Agency of Canada’s is interest in the
development and maintenance of vaccine-related SNOMED CT CA codes to facilitate exchange between
information systems that collect vaccination information, this this funding will allow Canada Health
Infoway maintain a single point of access for pan-Canadian SNOMED CT content related to vaccine
terminology standards for Canada. • Canada Health Infoway maintains a single point of
access for pan-Canadian SNOMED CT content related to vaccine terminology standards for Canada.
54,000
Transfer from the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development international research project on the
economic assessment of social benefits of chemicals management
Total: ($40,000)
HECSB
• Health Canada will transfer $40,000 to support the Organisation for Economic
Cooperation and Development’s international research project on the economic assessment of the
societal benefits of chemicals management.
• The funding will enhance Canada’s chemical regulatory programs by generating data on the
economic benefits of reducing health and environmental problems caused by exposure to toxic
chemicals. • Build on Health Canada’s previous contributions of expertise and funding for five
surveys to generate economic data on chemicals-related effects on asthma, IQ loss, kidney disease,
infertility, and very low birth weight in Canada.
• Implement five additional surveys in Canada to generate economic data on chemicals-related
effects of skin sensitisation, thyroid disruption, hypertension, non-fatal cancer, and foetal mortality.
• This funding will enable improved understanding of the economic benefits resulting
from the reduction of health and environmental problems caused by exposure to toxic chemicals.
(40,000)
Transfer from the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development activities related to pesticides and biocides
Total: ($145,000)
PMRA
• This transfer of $145,000 is for the purpose of providing a grant to the OECD to support
the work underway for the Working Parties on Pesticides and on Biocides. PMRA does not have a
mechanism available for a direct contribution and is using the one available at PHAC, as previously done
in 2019 and 2020.
• The grant will support health-related policy, technical and scientific activities that help Canada
maintain the highest standards for the sound management of chemicals.
• Funding to OECD’s Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Programme, and broadly to the OECD,
fosters collaboration and strengthens relationships with key international partners and stakeholders.
• This contribution advances scientific and technical collaboration on an international
stage between the OECD and the pesticides and biocides area of work at Health Canada including areas
such as assessment on the risk of pesticides and biocides to human health and the environment,
overcoming shared challenges and increasing the efficacy of pesticide management programmes for all
stakeholders, including Industry and Government.
• Supporting ongoing development and enhancement of innovative chemical assessment
methodologies for the regulation of chemicals and updating test guidelines that integrate emerging
science.
• The grant will support health-related policy, technical and scientific activities that help Canada
maintain the highest standards for the sound management of chemicals (pesticides and biocides), to
protect the health and safety of Canadians in practical and concrete ways.
• It is expected that the project will also strengthen pesticide assessment in OECD member and
non-member countries.
• The expected outcomes will directly support the mandate of Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency. (145,000)
Transfer from the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
harmonization and standardization of the good manufacturing practices training at an international level
Total: ($218,200)
ROEB
• The Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S) leads the international
development, implementation and maintenance of harmonized Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP)
(i.e. manufacturing of pharmaceutical products). Canada has been an active member of PIC/S since
1999.
• PIC/S is leading the development of a Pharmaceutical Inspectorates’ Academy (PIA). The PIA
is a training platform with the aim of developing a global harmonized and standardized approach to
training and curriculum development for GMP. The PIA’s goal is to ensure that high-quality standards for
Active Pharmaceutical Ingredients (API) and medicinal products are achieved globally, in the interest of
public health.
• Investing in the PIA supports the harmonisation and calibration of training, as well as the
standardised qualifications of GMP inspectors, which is key to a consistent interpretation and uniformed
application of GMP requirements by inspectors worldwide. This is essential to confidence building and
trust, which in turn, allows for reliance between like-minded countries. • The PIA is a unique
opportunity to ensure all regulators across the globe are applying high-quality standards consistently.
• Investment in the PIA will allow GMP Inspectors to strengthen their knowledge, skills, and
capabilities by allowing them to mutually share, engage and learn from each other.
• Contributing to the PIA helps set the foundation for meaningful collaboration with like-minded
countries. • Short term: High quality GMP training for inspectors across 54 countries,
including Canada.
• Medium term: Strong foundation to expand the list of countries with whom Health Canada
shares mutual recognition of inspections. (218,200)
Transfer from the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to support Indigenous
knowledge exchange on medical assistance in dying and palliative care
Total: ($765,000)
SPB • This transfer represents a small part of the larger plan the Government is undertaking to
meaningfully engage Indigenous peoples on palliative care and medical assistance in dying.
• Health Canada officials work closely with their colleagues in Indigenous Services Canada to
ensure that our two departments are aligned and do not duplicate each other’s work.
• This transfer respects the role of Indigenous Services Canada with regard to delivery of end-of-
life care to First Nations on Reserve and in Inuit communities. The funding will be essential to support
distinctions-based engagement on an issue that is also of great importance to Health Canada. •
This funding transfer to Indigenous Services Canada will support engagement with First Nations
on reserve and Inuit on:
o Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID), to help inform and support the delivery of culturally safe
MAID; and
o Palliative care, to support the delivery of culturally safe palliative care (by feeding into a
distinctions-based Indigenous palliative care framework). • Utilizing their ongoing
relationship with Indigenous-focused organizations working at the grassroots levels, Indigenous Services
Canada will use this transfer to undertake work to support engagement with First Nations on reserve and
Inuit communities on palliative care and MAID.
• This work will inform policy and set national level directives and policy recommendations on
distinctions-based end-of-life care. As well, the results of the palliative care engagement will be rolled up
into a distinctions-based framework under development by Health Canada. (765,000)
Transfer from the Department of Health to Statistics Canada to advance the oral health component of
the upcoming Canadian Health Measures Survey
Total: ($1,300,000)
SPB/Dental
• Funding for the Oral Health Component (OHC) of the Canada Health Measures Survey
(CHMS) cycle 7 will help secure data that will establish a credible baseline for oral health measures for
the long-term Canadian Dental Care Program (CDCP).
• In addition to supporting the results strategy for the CDCP, the data will inform long-term policy
and program work as well as any other future Government investments toward improving access to
dental care and oral health needs. • The OHC of the CHMS, Cycle 7 was an existing activity
funded through a grant from CIHR, and joint funding from Health Canada and Statistics Canada.
• The costs for this work were originally developed in 2018, but the start of collection was delayed
due to the COVID-19 pandemic and related challenges, which resulted in funding shortfalls when
implementation began.
• This additional funding allows StatCan to deliver the survey and related data on oral health as
planned to ensure that the program will have required baseline data. • The OHC of the CHMS,
Cycle 7 will serve as a baseline for oral health measures for the long-term Canadian Dental Care
Program.
• Data collection began in Fall 2022 and the results are expected to be available by early 2026.
(1,300,000)
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Public Health Agency of Canada
NEW FUNDING
Name
Key Messages
Purpose /Objectives Expected Results Voted Statutory
Items
Funding for Strengthening Canada’s Ability to Detect and Respond to Public Health Events and
Emergencies Through Data and Risk Assessment
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$20,482,949
• The COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated longstanding gaps in the Agency’s ability to collect,
share, and use data to inform public health decision-making and action, as identified in various audits
and evaluations.
• The funding will support surveillance and research activities, in response to significantly
heightened yet unfunded demand for new information on the wider health impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic. The initiative is seeking access to $399.5M over 3 years on a cash basis, starting in fiscal year
2022-23, to stabilize and strengthen key disease monitoring and risk assessment capacities.
• It will also strengthen access to public health data and build up critical data capacity and
infrastructure needed to assess current and future risks to Canada. These investments will build on
improvements made during COVID-19 to ensure Canada’s public health system is
prepared for the future. The purpose of this funding is to:
• Strengthen the Agency’s ability to access the right data at the right time through disease
monitoring (Detect), the capacity and infrastructure to interpret intelligence and assess the risks to the
health of Canadians (Understand) and undertake appropriate actions in a timely manner (Act). The
activities related to this initiative will allow the Agency to:
• Develop and enable access to evidence on the wider health and socio-economic impacts of the
pandemic;
• Predict, detect, assess and respond to outbreaks and new threats; and contribute to the
prevention, control, and reduction of the spread of infectious disease among Canadians; and
• Strengthen and improve its capacity to prepare for and respond to public health events and
emergencies. $18,382,125
$2,100,824
Funding for maintaining access to the Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential (PVC) to
support mobility and the application of public health measures
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$14,088,701
• PHAC is seeking funding of $17.6M over three years, starting in 2022-23, to sustain the
Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credentials.
• Funding will allow PHAC to provide:
o Continued proof of vaccination policy and program support to provinces and territories (PTs);
o Continued proof of vaccination technical support to PTs;
o Client service support for Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination holders; and
o Support in addressing fraudulent proof of vaccinations.
This funding is sourced through Budget 2022 The purpose of this funding is to:
• Ensure the continued provision of the Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credentials, both
as a health record and to facilitate mobility in the context of international travel,
as well as support the application of public health measures as needed going forward. • The
expected result would be that Canadians have continued access to the Canadian COVID-19 proof of
vaccination credentials to facilitate mobility in the context of international travel, including for ongoing
proof of vaccination requirements at international borders.
• The Government of Canada, and provincial and territorial governments are supported to
implement vaccination-related public health measures as needed going forward. $13,580,128
$508,573
Funding for the renewal of the funding for the existing Federal Framework for the Legalization and
Regulation of Cannabis in Canada
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$823,767
• Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Public Safety Canada, the
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and the Canada Border Services Agency are seeking to access $500.4M
in new funding over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25) for the Cannabis Program.
• Funding will allow for the continued implementation and administration of the federal
framework for the legalization and regulation of cannabis and follow through on the objectives set out in
the Cannabis Act: to protect public health and public safety.
The purpose of this funding is to:
• Renew funds for 2022-23 through to 2024-25 to support the next phase of implementation of
the Act and its regulations: the transition from program establishment to the legislative review of the
Act.
• Renewed funds will enable the uninterrupted delivery of licensing, regulatory compliance and
enforcement, engagement with partners on public health and public safety, law enforcement and
preventing and interdicting the cross-border movement of cannabis, research, and public education
related to the Cannabis Program.
• Under the Cannabis Program Horizontal Initiative Framework, PHAC actions contribute
to result Theme B: Provide Canadians with information needed to make informed decisions and
minimize health and safety harms, by:
o Providing Canadians with access to public health knowledge products on cannabis and
polysubstance use; and
o Enabling stakeholders to work with PHAC to co-develop knowledge products related to the
public health impacts of cannabis and polysubstance use.
$703,743
$120,024
Total New Funding
$32,665,996 $2,729,421
TRANSFERS
Name
Key Messages
Purpose /Objectives Expected Results Voted Statutory
Items
Transfer from Department of Health to Public Health Agency of Canada to support the harmonization
and standardization of the Good Manufacturing Practices training at an international level
Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $218,200
• As a member of the Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), Canada is
supporting the development of an Inspectorates’ Academy, which aims to harmonize and standardise
Inspector training internationally. This work is central in enabling a global approach to the management
of drug supply chains.
• In joining the development of this global initiative, Canada will be able to take a leadership role
in establishing internationally harmonized principles and ensure it will meet future program needs. It will
also allow Canada to benefit from the training program for its inspector. The purpose of this funding is
for:
• The Pharmaceutical Inspection Co-operation Scheme (PIC/S), in which Canada is a member, to
develop an Inspectorates' Academy that aims to harmonise and standardise Good Manufacturing
Practices (GMP) training for inspectors at an international level through an accredited qualification
system.
• The PIC/S Inspectorate’s Academy (PIA) will build global capacity to deliver harmonized
and standardized Good Manufacturing Practices training to approximately 2,000 inspectors across the
globe.
• Canada will benefit from the training developed, and the foundation for greater collaboration in
the oversight of drug manufacturing. $218,200
$0
Transfer from Department of Health to Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development activities related to pesticides and biocides
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$145,000 • This grant will contribute to advance scientific and technical collaboration on an
international stage between the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) and
the pesticides and biocides area of work at Health Canada.
• This will include areas such as assessment on the risk of pesticides and biocides to human health
and the environment, overcoming shared challenges and increasing the efficacy of pesticide
management programmes for all stakeholders, including Industry and Government. The purpose of
this funding is to:
• Assist the OECD member countries in developing and implementing high-quality chemicals
management policies and instruments through its Environmental Health and Safety Programme (EHS).
• To foster collaboration and strengthen relationships with key international partners and
stakeholders.
• The grant will support health-related policy, technical and scientific activities that help
Canada maintain the highest standards for the sound management of chemicals (pesticides and
biocides), to protect the health and safety of Canadians in practical and concrete ways. $145,000
$0
Transfer from Department of Health to Public Health Agency of Canada to support the Organization for
Economic Co-operation and Development international research project on the economic assessment of
societal benefits of chemicals management.
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$40,000
• This project will contribute funds towards an ongoing OECD-led international research
project on economic assessment of societal benefits of chemicals management intended to address
these gaps.
• The Surveys of Willingness-to-pay to Avoid negative Chemicals related Effects (SWACHE) Project
is part of a collaboration between the OECD's Working Party on Risk Management (WPRM) and the
Working Party on Integrating Environmental and Economic Policies (WPIEEP).
• The SWACHE Project will help inform Canada’s regulatory instrument development for managing
harmful chemical risks. It will address existing methodological and quantification gaps by advancing
Canada’s efforts on monetizing negative health impacts linked to harmful chemicals.
The purpose of this funding is to:
• Support the SWACHE project in improving economic assessments of net benefits to society of
chemicals management policies and of environmental policies more broadly.
• It will provide estimates on the economic benefit of reducing health and ecological effects
caused by exposure to toxic chemicals. Values will be estimated for health (morbidity) issues known to
be strongly associated with chemicals using stated preference approaches.
• Survey questionnaires on non-fatal health endpoints have been developed and are being
implemented in several rounds. Once completed, the estimated valuation estimates will be available for
Canada and OECD member and non-member countries. • To date, Canada’s continued
contribution to the SWACHE Project and participation in the OECD Experts Group has contributed to
survey development and enabled implementation of five first found health endpoint surveys on asthma,
IQ loss, kidney disease, infertility and very low birth weight in Canada.
• These additional funds will enable implementation of three second round health endpoint
surveys on skin sensitivity, thyroid disruption and hypertension in Spring-Summer 2023, with ten surveys
implemented by end of 2023. $40,000 $0
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health to support the
development and updating of vaccine related standardized medical codes used in immunization
registries
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($54,000)
• This transfer of funds will go to Canada Health Infoway to support the development and
updating of vaccine-related Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine Clinical Terms (SNOMED CT) codes.
• SNOMED CT is a clinical reference terminology used by most Canadian immunization registries to
support vaccine administration and tracking across Canada.
• The SNOMED CT Canadian Edition is updated and maintained by Infoway with funding from
Health Canada.
• PHAC will be funding Infoway to support an accelerated and expanded process to review and
update vaccine-related SNOMED CT codes to improve timeliness for provinces and territories (P/Ts).
The purpose of this funding is to:
• Support the timely updating of vaccine-related SNOMED CT codes by Infoway, required to
support vaccine administration and tracking across Canada.
• Updating of vaccine-related SNOMED CT codes at a pace and with a process that will
meet the needs of immunization registries and in addition will advance PHAC’s objectives to increase
registry interoperability.
($54,000) $0
From Public Health Agency of Canada to Crown Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada to
support Mental Wellness in Inuit Communities affected by the COVID-19 Pandemic
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($200,000) • This transfer is to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic
in Inuit communities.
• Budget 2021 committed $100M over three years to promote mental health and prevent mental
illness in populations most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• PHAC is implementing these initiatives through multiple solicitation streams and funding
mechanisms, including distinctions-based approaches for First Nations, Métis and Inuit.
The purpose of this funding will be to:
• Support Inuit-led initiatives that advance one or more of the following objectives:
o Promote mental wellness in those most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic;
o Learn about effective approaches to promote mental wellness in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic and recovery; and
o Enhance the capacity of individuals, service providers and organizations to promote mental
wellness in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
• Funding will support culturally safe and community-specific approaches such as arts and
culture initiatives, land-based programming and peer support initiatives. Expected outcomes include
improved knowledge and skills for mental wellness, improved service provider capacity to support
mental wellness, and improved participant wellbeing.
($200,000) $0
From Public Health Agency of Canada to the Employment and Social Development Canada to support
the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Transformation Initiative
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($357,901)
• PHAC, Indigenous Services Canada and Employment and Social Development Canada
(ESDC) are supporting the implementation of the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care
Transformation Initiative.
• This funding will support the signed Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) that sets out the
terms and conditions for the transfer of funds from ESDC to PHAC and to Indigenous Services Canada for
the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) Transformation Initiative.
• PHAC was originally allocated $420K from ESDC for this initiative. However, PHAC is returning the
unallocated funding of $357,901 to ESDC through the Supplementary Estimates C exercise. •
The funds represent a return of funding under MOU Amendment #3 (October 2022) to
implement decisions made by Indigenous recipients (Alberta, Quebec and Atlantic) in Fall 2022.
• As noted in the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) Framework and through
the Transformation initiative, it is expected that the Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern
Communities (AHSUNC) program will be Indigenous-led and aligned with the principles of Indigenous
reconciliation.
($357,901) $0
From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Employment and Social Development Canada to
support the Indigenous Engagement on the Disability Inclusion Action Plan and the National Autism
Strategy
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($400,000) • Budget 2021 announced $15.4M over two years, starting in 2021-22, for PHAC
to work with partners to support the creation of a National Autism Strategy, with $8.4M coming from
existing PHAC funds; resulting in $7M in new funding.
• $400,000 of Budget 2021 funding will be transferred from PHAC to ESDC to support engagement
work with Indigenous Peoples to inform a National Autism Strategy, in collaboration with the Disability
Inclusion Action Plan (DIAP).
• Three key themes for inquiry have been developed by PHAC to support a distinctions-based
approach to engagement on needs, interests, and priority areas for action for First Nations, Inuit and
Métis under a National Autism Strategy: social inclusion, economic inclusion, and evidence-based
supports.
The purpose of this transfer funding will be to:
• Support engagement work with Indigenous Peoples, through ESDC’s existing Engagement
Protocol Agreement (EPA) mechanism with National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs), to inform a
National Autism Strategy.
• PHAC and ESDC aim to alleviate some of the engagement burden for National Indigenous
Organizations (NIOs) by using a coordinated and streamlined approach to engage First Nations, Inuit and
Métis through the Engagement Protocol Agreement (EPA) mechanism.
• Funding will be used to support PHAC’s engagement with Indigenous Peoples to inform
the development of a National Autism Strategy. Where possible, the process will include representatives
from National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs), as well as stakeholders representing Indigenous women,
urban and remote Indigenous communities.
• The engagement process will also provide an opportunity to clarify data ownership and
stewardship with Indigenous communities and identify mechanisms to support Indigenous data
sovereignty. ($400,000) $0
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health to support vaccine
record interoperability across Canada
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($645,000)
• PHAC is seeking authority to transfer $645,000 to Health Canada (HC) in 2022-23, in
order for HC to make a contribution to Canada Health Infoway to strengthen CANImmunizes’ Canadian
Vaccine Catalogue (CVC).
• The funding would guarantee Canada’s license to access the Canadian Vaccine Catalogue (CVC)
issued by CANImmunize. Since 2016, CANImmunize has received funding support via Canada Health
Infoway, tasked with accelerating the adoption of digital health solutions across Canada.
The purpose of this funding would be to:
• Support the continuation of a Canadian license for CANImmunizes’ Canadian Vaccine Catalogue
(CVC) to ensure it remains available online, free of charge, to anyone wishing to access it.
• Funding will also enable CANImmunize to enhance the catalogue by incorporating singular
bilingual terminology for vaccines by mapping Canadian codes to U.S. codes, as well as by increasing the
frequency of updates from monthly to biweekly to keep pace with the surge of new COVID-19 vaccines
entering the market.
The results are expected to include:
• A collection of up-to-date vaccine data information that remains available to any Canadian who
wishes to reference it.
• Continued interoperability of Canadian vaccine records supports for provinces and territories
leveraging the Canadian Vaccine Catalogue (CVC) standards.
• Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccinations issued in accordance with information published in the
Canadian Vaccine Catalogue (CVC).
($645,000) $0
Transfer from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the International Development Research Centre to
support a vaccine clinical trial against the Sudan Ebolavirus
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
($1,345,200)
• The purpose of this transfer is to make a tri-partner Canadian contribution to a research
study on vaccine trials for the Sudan ebolavirus disease (SUVD) outbreak in Uganda, as there is no
vaccine against the recent outbreak in Uganda for the Sudan Ebolavirus.
• PHAC, Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the International Development
Research Centre (IDRC) will contribute financial support to the World Health Organization (WHO)
research initiative called Solidarity Ebola: Vaccine Trial Against Sudan Ebolavirus.
• Canada supported the development of a successful vaccine for a different species of ebolavirus
in 2015 and 2018. Unfortunately, that vaccine cannot work against the Sudan ebolavirus.
The purpose of this funding is:
• For PHAC, in collaboration with the IDRC and CIHR to support the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) research initiative, Solidarity Ebola: Vaccine Trial Against Sudan Ebolavirus.
• Completion of study to assess the effect of a candidate vaccine in protecting recent
contacts of a newly confirmed case of SUVD against laboratory-confirmed SUVD.
($1,345,200) -$0
Total Transfers ($2,598,901) $0
INTERNAL REALLOCATIONS
Name
Key Messages
Purpose /Objectives Expected Results Voted Statutory
Items
Internal reallocation of resources to procure diagnostic testing equipment
Total Supplementary Estimates (C):
$0 • The purpose of this funding is to procure 210 GeneXpert molecular diagnostic testing
system machines provided by Cepheid.
• These diagnostic testing system machines will be able to detect a broad spectrum of bacteria
and viruses as well as antimicrobial resistance.
This is a vote transfer of $16,000,000 from Operating to Capital. • PHAC will procure these
diagnostic testing system machines in place of the SARS-CoV-2 molecular tests.
• Some of these machines will then be used for testing in northern, remote and isolated
communities. $0 $0
Net Internal Reallocations $0 $0
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Name
Key Messages
(3-5 bullets max.) Purpose /Objectives Expected Results Voted Statutory
Items
TOTAL SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES ‘C’
Total: $31,894,323
• For Supplementary Estimates (C), the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) has an increase of
$31.9 million for the following:
o $27.6 million in Voted Appropriations which includes $27.6 million in new funding.
o $4.3 million in statutory appropriations for the employee benefit plans.
-- -- $27,615,848 $4,278,475
Funding for building a post pandemic agile workforce and to support long-term digital transformation
Total: $17,089,983
• CFIA is seeking access to $61.7M over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25), approved in
Budget 2022, to prepare for the post-pandemic operating environment.
• Build an agile workforce and support longer term digital transformation.
• 1) upskilling inspectors on essential training that was previously unavailable to them due to
COVID-19 restrictions
• 2) addressing deferred maintenance for digital services
• 3) examining opportunities for virtual inspection.
$14,669,659 $2,420,324
Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island
Total: $5,670,026
• CFIA is seeking a total of $11.3M over 2 years ($5.7M in 2022-23 and $5.6M in 2023-24)
to address the Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island (PEI).
• Develop operational capacity.
• Respond to international market pressures.
• Establish a science-based approach.
• Minimize further long-term spread within and outside PEI and protect market access.
$4,850,259 $819,767
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
Total: $5.427,426
• Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, CFIA, and the Canadian Border Services Agency are
seeking $45.3M over three years 2022-23 to 2024-25, to support near term actions for the prevention
and preparedness response initiatives to prevent the entry of African swine fever into Canada, as well as
anticipatory trade continuity initiatives.
• The CFIA total ask over the duration of the funding proposal represents $18.9M, of which $5.4M
is for 2022-23.
• Support near term actions for the prevention and preparedness to prevent the entry of African
swine fever into Canada as well as anticipatory trade continuity response initiatives.
• Prevent the entry of African swine fever into Canada. $4,943,515 $483,911
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock
Total: $3,119,748
• The CFIA is requesting Treasury Board approval to access $20.5M over 4 years (2022–
2026, $3.1M for 2022-23) to enable the Agency in effectively responding to the increasing and significant
health risks posed by the growth of legal and illegal pet trade.
• Enable the Agency in effectively responding to the increasing and significant health risks
posed by the growth of legal and illegal pet trade.
• Minimize risks posed by the growth of legal and illegal pet trade.
$2,674,642 $445,106
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations
Total: $587,140
• CFIA is seeking access to $10M over nine years and $300K ongoing, as approved in
Budget 2022, to support implementation of compliance and enforcement of new amendments to the
Food and Drug Regulations also known as the Front of Package (FOP) amendments. •
Develop compliance promotion and enforcement strategies.
• Prepare guidance for industry.
• Training for inspectors. • Support long term compliance and enforcement activities
including response to complaints and inspections. $477,773 $109,367
Transfer from Operating authority to Grant authority
Total: $0
• Transfer of $236K from Operating authority to Grant authority to support the Innovative
Solutions Canada (ISC) Program
• CFIA received grant authority under the ISC program Terms and Conditions along with 19 other
Federal Organizations.
• This in-year transfer is necessary to fund the ISC grant projects.
• Small business innovations are supported through posting online challenges.
• The development of innovative approaches to improve sector outcomes. ($236,221)
$236,221 --
CIHR’s 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (C)
CIHR Key Messages
Purpose /Objectives
Expected Results
Voted Statutory
Funding for the Canada First Research Excellence Fund
Total: $10,631,131
(horizontal item)
• Our government understands the importance of maintaining our international
competitive advantage in innovation and supporting our academic institutions to attract the best talent
and to support the best ideas.
• The Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF), aims to boost the strengths of Canadian
postsecondary institutions so that they can achieve global success in research areas that create long-
term social and economic advantages for Canada.
• CFREF invests approximately $200 million per year through a highly competitive peer review
process to support the selected Canadian postsecondary institutions in turning their key strengths into
world-leading capabilities.
• The purpose of this funding is to support the 2023 CFREF competition and to fund the first year
of the projects that align with CIHR’s mandate.
• Selected Canadian postsecondary institutions will be positioned to pursue the best talent in the
world, seize emerging opportunities and strategically advance their greatest strengths on the global
stage and implement large-scale, transformational and forward-thinking institutional strategies.
• Selected institutions will be positioned to achieve global success in research areas that create
long-term social and economic advantages for Canada.
$10,631,131 -
Funding to support efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health
Total: $1,384,400
(Budget 2022)
• Our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy to support Canadians, their
families and caregivers facing the challenges of dementia.
• The strategy includes a distinct pillar on research to fund innovative ideas across the country to
support enhanced diagnosis, treatment and quality of life.
• Budget 2022 announced funding of $20 million over 5 years for CIHR to ramp up efforts to learn
more about dementia and brain health.
• This funding aims to improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to
evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
• This funding will support the implementation of this new initiative to support research across
the continuum from promoting brain health in aging to addressing the complex care needs of people
living with dementia and their caregivers.
• Research activities will focus on resilience, cognitive reserve and vulnerabilities in brain aging, as
well as modifiable factors for reduction of risk of development and progression of cognitive impairment
and dementia.
• Additionally, this investment will fund the Dementia Research Knowledge Mobilization Hub (the
KM Hub) designed to coordinate knowledge mobilization activities and build a dynamic user community.
• Knowledge gaps will be addressed in dementia and brain health in aging.
• The mobilization of research evidence into improved care and services, policies and outcomes
for all Canadians, including those living with dementia and their caregivers, will be facilitated.
$1,352,000 $32,400
Funding to explore the development of a common grants management solution
Total: $91,203
Transfer from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) to CIHR
• Our government understands the importance of harmonizing and modernizing its systems to
support a vibrant research ecosystem.
• Through this program, we are taking steps to modernize the grants management system for
CIHR, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC), and the Social Sciences and
Humanities Research Council (SSHRC).
• NSERC is leading this important work on behalf of the federal granting agencies.
• This transfer is to adjust the amount previously transferred to NSERC through Supplementary
Estimates B as a result of an updated forecast.
• The funding will support the harmonization and modernization of the grant management system
for CIHR, NSERC, and SSHRC to better support applicants, administrators and reviewers during the grants
management lifecycle. $91,203 -
Funding to support a vaccine clinical trial against the Sudan Ebolavirus
Total: ($1,500,000)
Transfer from CIHR and PHAC to the International Development Research Centre (IDRC)
• Since the inclusion of this item in the Supplementary Estimates C the World Health Organization
and the Uganda Ministry of Health formally declared an end to the Ebola outbreak.
• As a result CIHR and IDRC are in active conversations as to how these funds can be repurposed
or if these funds will be returned to CIHR through next year’s Estimates process. Nil Nil
($1,500,000) -
2023-24 Main Estimates
Health Canada
(in millions $) 2022-23
Main Estimates Increases Decreases Net Change 2023-24
Main Estimates % Change This Year over
Last Year
Voted 3,714.1 855.4 (650.5) 204.9 3,919.0 5.5%
Statutory 163.9 26.4 (9.1) 17.3 181.2 10.6%
Total Budgetary 3,878.0 881.8 (659.6) 222.2 4,100.2 5.7%
Health Canada has a proposed net increase of $222.2M in its 2023-24 Main Estimates (from $3,878.0M
in 2022-23 to $4,100.2M in 2023-24).
Increases of $881.8M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions increase of $833.8M
• Funding to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases ($479.6M)
• Funding for the renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of cannabis
in Canada ($131.1M)
• Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit Plan ($112.0M)
• Funding to improve mental health supports and services ($69.9M)
• Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office ($25.7M)
• Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites ($9.2M)
• Funding for federal nuclear emergency preparedness ($3.2M)
• Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada ($3.1M)
Funding Level Increases [$31.9M]
• Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
($10.4M)
• Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care ($5.0M)
• Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process ($4.9M)
• Net vote revenue adjustments ($3.2M)
• Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research ($3.0M)
• Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to medical
assistance in dying ($3.0M)
• Funding for Impact Assessment ($2.4M)
Other [$16.1M]
• Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives ($8.3M)
• Various other increases under $2.0M ($4.9M)
• Transfer of the Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network Program from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research ($2.9M)
Decreases of $659.6M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$569.1M]
• Funding to support emergency measures related to the pandemic ($500.0M)
• Extension of the Territorial Health Investment Fund ($27.0M)
• Funding to support innovative approaches to COVID-19 testing ($22.5M)
• Investments in Cannabis Public Education, Awareness, Research and Mental Health ($15.9M)
• Canadian Agriculture Partnership framework ($3.7M)
Funding Level Decrease [$79.3M]
• Canada Health Infoway ($36.7M)
• Funding for Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program ($16.9M)
• Canada Brain Research Fund Program ($8.3M)
• National Standards on Mental Health ($5.9M)
• Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program ($4.6M)
• Creating a Pan-Canadian Database for organ donation and transplantation ($3.9M)
• Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($3.0M)
Other [$11.2M]
• Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plans ($7.6M)
• Various other decreases under $2.0M ($3.6M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding increase of $17.3M relates mainly to employee benefits plan
adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2023-24 Main Estimates total statutory includes a statutory revenue
forecast of $51.5M for the internal shared services partnership between Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada. This is in line with the previous year.
2023-24 Main Estimates
Public Health Agency of Canada
(in millions $) 2022-23
Main Estimates Increases Decreases Net Change 2023-24
Main Estimates % Change This Year over
Last Year
Voted 8,415.7 523.2 (4,781.2) (4,258.0) 4,157.7 (50.6%)
Statutory 79.3 36.5 (56.7) (20.2) 59.1 (25.5%)
Total Budgetary 8,495.0 559.7 (4,837.9) (4,278.2) 4,216.8 (50.4%)
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Public Health Agency of Canada has a proposed net decrease of $4,278.2M in its 2023-24 Main
Estimates (from $8,495.0M in 2022-23 to $4,216.8M in 2023-24).
Increases of $523.2M (excluding Statutory)
• Funding for the mpox Imvamune vaccine ($309.2M);
• Funding for strengthening Canada’s ability to detect and respond to public health events and
emergencies through data and risk assessment ($147.8M);
• Funding for distress centres ($22.0M);
• Funding for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation ($11.0M);
• Funding for Sero-Surveillance ($9.9M);
• Funding for immigration, settlement measures, temporary accommodations, and income
support for Ukrainians ($5.1M);
• Funding for the development of a diabetes national framework ($5.0M);
• Funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care ($4.3M); and
• Various other increases under $4M ($8.9M)
Decreases of $4,781.2M (excluding Statutory)
• Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines and vaccine deployment
(-$2,931.7M);
• Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 therapeutics (-1,050.0M);
• Funding to support COVID-19 surge capacity (-$339.4M);
• Funding to support border and travel measures and isolation sites (-$338.5M);
• Funding for personal protective equipment maintenance and logistics (-$57.1M);
• Funding for mental health of those most affected by COVID-19 (-$22.3M);
• Funding for the procurement of domestic influenza vaccines (-$11.9M);
• Funding for innovative research and procurement of testing technologies related to the
pandemic (-$7.1M);
• Funding to support Canadians impacted by autism spectrum disorder and the development of a
national strategy (-$6.1M);
• Funding for ParticipACTION (-$5.0M);
• Funding for a national dementia strategy (-$4.9M); and
• Various other decreases under $4M (-$7.0M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding decrease of $20.2M relates to employee benefit plan
adjustments.
2023-24 Main Estimates
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(in millions $) 2022-23
Main Estimates Increases Decreases Net Change 2023-24
Main Estimates % Change This Year over
Last Year
Voted 688.0 41.9 38.5 3.4 691.4 0.5%
Statutory 149.8 7.3 6.4 0.9 150.7 0.6%
Total Budgetary 837.8 49.2 44.9 4.3 842.1 0.5%
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has a proposed net increase of $4.3M in its 2023-24 Main Estimates
(from $837.8M in 2022-23 to $842.1M in 2023-24).
Increases of $49.2M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed Treasury Board Submissions [$40.3M]
• Funding for building a post-pandemic agile workforce, and to support long-term digital
transformation ($21.9M).
• Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
($7.7M).
• Funding to address the current Potato Wart crisis in Prince Edward Island ($5.7M).
• Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of
regulated animals other than livestock ($4.2M).
• Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations ($0.8M).
Other [$8.9M]
• Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia ($4.4M).
• Funding for Collective Bargaining ($2.9M).
• Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustments ($1.0M).
• End of the transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety ($0.6M).
Decreases of $44.9M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Decrease [$44.7M]
• Funding to maintain daily shift inspection presence in federally registered meat processing
establishments ($15.6M).
• Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures ($14.3M).
• Funding to implement both federally delivered and federal/provincial and territorial cost-shared
services and programs under the Canadian Agricultural Partnership framework ($6.9M).
• Funding for enhanced international capacity ($5.6M).
• Funding for Regulatory and Security Science cluster management support ($1.4M).
• Funding for Food Fraud ($0.4M).
• Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products ($0.3M).
• Innovative Solution Canada Grant funding ($0.2M).
Other [$0.2M]
• Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat to support Financial Management Transformation
($0.2M).
Statutory Appropriations
A net funding increase of $0.9M in Statutory authorities mainly relates to EBP adjustments.
For information purposes, Statutory authorities included in the 2023-24 Main Estimates consists of
Statutory revenue of $53.0M, Statutory compensation payments of $12.5M, and EBP of $85.2M.
2023-24 Main Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(in millions $) 2022-23
Main Estimates Increases Decreases Net Change 2023-24
Main Estimates % Change This Year over
Last Year
Voted 1,234.8 127.1 (18.9) 108.0 1,342.8 8.7%
Statutory 7.7 1.1 - 1.1 8.9 15.6%
Total Budgetary 1,242.5 128.2 (18.9) 109.1 1,351.6 8.8%
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research has a proposed net increase of $109.1M in its 2023-24 Main
Estimates (from $1,242.5M in 2022-23 to $1,351.6M)
The majority of CIHR’s increased funding is for targeted health research investments, with most of them
being time-limited funded initiatives
Increases of $127.1M
Funding Level Increases $122.6M
• Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021) ($81.1M)
• Canada First Research Excellence Fund – Competition 2022-23 ($19.1M)
• Develop a National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases (Budget 2019) ($7.4M)
• Support the study of Long-Term Health Impacts of COVID-19 (Budget 2022) ($5.0M)
• Support a new National Women’s Health Research Initiative (Budget 2021) ($4.3M)
• To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging (Budget 2022) ($3.1M)
• To support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022) ($2.6M)
Other $4.5M
• For the redistribution of the Canada Graduate Scholarships ($2.5M)
• To support the Pan-Canadian Women's Health Research Coalition ($1.0M)
• To address the opioid crisis ($1.0M)
Decreases of $18.9M
Funding Level Decreases $18.9M
• Transfer of the Networks of Centres of Excellence Program to the New Frontiers in Research
Fund ($5.6M)
• Transfer of the Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research program to the
Strategic Innovation Fund ($4.1M)
• Post-traumatic stress injuries as time-limited funding ends in 2022-23 ($3.0M)
• Transfer to Health Canada for the Drug Safety Effectiveness Network ($2.9 M)
• Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19 as time-limited funding ends in 2022-23
($2.2M)
• Transfer of the Business–Led Networks of Centres of Excellence program to the Strategic
Innovation Fund ($1.1M)
Statutory Appropriations - Net funding increase of $1.1M relates mainly to employee benefit plan
adjustments.
Health Canada’s 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
HC
Purpose /Objectives
CONTRIBUTIONS
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases Program
The purpose of the Program is to achieve better health outcomes for patients with rare diseases by
providing funding to willing jurisdictions to improve access to drugs for rare diseases (DRD), broadening
rare disease treatments and services, and building national DRD governance and data infrastructure
elements. The objectives of the Program are to seek national consistency, support patient outcomes and
system sustainability, collect and use evidence, and invest in innovation.
Substance Use and Addictions Program
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides grants and contributions
funding to respond to drug and substance use issues. This funding is provided to other levels of
government, community-led and not-for-profit organizations in Canada.
SUAP provides funding for a wide range of innovative and evidence-informed projects addressing
problematic substance use prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across the country.
Projects target a range of psychoactive substances, including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol,
nicotine and tobacco, at the community, regional and national levels.
Contribution to the Canadian Institute for Health Information
The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) receives federal funding to provide comparable and
actionable data and information that are used to accelerate improvements in health care, health system
performance and population health across Canada. CIHI’s broad range of health system databases,
measurements and standards, together with its evidence-based reports and analyses, are widely used by
stakeholders in their decision-making processes. Further, CIHI protects the privacy of Canadians by
ensuring the confidentiality and integrity of its health care information.
Between 1994 and 2018, the Government of Canada allocated approximately $1.232 billion to CIHI
through a series of contribution agreements. Over the past six years (2017-18 to 2022-23), CIHI received
over $475 3 million under the current agreement, including targeted funding such as:
· $53 million over 5 years, starting in 2017-18, to address health data gaps and support improved
decision-making on health system priorities.
· $140,000 in 2019 to undertake an environmental scan of data gaps for addiction treatment
services and an additional $500,000 to initiate a collaborative pan-Canadian Organ Donation and
Transplantation (ODT) Data and Performance Reporting System ($200,000 of this funding was
subsequently allocated to Canada Health Infoway to enable joint work);
· $3.4 million in 2020 to advance the second year activities of the ODT Data and Performance
Reporting System project ($1.9 million of this funding was subsequently allocated to Canada Health
Infoway to enable joint work);
· $3.7 million in 2021 to advance year three of the ODT Data and Performance Reporting project,
including the development of indicators and standards, a data repository, and expanded reporting and
tools to access data;
· $3.5 million to meet priority data needs for public health data management during the
pandemic as part of the Safe Restart Agreement in 2020-21;
· $1.7 million in 2022-23 to address health workforce data gaps and support development of
workforce planning data and tools in addition to expanding work on drug data planning.
Health Canada funds approximately 80% of CIHI's total budget, while P/T governments contribute 18%.
The remaining funds are generated largely through product sales.
Health Care Policy and Strategies Program
The Health Care Policy and Strategies Program, provides time-limited contribution funding for projects
that aim to improve the accessibility, quality, sustainability, and accountability of Canada's health care
system. The program supports the federal government's commitment to maintain a strong and effective
publicly funded health care system. The program’s four priority areas are: mental health care;’, home and
community care;’, palliative and end-of-life care, and other F/P/T and emerging priorities. The program
will continue to support the Terry Fox Research Initiative, Ovarian Cancer Canada, Sexual and
Reproductive Health Fund, palliative care and medical assistance in dying (MAID), and mental health
standards.
Contribution to the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is an arm’s-length, not-for-profit organization that was
established in 2007 by the Government of Canada. CPAC’s mandate is to mobilize partners across the
country to reduce the burden of cancer through coordinated, system-level change through the
implementation of the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control (the Strategy).
The Strategy is an overarching framework for a comprehensive Canadian cancer control program. The
work of the Strategy spans the spectrum of cancer control, from research, prevention and detection to
treatment, survivorship and end-of-life care.
Developed in consultation with Canadians, including cancer experts and stakeholders, the Strategy’s
objectives include:
· Reducing the expected number of new cases of cancer among Canadians.
· Enhancing the quality of life of those living with cancer.
· Lessening the likelihood of Canadians dying from cancer.
CPAC is fully funded by the Government of Canada, with Budget 2016 confirming ongoing funding at
$47.5 million per year. Health Canada is responsible for managing CPAC’s funding which included $250
million (2007 to 2012), $241 million (2012 to 2017), $237.5 million (2017-2022), and $237.5 million
(2023-2028). Given pandemic related delays, CPAC was granted a one-year extension to its 2017-22
Contribution Agreement with Health Canada, to March 31, 2023, to complete work (2028 instead of
2027) that was planned, but unable to be completed.
Contribution to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) is an independent, not-for-profit
agency funded by Canadian federal, provincial, and territorial (F/P/T) governments to provide credible,
impartial, and evidence-based information about the clinical/cost-effectiveness and optimal use of drugs
and other health technologies to Canadian health care decision makers.
The purpose of the contribution agreement is to provide financial support for CADTH's core business
activities, namely, pharmaceutical Reimbursement Reviews, Health Technology Assessments and Optimal
Use Projects. Through these activities, CADTH is able to create and disseminate evidence-based
information enabling health system partners to make informed decisions on the adoption and
appropriate utilization of drugs and non-drug technologies, in terms of both effectiveness and cost.
Official Languages Health Program
The Official Languages Health Program has a total budget of $191.2 million over five years (2018-2023),
and $38.46 million per year ongoing after the 2022-2023 fiscal year. The Program supports the federal
government's commitment to maintain a strong and effective publicly funded health care system by
ensuring that official language minority communities (OLMCs) have access to health services in the
official language of their choice. Through the implementation of contribution agreements and micro-
grants, Health Canada supports investments that improve the active offer of health services for OLMCs,
through training and retention of health care providers, networking activities and innovative projects
that increase access to health services for OLMCs.
Contribution funding to improve health care quality and patient safety
Through Healthcare Excellence Canada (HEC), the Program supports the federal government's interest in
achieving an accessible, high quality, sustainable and accountable health system adaptable to the needs
of Canadians. HEC works to: find and promote innovators and innovations, drive the rapid adoptions and
spread of quality and safety innovations, build capabilities to enable excellence in healthcare and
catalyze policy change. HEC will focus its work on care of older adults with health and social needs, care
that is closer to home and community with safe transitions, and pandemic recovery and resilience.
Canada Brain Research Fund Program
Through Budgets 2011, 2016, and 2019, and a subsequent funding renewal in 2021, the Government of
Canada committed up to $200 million, to be matched by non-federal government donors, for the Canada
Brain Research Fund Program. The Program provides funding for the Brain Canada Foundation (Brain
Canada) which fundraises to match the federal contribution with donations from its private and
charitable-sector donors and partners. The Government of Canada's objectives in funding the Canada
Brain Research Fund are: 1) to serve as a focal point for private investment in brain research by attracting
private and charitable donations to match federal funding; and 2) to support research that advances
knowledge of the brain through awards to researchers.
Organs, Tissues, and Blood Program
The Organs, Tissues, and Blood Program provides support for safe, effective, accessible and responsive
organ, tissue and blood systems that will improve and extend the quality of the lives of Canadians while
respecting federal, provincial, and territorial scopes of authority. Canadian Blood Services (CBS) is the
sole recipient of the Program funding.
Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program
The Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), an arm's length, not-for-profit organization, was
established in March 2007 with a ten-year mandate to improve health and social outcomes for people
and their families living with mental illness. Between 2007 and 2017, the Government of Canada
invested $130 million in the MHCC through a grant, to develop a mental health strategy for Canada,
conduct an anti-stigma campaign and create a knowledge exchange centre. In 2016, the MHCC's
mandate was renewed for a 10-year period, from 2017-18 to 2026-27 to advance work on mental health
priorities, including linkages to substance use, suicide prevention, support for at-risk populations and
engagement. The Government of Canada has made a contribution of $14.25 million per year since 2017-
18 for these mandated priority areas.
Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
The Program objectives are to ensure that, for the remainder of their lives, eligible thalidomide
survivors:
• Receive ongoing tax-free payments based on their level of disability; and
• Have transparent and timely access to the Extraordinary Medical Assistance Fund.
Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs Program
The purpose is to expand Prince Edward Island’s public formulary and improve the affordability of its
public drug plans to levels more comparable to those of other provinces and territories. Insights and
lessons learned from this initiative may be used to inform the future implementation of national
pharmacare.
Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program
The Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada's Health Systems Program aims to address systemic
racism and discrimination in Canada's health systems to advance Health Canada's overall mandate to
help everyone in Canada maintain and improve their health by striving to ensure high quality health
services are efficient and accessible, and by reducing health inequalities.
The objectives of the Program are to address systemic racism and discrimination and advance health
equity for racialized and marginalized populations in Canada's health systems. To achieve its objectives,
the Program will provide support to eligible organizations through two distinct streams of funding:
1. Project stream: To improve the safety, accessibility, equity, quality, sustainability, and
accountability of Canada's health systems, investments will be made in systems-level projects that
address racism and discrimination perpetrated against racialized and/or marginalized populations.
2. Engagement stream: To maintain strong and effective publicly funded health systems through
the development of policies and strategies that address evolving health priorities, investments will be
made to build capacity within racialized and/or marginalized communities and organizations that serve
racialized and/or marginalized populations to enable them to meaningfully engage on their health
priorities to ensure that their priorities and perspectives are adequately considered by health-decision
makers.
Contribution to Canada Health Infoway
Canada Health Infoway (Infoway) is an independent, not-for-profit corporation that is federally funded to
work with jurisdictions and other stakeholders to support the development and adoption of digital
health technologies across Canada. Between 2001 and 2010, the Government of Canada invested $2.1
billion in Infoway, through grants or up-front multi-year funding, to focus on electronic health records
and other priorities in digital health. Budget 2016 allocated $50 million over two years to Infoway to
support digital health activities in e-prescribing and telehomecare, with the funds flowing through a
Contribution Agreement. Budget 2017 allocated $300 million over five years to Infoway to expand e-
prescribing and virtual care initiatives, support the continued adoption and use of electronic medical
records, help patients to access their own health records electronically, and better link electronic health
record systems to improve access by all providers and institutions. In addition, Budget 2019 provided
$36.5 million over five years with $5 million per year ongoing, for Infoway and the Canadian Institute for
Health Information to support the creation of a pan-Canadian data and performance reporting system
for Organ Donation and Transplantation. Finally, in 2020, Infoway was allocated a contribution of $50
million over two years to support provinces, and territories to expand virtual health services to
Canadians. At this time, planned federal contributions to Infoway for 2023-24 and beyond are focused
on the advancement of pan-Canadian standards to support the interoperability of electronic medical
records, continuing to advance e-prescribing and a performance reporting system for Organ Donation
and Transplant.
Environmental Health Research Contribution Program
The purpose of this Program is to build external capacity and research infrastructure by funding research
activities on environmental pollutants, including microplastics, in order to improve the health and quality
of life of Canadians.
Chemicals Management Plan Engagement and Outreach Contribution Program
The purpose of this Program is to support the capacity of Canadians, with an emphasis on
disproportionately impacted populations and Indigenous peoples, to engage in the Chemicals
Management Plan (CMP) and environmental health programs, allowing for a broad range of expertise
and opinions to be heard and considered. The Program will also support partnerships to increase
outreach to Canadians about environmental health issues, using tailored tools and messaging. This will
include raising awareness of the impacts of chemicals on human health and how to reduce the risks.
Radon Outreach Contribution Program
The purpose of this Program is to protect and improve human health and well-being in Canada from the
impacts of indoor radon exposure, by aiding in the education of Canadians about the importance of
testing their homes, schools and workplaces for radon and reducing radon levels where necessary.
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Payments to provinces and territories for the Purpose of Home Care and Mental Health
The Government of Canada is investing $11 billion over ten years (from 2017 to 2027) to support
provinces and territories (PTs) to improve access to home and community care ($6 billion) and mental
health and addictions ($5 billion) services in their jurisdictions, in accordance with the Common
Statement of Principles for Shared Health Priorities (CSoP), which was jointly agreed to by F/P/T
Ministers of Health (with the exception of Quebec) in August 2017.
Governments agreed to common objectives in each of home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, and in particular to improving access to mental health and addictions through one or
more of the following areas of action:
· Expanding access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and
youth (age 10-25), recognizing the effectiveness of early interventions to treat mild to moderate mental
health disorders.
· Spreading evidence-based models of community mental health care and culturally-appropriate
interventions that are integrated with primary health services.
• Expanding availability of integrated community-based mental health and addiction services for
people with complex health needs.
Similarly, on home and community care, FPT governments agreed to work together to improve access to
services through one or more of the following areas of action:
· Spreading and scaling evidence-based models of home and community care that are more
integrated and connected to primary health care.
· Enhancing access to palliative and end-of-life care at home or in hospices;
· Increasing support for caregivers.
• Enhancing home care infrastructure, such as digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology
and facilities for community based service delivery.
By endorsing the CSoP, PTs agreed to develop a focused set of common indicators to measure progress
on these priority areas. Following agreement on the Common Statement of Principles for Shared Health
Priorities in 2017, the federal government negotiated and signed bilateral agreements with all 13
provinces and territories which set out details of how each jurisdiction is using federal investments to
improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services over the first five
years of investment. One-year extensions of the agreements were implemented for 2022-23. New
agreements will be required for provinces and territories to access the remaining four years if this
funding (2022-23 to 2026-27). The 2020 Fall Economic Statement provided an additional $1 billion to
provinces and territories through the Safe Long-term Care Fund to support greater infection prevention
and control in long-term care facilities and seniors’ residences.
Budget 2021 outlined a further $3 billion investment over five years. ($600 million per year to ensure
that provinces and territories can provide a high standard of care in their long-term care facilities. The
GOC continues to work collaboratively with P/Ts to provide this support.)
Health Canada’s 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
Description
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Funding to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases
• Funding to develop a National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases to improve immediate access
to drugs for rare diseases, support families and caregivers, build capacity, and close the knowledge gap
on rare diseases (+$490.7M)
• Transfer to Indigenous Services Canada to assist eligible First Nations and Inuit Clients with rare
diseases to access the drugs they need (-$11.1M)
• The 2022-23 funding was not drawn and is expected to be moved to future years
Funding for the renewal of the federal framework for the legalization and regulation of cannabis in
Canada
• Funding to support the continued implementation and administration of the federal framework
for the legalization and regulation of cannabis and follow through on the objectives set out in the
Cannabis Act to protect public health and public safety
• $128.8M received in-year (SEC) in 2022-23
Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit Plan
• Funding to implement the interim Canada Dental Benefit, with Canada Revenue Agency acting as
the delivery agent, to work toward development of the long-term Canadian Dental Care Program and
provide eligible Canadians with access to funding to purchase dental care services (+$113.7M)
• Transfer to Statistics Canada to help lay the groundwork for the long-term Dental Care program
(-$1.7M)
• $51.8M received in-year (SEC) in 2022-23
• In addition, $737.8M in total statutory authority for dental benefit payments to provide up to
$650 per child to families with children under the age of 12 as part of the interim Canada Dental Benefit
so they can get the oral health care their children need while continuing to work on expanding access to
dental care services via a long-term national dental care program
Funding to improve mental health supports and services
• Funding to sustain improved access to mental health services with the Wellness Together
Canada portal, as well as to help Canadians who are experiencing mental health or substance use issues.
• $69.6M received in-year (SEB) in 2022-23.
Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office
• Funding to support the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office in advancing policy, planning,
and engagement in anticipation of the establishment of a Canadian Drug Agency (+$21.7)
• Reprofile of funds from previous years into 2023-24 for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition
Office (+$4.0)
• $5.9M received in-year (SEC) in 2022-23
Funding for the construction of plasma collection sites
• Funding to the Canadian Blood Services for the construction and start-up of six new plasma
collection sites with the aim to increase plasma sufficiency from 14% in 2021-22 to 22% in 2027-28. This
funding will provide additional security of supply for patients and potentially reduce long-term costs of
plasma-derived products. Ongoing operational funding for the sites will be the responsibility of the
provinces and territories
• $10.8M received in-year (SEB) in 2022-23
Funding for federal nuclear emergency preparedness
• Funding to support federal nuclear emergency preparedness in ensuring that the Government of
Canada continues to be prepared to proactively mitigate, and respond to, emerging incidents and
hazards, minimizing adverse impacts on the health and safety of Canadians
• $3.3M received in-year (SEC) in 2022-23
Funding for advancing a circular economy for plastics in Canada
• Funding to increase and communicate knowledge on plastics: internal and external research
(new contribution program) and scientific review of recent literature on the effects of micro-plastics.This
funding will help develop, implement, and update management measures: identify and prioritize action
for chemical additives in plastics, and develop options for a mandatory food packaging chemical safety
program and update guidance on recycled plastics in food packaging
• $1.9M received in-year (SEB) in 2022-23
Fundng Level Increases
Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
• Reprofile of funds from 2021-22 to 2023-24 to provide logistical supports to improve access to
abortion in Canada, to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support for Canadians who
face the greatest barriers, and to generate knowledge about sexual and reproductive health for health
care providers ($10.4M)
• Original profile in 2023-24 was $14.8M, $10.4M was reprofiled from
2021-22, resluting in a profile of $25.3M
Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
• Funding level increase to continue to establish the new Addressing Racism and Discrimination in
Canada’s Health Systems Program. The Program will address systemic racism and discrimination by
supporting systems-level community-supported projects and building capacity to engage on health
priorities (+$3M)
• Reprofile of funds from 2021-22 to 2023-24 to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care
(+$2M)
Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
• Funding level increase to provide greater transparency and sustainability in the regulation of
pesticide by supporting the transition to a more proactive, transparent and predictable pesticide
regulatory system; increasing the availability of independent data to support pesticide review decisions;
and accelerating research and adoption of alternative pest management solutions
Net vote revenue adjustments
• Increase in Employee Benefit Plans related to an increase in net vote revenue for:
o Revised fees to increase revenues for reinvestment in stabilizing, modernizing, and transforming
regulatory compliance and enforcement activities; and, re-investing in key regulatory activities that
contribute to Canadians having access to safe and effective health products and healthy and nutritious
food
o Specialized Health Services due to an increased demand in the employee assistance program
and related services, as well as growth of the Federal Public Service
Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research
• Funding level increase to continue to support cancer research. This investment will advance
precision medicine in cancer, including ovarian cancer ($13.3M)
• Reprofile of funds from 2023-24 to 2025-26 for the Terry Fox Research Institute to continue
cancer research-related activities (-$10.3M)
Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to medical
assistance in dying
• Funding level increase to support not-for-profit organizations in advancing the Federal Action
Plan on Palliative Care. This funding will strengthen the enforcement of standards, better support the
workforce, and support improved access to quality palliative care
Funding for Impact Assessment
• Funding level increase related to the Renewal of Funding for the Implementation of the Impact
Assessment Act to continue to deliver on and expand the Departments impact assessment activities,
including new contribution funding to support environmental health initiatives. The overall objective of
renewed investment in the impact assessment initiative is to protect the environment and health, move
sustainable projects forward safely, and instill public confidence in decisions on major resource and
infrastructure projects (e.g., pipelines, mass transit and mines)
Other - Increases
Funding for the implementation of greening initiatives
• Reprofile of funds from previous years to 2023-24 for the implementation of greening initiatives.
HC’s Lagimodière real property asset divestiture will invest the funds in its regional custodial real
property holdings, in accordance with the Treasury Board Policy on the Planning and Management of
Investments and Directive on the Management of Real Property (+$6M)
• Reprofile of funds from 2021-22 to 2023-24 for the implementation of greening initiatives. The
Environmental Health Centre divestiture will reduce Health Canada’s custodial footprint and
environmental impacts as it would eliminate HC’s second largest contributor of Green House Gas
emissions, and support the Government of Canada’s Sustainable Development Strategy (+$2.3M)
Various other increases under $2.0M
• A total of $4.9M comprised of various items with funding levels increases under $2M
Transfer of the Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network Program from the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research
• Funding level increase in the transfer to facilitate the movement of the Drug Safety and
Effectiveness Network program of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for the contribution to the
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) at the Department of Health. The funds
will be incorporated within CADTH’s existing contribution agreement with Health Canada, through
amendments to the agreement’s Terms and Conditions, to support the continued generation of post-
market drug safety and effectiveness evidence in Canada
Sunset - Decreases
Funding to support emergency measures related to the pandemic
• Off-cycle contingency funding reprofile from 2021-22 to 2022-23 to support emergency
contracting, staffing or acquisition of assets needed to respond to the crisis. This could include the
procurement of additional rapid tests, treatments or therapeutics or biomedical assets including
associated logistics and operational costs and funding to exercise options under existing advanced
purchase agreements
• This item sunsets in 2022-23 (funds will lapse in 2022-23) and no longer required for 2023-24
Extension of the Territorial Health Investment Fund
• Funding approved in 2021-22 to extend the Territorial Health Investment Fund for two years and
continue to support territories in undertaking innovative activities
• This item sunsets in 2022-23 however $150 million over five years was recently announced for
the Territorial Health Investment Fund in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health
care in the territories.
Funding to support innovative approaches to COVID-19 testing
• Funding in 2021-22 to focus on prevention and management of outbreaks, with a particular
focus on transmission of variants of concern as emerging evidence highlights the need for innovative
approaches to testing, screening and surveillance in the context of a vaccinated population
• This item sunset in 2022-23 and no longer required for 2023-24
Investments in Cannabis Public Education, Awareness, Research and Mental Health
• Funding from Budget 2018 of $82.5M over five years (2018-19 to 2022-23) to support
community-based and Indigenous cannabis education and awareness initiatives for optimization of a
public health approach to non-medical cannabis use
• This item susets in 2022-23 and has not been renewed for 2023-24
Canadian Agriculture Partnership framework
• Off-cycle funding in 2017-18 to Department of Agriculture and Canada and Health Canada’s Pest
Management and Regulatory Agency branch to implement a suite of services for delivering federal
programs under the agricultural policy framework. Health Canada’s portion was $20M over 5 years
(2017-18 to 2022-23)
• This item sunsets in 2022-23 however it is expected to be renewed in 2023-24 for a period of 5
years and is being led by AAFC
Funding Level Decreases
Canada Health Infoway
• Funding level decrease due to reprofiles from 2021-22 to 2022-23 for:
o Digital health tools to support Canadians in response to COVID-19
(-$33.9M)
o Organ donation and transplantation in supporting the development of a pan-Canadian data and
performance system (-$2.8)
Funding for Addressing the Opioid Crisis and Substance Use and Addictions Program
• Overall net funding level decrease due to the following:
o Decrease for Budget 2021 Addressing the opioids crisis and problematic substance use (-$47.1M)
o Decrease for the 2020 FES Addressing the opioids crisis (-$23.6M)
o Decrease for B2019 The Drug Overdose Crisis in Canada (-$1.0M)
o Decrease for the Opioids Emergency Treatment Fund (-$0.2M)
o Increase for Budget 2022 funding for Addressing the Opioids Crisis and Problematic Substance
Use (+$46.9M)
o Increase for Budget 2018 Opioids Omnibus (+$3.1M)
o Increase for the Substance Use and Addictions Program reprofile (+$5.0M)
Canada Brain Research Fund Program
• Funding level decrease due to a reprofile of funds from previous years to 2022-23 to support
innovative neuroscience research aiming to improve the diagnosis, treatment and prevention of brain
and neurological diseases, disorders, illnesses and other brain health conditions
National Standards on Mental Health
• Funding level decrease for National Standards on Mental Health. Funding of $12.7M was
reprofiled from 2021-22 to 2023-24 so that contractual work being done by the Standards Council of
Canada can continue in 2023-24. Initial standards deliverables will be complete in March 2023 in order
to proceed to the next phase of testing
Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
• Funding level decrease due to a reprofile of funds from 2020-21 to 2022-23 for the provision of
the one-time ex-gratia payment and financial assistance to help Canadian thalidomide survivors age with
dignity
Creating a Pan-Canadian Database for organ donation and transplantation
• Funding level decrease due to a reprofile of funds from previous years to 2022-23 and 2023-24
for the development of a pan-Canadian data and performance system for organ donation and
transplantation
Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy
• Funding level decrease due to a reprofile of funds from 2020-21 to 2022-23 to support
Strengthening the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy and respond to the current opioid crisis
Other - Decreases
Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan
• A total decrease of $7.6M in net year-over-year changes related to employee benefit plan
Various other decreases under $2.0M
• A total of $3.6M comprised various items with funding levels decreased under $2M
Public Health Agency of Canada’s 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
Initiative
Description 2022-23
Main Estimates (in millions) 2023-24
Main Estimates (in millions)
Net Change (in millions)
New and Renewed Funding - Increases
Funding for the mpox Imvamune Vaccine
• Funding to support the procurement of additional Imvamune vaccines for mpox and smallpox as
well as to support its storage and distribution.
• This initiative will ensure that Canada has a mpox vaccine supply contract in place sufficient to
offer two-doses of the vaccine to priority populations, and the equipment/infrastructure to meet
Imvamune vaccine storage and distribution requirements.
0 309.2 309.2
Funding for Detect, Understand and Act
• This funding is for strengthening Canada’s ability to detect and respond to public health events
and emergencies through data and risk assessment. It will help to stabilize and strengthen key public
health monitoring, reporting and risk assessment capacities in response to COVID-19.
• The pandemic response demonstrated that there is a need to close gaps in accessing public
health data as well as build infrastructure to better monitor the health of Canadians and the response to
future public health threats.
0 147.8 147.8
Funding for distress centres during the COVID-19 pandemic
• The funding is to help to stabilize distress centres during the pandemic and pandemic recovery
phase as they continue to experience a surge in demand for mental health crisis calls.
• Funds will be administered through the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), which
is overseeing Talk Suicide Canada, formally known as the Canada Suicide Prevention Service. CAMH has
the capacity to address recruitment, hiring and virtual training needs through its established
relationships with distress centres across Canada. This also includes providing and curating resources to
help distress centres address complex needs for priority populations during the pandemic.
0 22.0 22.0
Funding for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation
• Funding to allow for the increased and accelerated development and scaling of solutions that
enable older adults and people living with brain health issues such as dementia, to live in the setting of
their choice and remain active in their communities.
0 11.0 11.0
Funding for the Sero-Surveillance Consortium
• The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force’s (CITF) mandate is to mobilize a series of serological and
vaccine surveillance studies to determine the extent of SARS-CoV-2 infection and immune response in
the Canadian population.
• Because of the continued need for information and the complexity of the transition, an
additional year is required for the CITF to properly complete active studies, so that the knowledge
generated and infrastructure built on COVID-19 transmission dynamics is maximized and integrated into
PHAC core programming.
55.6 65.5 9.9
Funding for immigration, settlement measures, temporary accommodations, and income support for
Ukrainians
• Funding will support and conduct health screening and assessments of international travelers at
its ports of entry pursuant to the Quarantine Act for both incoming Ukraine nationals and other
immigration populations.
• This funding will support officials to be stationed at various locations at all times of the day for
both physical and virtual health assessments.
0 5.1 5.1
Funding for diabetes development of a National Framework
• Funding will support the successful implementation of the Diabetes Challenge Prize and the
National Diabetes Framework with the goal of supporting healthy living and chronic disease prevention.
• The Diabetes Challenge Prize will focus on surfacing different approaches to diabetes prevention
and will promote the development of solutions to reduce the risks associated with type 2 diabetes, with
the aim of ultimately improving health outcomes of Canadians.
• The National Diabetes Framework is expected to provide a common policy direction for multi-
sectoral stakeholders and careful engagement to ensure each sector can advance with their own
activities is essential.
1.8 6.8 5.0
Funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care initiative
Funding will:
• Ensure that more Indigenous families have access to high-quality and culturally relevant
programs and services;
• Support repairs and renovations at existing Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care centres;
and
• Give authority for a 3 percent funding escalator to be applied to all new and existing Indigenous
Early Learning and Child Care grants and contributions funding sought in this submission starting in
2027-2028, as well as for legacy funding amounts for the Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern
Communities program.
26.7 31.0 4.3
Various other increases under $4M
• A total of $8.9M comprised of various items with funding levels increases under $4M.
- - 8.9
Decreases
Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines and vaccine deployment
• Funding to support the continued contractual commitments related to COVID-19 vaccine doses
that were unavailable or unneeded in previous years and were therefore shifted into future years.
• It will also allow Canada the necessary flexibility and agility to rapidly secure additional doses of
new formulation, if needed, to provide Canadians with vaccines that provide the best protection against
COVID-19 and the cover to secure additional doses into 2024
• Continued distribution of COVID-19 vaccines to provinces and territories through logistical
support and inventory management.
5,400.8 2,469.1 (2,931.7)
Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 therapeutics
• Sunset of funding that was aimed at acquiring COVID-19 therapeutics.
• In the height of COVID, therapeutics were necessary to treat and reduce negative health impacts
on COVID-19 patients to reduce strain on the healthcare system.
1,050.0 0 (1,050.0)
Funding to support COVID-19 surge capacity
• Sunset of funding for COVID-19 surge capacity.
• Previously, surge capacity funding was used to stabilize key resources and operations to maintain
a sustained response to the COVID-19 pandemic in four key areas:
o Strengthened Surveillance, Data, Guidance, and Scientific Capacity;
o Laboratory Research, Response and Support;
o Emergency Management Operations; and
o Sustaining Horizontal Operations and Coordination to Support COVID-19 Response
339.4 0 (339.4)
Funding to support border and travel measures and isolation sites
• Sunset of funding for border and travel measures due to the termination of border and travel
measures effective October 1, 2022.
• Early in the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada put in place emergency border
measures to reduce the risk of the importation and transmission of COVID-19 variants in Canada related
to international travel.
• The removal of border measures came at a time when the COVID-19 situation had evolved both
domestically and internationally where restrictions had been lifted across jurisdictions, doing away with
the need for further funding.
338.5 0 (338.5)
Funding for personal protective equipment, logistics and warehousing
• Funding to continue to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to rapidly
deliver critical PPE and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as
to maintain the readiness of the NESS 230.1 173.0 (57.1)
Funding to improve mental health supports and services to help those most affected by COVID-19
• Budget 2021 announced funding to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic.
• This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion and mental
illness prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two years to address PTSD and trauma in
frontline and essential workers and others who are disproportionately affected.
• It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators to monitor the impact of national
mental health service standards and set up data collection and data infrastructure for standards
reporting.
82.2 59.9 (22.3)
Funding for the procurement of domestic influenza vaccines
• To support a sustained state of vaccine readiness, the Government of Canada maintains
contracts to secure pandemic vaccine production capacity and priority access for Canada in the event of
an influenza pandemic.
• This funding would support a contract with a domestic vaccine manufacturer to ensure Canada
remains protected against the threat of an influenza pandemic over the next five years (starting in 2022-
23). 139.6 127.7 (11.9)
Funding for Innovative Technology
• The funding supports the implementation of innovative approaches to address COVID-19.
• The funding allows the National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) to expand existing COVID-19
programming for wastewater surveillance and genomic sequencing, as well as in replacing the NML’s
aging mobile laboratory.
• This funding ensures that public health partners and Canadians alike continue to receive the
services and intelligence that these initiatives provide.
17.0 9.9 (7.1)
Funding to support Canadians affected by autism spectrum disorder
• The funding was used to support the creation and continuation of initiatives and services of a
National Autism Strategy (NAS).
• The funds allow PHAC to meet various commitments for the creation of a NAS, including
engaging with National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) to build consensus on the priorities for action.
• Additionally, the money was used to continue the Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategic Fund
Initiative.
6.9 0.8 (6.1)
Funding for ParticipACTION
• Budget 2018 announced funding of $25 million over five years to be provided to the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) for ParticipACTION to increase participation in daily physical activity
among Canadians.
• The program has now sunset.
5.0 0 (5.0)
Funding for a National Dementia Strategy
• As part of Budget 2019, the Government of Canada announced $50 million over 5 years to
support the implementation of key elements of A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire,
which was released in June 2019. The strategy has three national objectives focused on prevention,
advancing therapies, and finding a cure, and improving the quality of life of people living with dementia
and caregivers.
• Most of Budget 2019 funding ($40M) will be administered through the Dementia Strategic Fund
(DSF), which is supporting a variety of activities, including the development and implementation of a
national public education/awareness campaign, targeted awareness raising
18.2 13.3 (4.9)
Various other decreases under $4.0M
• A total of $7.0M comprised of various items with funding levels decreases under $4M.
- - (7.0)
Health Portfolio’s 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Public Health Agency of Canada - 2023-24 Main Estimates
Summary of Transfer Payment Program Variances
PHAC Explanation of Variance 2021-22 Expenditures 2022-23
Main Estimates 2023-24
Main Estimates Main Estimates Variance
Grants
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of health promotion projects in the areas of building
community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and partnership
building/intersectoral collaboration
• Sunsetting of $29M in Immunization Partnership Funding for the deployment of vaccines
o The funding was used to support partners and stakeholders in developing population-level
interventions aiming to increase confidence in and accept uptake of the COVID-19 vaccines
• Increase of $22M for Distress Centres;
o Reprofiled funding from 2021-22 for $35M into 2022-23 and 23-24 to support the needs of
those experiencing mental health crisis and distress
o The purpose of this program will be to address current urgent needs for crisis and distress
support, including de-escalation of mental health crisis, referrals to resources, including curated
resources for diverse populations, and connection to emergency services.
o Stabilizing the sector will help support the foundation that is needed to introduce a national
three-digit number for suicide prevention and mental health crisis support
28,043,418 67,953,882 62,475,520 (5,478,362)
Grants to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
• New funding of $7M for the COVID-19 Detect, Understand and Act Initiative
o This funding will help to stabilize and strengthen key public health monitoring, reporting and risk
assessment capacities in response to COVID-19. The pandemic response demonstrated that there is a
need to close gaps in accessing public health data as well as build infrastructure to better monitor the
health of Canadians and the response to future public health threats.
110,406,202 54,100,000 63,588,000 9,488,000
Grants to eligible non-profit international organizations in support of their projects or programs on
health
• No variance
2,262,852 2,347,119 2,347,119 0
Diabetes Prevention Challenge
• Increase due to reprofiled funding for the development of a Diabetes National Framework
o The National Diabetes Framework is to advance key areas with the focus of preventing diabetes.
It is also expected to provide a common policy direction for multi-year sectoral stakeholders and careful
engagement to ensure each sector can advance with their own activities.
0 633,179 4,935,000 4,301,821
Grants to graduate students, post-graduate students and Canadian post-secondary institutions to
increase professional capacity and training levels in order to build an effective public health sector
No variance
0 460,000 460,000 0
Grant to individuals and organizations in support of immunization surveillance
• New funding for the COVID-19 Detect, Understand and Act Initiative
o This funding will help to stabilize and strengthen key public health monitoring, reporting and risk
assessment capacities in response to COVID-19. The pandemic response demonstrated that there is a
need to close gaps in accessing public health data as well as build infrastructure to better monitor the
health of Canadians and the response to future public health threats.
o A portion of the DUA grant funding was allocated to this G&C class. The purpose being to
establish grant funding to support external organizations to conduct enhancing monitoring reporting and
analysis of emerging adverse events following immunization to better understand potential biological
mechanisms/pathways, risk factors and health outcomes.
0 0 12,435,000 12,435,000
Contributions
Contributions to individuals and organizations to support health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and partnership
building/intersectoral collaboration
• $21M funding level reduction from $82.4M in 2022-23 to $59.4M in 2023-24 for Mental Health
for those most affected by COVID-19
o Budget 2021 provided $100M over three years to promote mental health, and $50M over two
years to address PTSD and trauma ($56M in 21-22, $62M in 22-23 and $35M in 23-24).
o The funding will deliver and evaluate diverse mental health promotion and mental illness
prevention interventions, in addition to equipping service providers and organizations to address new
and complex needs emerging from the pandemic. These activities are an important complement to
treatment and specialist services and can help reduce demands on the health care system.
o Due to delays, 21-22 funding was reprofiled into three future years (ending with $4.8M in 2024-
25) enabling the program to support additional projects to address gaps and priorities in the current
suite of funded projects and extending successful ones.
• $5M sunset of ParticipACTION
o Budget 2018 announced funding of $25 million over five years to be provided to the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) for ParticipACTION to increase participation in daily physical activity
among Canadians. This program has now sunset.
• $4.8M funding level reduction for Dementia Strategy
o The funding is used to support the development and implementation of a national public
education/awareness campaign, targeted awareness raising initiatives, and initiatives that support
access to and use of dementia guidance.
• $4M funding level reduction to support Autism and develop a National Strategy
o The funding is used to support the creation and continuation of initiatives and services of a
National Autism Strategy.
• $15.6M increase due to reclassification of HIV/AIDS funding
o Contributions funding related to Sexually Transmitted and Blood Borne Infections (STBBI)
including HIV/AIDS initiatives, can now be found listed under this transfer payment listing
115,078,446 158,361,497 133,609,521 (24,751,976)
Contributions to non-profit organizations to support, on a long-term basis, the development and
provision of preventative and early intervention services aimed at addressing the health and
developmental problems experienced by young children at risk in Canada
No variance
83,363,320 83,978,000 83,978,000 0
Contributions to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
• $68M sunset of border measures and isolation funding due to the termination of border and
travel measures effective October 1, 2022.
o The removal of border measures came at a time when the COVID-19 situation had evolved both
domestically and internationally where restrictions had been lifted across jurisdictions, doing away with
the need for further funding.
122,339,276 75,500,000 5,000,000 (70,500,000)
Contributions to incorporated local or regional non-profit Aboriginal organizations and institutions for
the purpose of developing early intervention programs for Aboriginal pre-school children and their
families
• Increase to funding for the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Program
o The purpose of this program is to ensure that more Indigenous families have access to high-
quality Early Learning and Child Care Programming.
o The funding will be used to fund improvements of the quality and accessibility of care, and
contribute to building, training and retaining a skilled workforce. Funding will include new investments in
Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern Communities (AHSUNC).
33,636,492 58,221,001 60,887,232 2,666,231
Pan-Canadian vaccine injury support program
No variance
9,380,844 19,000,000 19,000,000 0
Contributions to Canadian Blood Services and/or other designated transfusion/transplantation centres
to support adverse event surveillance activities
Immaterial
1,792,157 2,150,000 2,190,000 40,000
Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation
• New funding for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation Program
o This program funding will allow for the increased and accelerated development and scaling of
solutions that enable older adults and people living with brain health issues such as dementia to live in
the setting of their choice and remain active in their communities.
0 0 11,000,000 11,000,000
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Purpose /Objectives Expected Results 2021–22 Expenditures 2022–23 Main Estimates 2023–
24 Main Estimates
GRANTS
Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC)
The ISC program supports the generation of new and unique intellectual property (IP) stimulation of
Research and Development collaborations, and growth of small businesses in the Canadian innovation
ecosystem.
CFIA's Innovative Solutions Canada grants will promote the development of innovative approaches to
improve sector outcomes.
300,000 613,779 400,000
CONTRIBUTIONS
Federal Assistance Program (FAP)
The FAP supports projects and initiatives that advance CFIA's strategic outcome of a safe and accessible
food supply and plant and animal resource base.
The expected results include:
a. scientific and technical knowledge is advanced and/or enhanced;
b. individual knowledge and skills are developed and/or improved;
c. international collaborations are expanded and/or strengthened; and
d. organizations or initiatives are established or sustained.
820,653 600,000 600,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENTS
Compensation Payments
Compensate Canadians, in accordance with the appropriate regulations, for plants or animals ordered
destroyed for the purpose of disease control. In accordance with the Health of Animals Act and the
Plant Protection Act, owners and/or producers will be compensated for ordered destruction of animals
or plants for the purpose of disease control. Compensation will be provided according to the market
value of the animals or plants.
3,816,364 12,500,000 12,500,000
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary ($ millions)
Description 2022-23 Main Estimates 2023-24 Main Estimates Net Change
New and Renewed TB Submissions - Increases
Funding for building a post-pandemic agile workforce, and to support long-term digital transformation
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) is seeking access to $61.7M over three years (2022-
23 to 2024-25), approved in Budget 2022, to prepare for the post-pandemic operating environment. This
funding will help build an agile workforce and support longer term digital transformation by: 1) upskilling
inspectors on essential training that was previously unavailable to them due to COVID-19 restrictions; 2)
addressing deferred maintenance for digital services; and 3) examining opportunities for virtual
inspection.
0.0 21.9 21.9
Funding for preparedness, prevention and trade continuity in response to African swine fever
• Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC), CFIA, and the Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA)
are seeking $45.3M over three years (2022-23 to 2024-25), to support near term actions for the
prevention and preparedness response initiatives to prevent the entry of African swine fever into
Canada, as well as for anticipatory trade continuity initiatives. The CFIA total ask over the duration of the
funding proposal is
$18.9M. 0.0 7.7 7.7
Funding to address the current Potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island
• CFIA is seeking a total of $11.3M over two years ($5.7M in 2022-23 and $5.6M in 2023-24) to
address the current Potato wart crisis in Prince Edward Island (PEI). This includes developing operational
capacity; responding to international market pressures; and, establishing a science-based approach that
will minimize further long-term spread within and outside PEI, as well as protect market access.
0.0 5.7 5.7
Funding for the preparedness and prevention of disease outbreaks related to the trade of regulated
animals other than livestock
• CFIA is requesting Treasury Board approval to access $20.5M over four years (2022-23 to 2025-
26, $3.1M for 2022-23) to enable the Agency to effectively respond to the increasing and significant
health risks posed by the growth of legal and illegal pet trade.
0.0 4.2 4.2
Funding for the implementation and enforcement of amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations
• CFIA is seeking access to $10M over nine years (2022-23 to 2030-31) and $300K ongoing, as
approved in Budget 2022, to support implementation of compliance and enforcement of new
amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations, also known as the Front of Package amendments, which
includes other amendments on vitamin D fortification, labelling for aspartame and prohibition of
partially hydrogenated oils. These regulations came into effect in July 2022, and have a transition period
ending December 31, 2025. Funding will be used to develop compliance promotion and enforcement
strategies; prepare guidance for industry; and, for inspector training. Ongoing funding will support long
term compliance and enforcement activities including responses to complaints and inspections.
0.0 0.8 0.8
Other - Increases
Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia
• As part of the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining modern federal
science infrastructure, Budget 2017 committed $80M over five years to replace the Sidney Centre for
Plant Health with a new, world class plant health research facility to help support the safety of Canada’s
agriculture and agri-food sector, while facilitating trade and economic growth that benefits Canadians.
• The new, world-class Centre for Plant Health will support the science outcomes detailed in the
Federal Science and Technology Infrastructure Initiative; help to set the stage for portfolio management
of scientific assets and infrastructure; and, implement IM/IT solutions to support federal scientists in
their important work.
25.3 29.7 4.4
Funding for Collective Bargaining
• A total increase of $2.9M in 2023-24 related to collective agreement funding to be received by
the Agency.
- 2.9 2.9
Employee Benefit Plan (EBP) adjustment
• The Annual Reference Level Update EBP rate was increased by 0.2%.
- 1.0 1.0
End of the transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety
• End of the transfer from CFIA to Health Canada (HC) in the amount of $0.6M in 2022-23 to
develop risk profiles for current and emerging foodborne pathogens and other food hazards. This
transfer facilitated an effective mechanism by which Health Canada standards, policies, guidance and risk
assessments are applied in order to better support CFIA’s risk-based approaches for preventive measures
as well as risk control actions that improve food safety measures across Canada.
(0.6) 0.0 0.6
Funding Level Decreases
Funding to maintain daily shift inspection presence in federally registered meat processing
establishments
• CFIA accessed $15.6M per year (excluding $0.8M reserved for accommodation and IT services) in
2021-22 and 2022-23 to maintain the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program in all federal meat
processing establishments to meet the United States inspection frequency requirement and maintain
market access. This is a sunsetting program that will be considered for renewal
15.6 0.0 (15.6)
Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
• CFIA sought Treasury Board approval to renew sunsetting funding in the amount of $31.4M over
two years (2021-22 and 2022-23), to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures. The
measures supported by this funding maintained and strengthened Canada’s food safety system by
targeting inspection activities to high risk domestic and imported food and food products, supported
work with countries wishing to send food to Canada, and facilitated industry compliance with existing
and future food safety requirements across the food supply chain. This is a sunsetting program that will
be considered for renewal
14.3 0.0 (14.3)
Funding to implement both federally delivered and federal/provincial and territorial cost-shared services
and programs under the Canadian Agricultural Partnership (CAP) framework
• On April 1, 2018 the Canadian Agricultural Partnership (CAP) agricultural policy framework
replaced Growing Forward 2 framework, which was set to end on March 31, 2018. Similar to previous
frameworks, the CAP provided programming that supports science and innovation, environmental
sustainability, risk management, and market development and access. The CAP is composed of: AAFC
services and grant and contribution programs; HC services; and, CFIA services.
• CFIA received $34.6M ($37.0M including Public Services and Procurement Canada) over five
years (2018-19 to 2022-23) for CAP, consistent with the funding received for the Growing Forward 2
framework. AAFC and CFIA have received funding approval from the Department of Finance to renew
this funding with the Treasury Board Submission approved on February 9th.
6.9 0.0 (6.9)
Funding for enhanced international capacity
• Following Budget 2015, Treasury Board approved $10.7M funding over two years (2016-17 and
2017-18) for the CFIA to increase its capacity to negotiate free trade agreements, advance Canada’s
interests in International Standard Setting Bodies, enable exports and augment trade policy and
regulatory cooperation.
• Budget 2018 renewed $22.3M over 5 years (2018-19 to 2022-23) to maintain the capacity
provided through Budget 2015.
• The CFIA’s international program supports trade and contributes to a predictable international
regulatory framework. Specifically, the CFIA establishes and enforces sanitary (food safety and animal life
or health) and phytosanitary (plant life or health) measures and regulations that must be consistent with
the international rights and obligations established by the World Trade Organization.
• This is a sunsetting program that will be considered for renewal
5.6 0.0 (5.6)
Funding for Regulatory and Security Science (RSS) cluster management support
• Budget 2018 announced the plan to rebuild federal laboratories and advance interdisciplinary
science. The Regulatory and Security Science (RSS) cluster led by CFIA, including AAFC, CBSA, HC, Public
Health Agency of Canada and the National Research Council of Canada as partners, will provide seamless
integration of complementary government science capabilities to protect Canada’s people, animals and
plants and advance innovation and economic growth. The focus was on strengthening scientific
collaboration between regulatory and security science providers and users to anticipate and address
emerging threats.
1.4 0.0 (1.4)
Funding for Food Fraud
• As announced in Budget 2019, CFIA received $2.8M in 2019-20, $5.2M in 2020-21 $4.8M in
2021-22, $5.2M in 2022-23 and $4.8M ongoing.
• Building on its existing programming to prevent fraud in food labeling, with new funding, the
CFIA, in collaboration with HC, will continue to work to strengthen Canada’s response to food fraud,
address known food fraud issues and incorporate modern targeted methodologies, pursue definitive
investigations into potential incidences of food fraud, and inspections, control actions, investigations and
prosecutions where appropriate.
5.2 4.8 (0.4)
Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products
• Budget 2019 announced funding of $25.1M over 5 years ($2.5M in 2019-20, $5.7M in 2020-21,
$6.3M in 2021-22, $5.5M in 2022-23 and $5.2M in 2023-24) for the CFIA to continue digitizing its export
certification activities. This is in line with the Government’s commitment to providing Canadians with
reliable, accessible and secure services that are seamless and digitally enabled.
5.5 5.2 (0.3)
Innovative Solution Canada (ISC) Grant funding
• CFIA received grant authority under ISC grant program Terms and Conditions along with 19 other
federal organizations to support small business innovations through posting online challenges.
0.6 0.4 (0.2)
Other - Decreases
Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat to support Financial Management Transformation
• Transfer from CFIA to the Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of $0.2M until 2027-28 to
support the Integrated Finance & Material Systems, and to co-ordinate the Government of Canada wide
transition to SAP S/4HANA enterprise resource planning software, and build a Government of Canada
Digital Core template (built once, used everywhere) to be used as an accelerator to deliver Financial
Management Transformation across the Government of Canada.
- (0.2) (0.2)
Health Portfolio’s 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Canadian Institutes of Health Research – 2023-24 Main Estimates
CIHR
Purpose /Objectives Expected Results 2021–22 Expenditures 2022–23 Main Estimates 2023–24
Main Estimates
“GRANTS FOR RESEARCH PROJECTS AND PERSONNEL SUPPORT” TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAM
Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021)
This funding allows for the implementation of the Clinical Trials Fund to reinforce Canada’s clinical trials
ecosystem by investing in three funding streams including a Pan-Canadian Clinical Trials Consortium,
clinical trials training platforms and clinical trials projects.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program These
important investments will stimulate innovation across the country to improve health care and health
outcomes for all Canadians.
- - 74,790,826*
Supporting a National Women’s Health Research Initiative (Budget 2021)
The National Women's Health Research Initiative will advance a coordinated research program that
addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of women's health and will ensure new evidence
improves women's and gender-diverse people's care and health outcomes. It will also promote an
intersectional lens to research and care to tackle persistent gaps for all women, including for Indigenous,
Black, and racialized women, women with disabilities, and members of Two-Spirit, lesbian, gay, bisexual,
transgender, queer, intersex, and additional sexually and gender diverse (2SLGBTQI+) communities.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program This
investment will:
• Increase research in women’s health and promote the use of an intersectional lens to address
gaps in current research streams.
• Maximize research impact within and beyond to ensure evidence is integrated into health policy,
decision making, and planning to support community, regional, provincial, territorial, and /or federal
efforts regarding women's health.
• Build capacity for the next generation of women's health researchers to support the
development of a sustainable women's health research ecosystem in Canada.
- - 3,400,000*
Long-Term Health Impacts of COVID-19 (Budget 2022)
This investment will support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on
Canadians' health and health systems.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
These investments will generate evidence on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections and help
inform decision-making.
- - 4,451,500*
Funding to support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022)
To address the underrepresentation of Black researchers and trainees among the applicants and
awardees of the federal granting agencies programs.
To increase meaningful participation of Black research trainees in Canada to contribute to skills
development and improving employment options and to promote the funding within relevant
stakeholders, partner organizations, and the academic community.
*$1,280,500 falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment
program; $1,050,000 falls under Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS) transfer payment program (see
below under “other transfer payment programs”)
This funding will increase the number and proportion of Black research trainees directly supported by
agencies’ scholarships and fellowships at the undergraduate, master, doctoral and post-doctoral stages.
This research will contribute to making Canada’s research culture more equitable, diverse, and inclusive,
and increase Canada’s innovation potential.
- - 1,280,500*
To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging (Budget 2022)
This funding will support research across the continuum from promoting brain health in aging to
addressing the complex care needs of people living with dementia and their caregivers.
Research activities will focus on resilience, cognitive reserve and vulnerabilities in brain aging, as well as
modifiable factors for reduction of risk of development and progression of cognitive impairment and
dementia.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
Research on this topic will address current knowledge gaps in dementia and brain health in aging.
This will lead to the mobilization of research evidence into improved care and services, policies and
outcomes for all Canadians, including those living with dementia and their caregivers, will be facilitated.
- - 2,480,000
Develop a National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases (Budget 2019)
This portion of the investment will advance research initiatives in rare diseases.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
Research will generate evidence (including improved diagnosis, tracking of rare diseases, and drug
development) to support improved care and efficiencies within the health care system, as well as
improved health outcomes for Canadians.
- - 6,425,000
To support the Pan-Canadian Women's Health Research Coalition
This investment is a transfer from Women and Gender Equality Canada to CIHR to support the Pan-
Canadian Women's Health Coalition, one of the three funding streams under the National Women's
Health Research Initiative that received support in Budget 2021.
The Coalition will be composed of hubs across Canada linked through a coordinating centre that will
work together to maximize the visibility and impact of women's health research and practice in Canada.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
This investment will:
• Increase research in women’s health and promote the use of an intersectional lens to address
gaps in current research streams.
• Maximize research impact within and beyond to ensure evidence is integrated into health policy,
decision making, and planning to support community, regional, provincial, territorial, and /or federal
efforts regarding women's health.
Build capacity for the next generation of women's health researchers to support the development of a
sustainable women's health research ecosystem in Canada.
- - 1,000,000
Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries
This investment supports a joint initiative between CIHR and the Canadian Institute for Public Safety
Research and Treatment (CIPSRT) to further our understanding of post-traumatic stress injuries among
public safety personnel.
This additional $3.0 million for post-traumatic stress injuries is required as time-limited funding ends in
2022-23.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
This research will generate evidence to contribute to our understanding of PTSI among PSP.
2,639,882 2,800,000 0
Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19 The focus of this funding is to develop national mental
health, and substance use service standards through two catalyst grant funding opportunities.
* Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program
This research will contribute to the evidence base to inform the development of the standards, which
are expected to positively impact the mental health of Canadians and reduce problematic substance use
by supporting the delivery of accessible and high-quality mental health and substance use services
consistently and equitably.
589,724 1,914,713 0
Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network (DSEN)
The DSEN is an initiative created by CIHR and Health Canada in 2009 to increase the evidence on drug
safety and effectiveness available to regulators, policymakers, health care providers and patients and to
build capacity within Canada to undertake high-quality post-market research in this area. The majority of
the DSEN funding elements are being transferred to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in
Health (though Health Canada).
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program This
funding will increase the amount of evidence on drug safety and effectiveness available to regulators,
policy-makers, health care providers and patients; and increase Canada’s capacity to undertake high-
quality post-market research in this area.
6,839,439 3,316,930 459,998
To address the opioid crisis Minister of Health has made addressing the national opioid crisis a top
priority, committing to protecting the health and safety of all Canadians through a comprehensive,
compassionate, collaborative and evidence-based approach to addressing problematic substance use.
This represents an increase in the transfer amount from Health Canada to address the opioid crisis.
*Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer payment program This
funding will generate evidence to inform best practices for the operation of safer supply interventions
and supervised consumption sites.
It will address pressing evidence needs of decision makers and knowledge users in the area of harm
reduction interventions, taking into consideration the impact of the COVID-19 pandemic and the local
context.
It will advance evidence-based practices through knowledge dissemination activities.
771,458 1,300,000 2,300,000
OTHER TRANSFER PAYMENT PROGRAMS
Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
Launched in December 2014, the CFREF invested $1.5 billion over 10 years (across the three granting
agencies) to propel Canadian research at universities and colleges from world-class to world leading in
areas that create long-term economic advantages for Canada.
The decrease is due to time-limited funding for the inaugural competition, which ends in 2022-23.
This funding will give research institutions across Canada an increased ability to pursue break through
discoveries.
It will allow for the institutions to be more forward thinking in their institutional strategies and the
pursue top talent from around the world.
43,803,272 28,117,817 47,227,134
Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS)
The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are pursuing
masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
The objective of the master’s component is to help develop research skills and assist in the training of
highly qualified personnel by supporting students who demonstrate a high standard of achievement in
undergraduate and early graduate studies.
The objectives of the doctoral component are to reward and retain top-level graduate students at
Canadian institutions, to enable a high-quality research training experience for award holders and to
foster impacts within and beyond the research environment.
The increase is a result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate Scholarships allocations
within the program, between the three granting agencies (NSERC and SSHRC), to re-align with the
research landscape.
*Includes portion of funding to support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022)
– as referenced above. This funding will help support students that are pursuing health-related fields of
research in Canada.
This will allow Canada to retain graduates and further provide them with high quality research training.
28,582,495 35,547,500 39,047,500*
Networks of Centres of Excellence Program (NCE)
The program supports large-scale academically led research networks that harness the creativity and
inventiveness of Canadian health, natural, and social scientists and engineers. Partners from industry,
government and not-for-profit organizations contribute additional expertise and cash and in-kind
support.
As per Budget 2018, funding for the NCE program has been gradually transferred to the New Frontiers in
Research Fund, until fully phased out (CIHR funding is ending in 2023-24).
This program allows for the:
• Mobilization multi-disciplinary research capacity from across Canada.
• Engagement of partners from multiple academic institutions and various public and private-
sector organizations.
• Training of the next generation of highly qualified people.
• Acceleration of work with end users to facilitate the creation and application of new knowledge.
• Increasing collaboration between researchers in Canada and abroad.
17,702,409 5,575,040 -
Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR)
As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the CECR and the Business-led
Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE) programs are being consolidated and transferred to the
Strategic Innovation Fund (managed by ISED).
The decrease represents the wind-down and gradual transfer of funding to the Strategic Innovation
Fund. The CECR program bridges the challenging gap between innovation and commercialization. The
program matches clusters of research expertise with the business community to share the knowledge
and resources that bring innovations to market faster. Centres advance research and facilitate
commercialization within four priority areas: the environment; natural resources and energy; health and
life sciences; and information and communications technologies.
7,206,000 4,133,000 -
Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE) As per Budget 2018, the research and
commercialization activities of the BL-NCE programs are being consolidated and transferred to the
Strategic Innovation Fund.
The decrease represents the wind-down and gradual transfer of funding to the Strategic Innovation
Fund. The BL-NCE funds large-scale collaborative research networks that bring a wide range of
research expertise to bear on specific challenges identified by an industrial sector. Led by a not-for-profit
consortium of industrial partners, networks enhance private sector innovation by blending academic
expertise with the private sector’s drive to respond to real-world challenges. BL-NCEs increase private
sector investments in Canadian research, support training of skilled researchers, and accelerate the
transfer of ideas from the laboratory into solutions needed by the private sector.
2,432,376 1,496,334 447,135
Canadian Institutes of Health Research 2023-24 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
Description 2022-23 Main Estimates (in millions) 2023-24 Main Estimates (in millions) Net
Change (in millions)
New TB Submissions - Increases
Clinical Trials Fund (Budget 2021)
• As announced in Budget 2021, this new funding ($250 million from 2022-23 to 2024-25) will
support the implementation of a new Clinical Trials Fund.
• $85.8 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps B), $81.1 million in 2023-24 and $81.4 million
in 2024-25.
0.0 81.1 81.1
Canada First Research Excellence Fund – Competition 2022-23
• The CFREF is a Tri-agency program administered by the Tri-agency Institutional Programs
Secretariat at SSHRC. SSHRC, NSERC and CIHR will award grant funding to successful Canadian post-
secondary institutions to help those institutions excel globally in research areas that create long-term
social and economic advantages for Canada. A total of $1.4B, over eight years (2022-23 to 2029-30), will
be awarded as part of the competition completing in February 2023. Funding required for CIHR amounts
to $331.4M over the said timeframe. Funding allocation will be revised following confirmation of the
competition results.
28.1 47.2 19.1
Develop a National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases (Budget 2019)
• As announced in Budget 2019, this new finding ($32.3 million from 2023-24 to 2027-28 for
CIHR) will be used to advance research initiatives in rare diseases
• $7.4 million in 2023-24, $7.0 million in 2025-26, $5.5 million in 2026-27 and $4.5 million in 2027-
28.
0 7.4 7.4
Long-Term Health Impacts of COVID-19 (Budget 2022)
• As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) will be
used support research on the long-term health impacts of COVID-19, including the effects of “Long
COVID” on different groups, including vulnerable populations and children.
• $1.4 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps B) and $5.0 million in 2023-24
0 5.0 5.0
Supporting a National Women’s Health Research Initiative (Budget 2021)
• As announced in Budget 2021, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) to
support a new National Institute for Women’s Health Research to advance research in high-priority areas
of women’s health.
• $1.3 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps B), $4.3 million in 2023-24, $4.4 million in 2024-
25, $5.1 million in 2025-26 and $4.8 million in 2026-27)
0 4.3 4.3
To learn more about Dementia and Brain Health in Aging (Budget 2022)
• As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($20 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27) will be
used to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health, to improve treatment and
outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address mental health consequences for
caregivers and different models of care.
• $1.4 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps C), $3.1 million in 2023-24, $5.3 million in 2024-
25, $5.3 million in 2025-26 and $4.5 million in 2026-27.
0 3.1 3.1
To support Canada’s Black students and postdoctoral fellows (Budget 2022)
• As announced in Budget 2022, this new funding ($15.1 million from 2022-23 to 2026-27 and
$4.0 million ongoing) will be used to support Black research trainees in Canada.
• $1.3 million in 2022-23 (provided through Supps B), $2.6 million in 2023-24, $3.3 million in 2024-
25 (includes $1.4 million for CGS), $3.7 million in 2025-26, $4.1 million in 2026-27 and $4.0 million on-
going (includes $1.0 million in 2022-23 and $1.4 million in 2024-25, and on-gong, for Canada Graduate
Scholarships)
0 2.6 2.6
Funding Level Increases
Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS) Master’s and Doctoral program
• The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students who are
pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
• The increase is a result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate Scholarships
allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies (NSERC and SSHRC), to re-align with
the research landscape.
• 2023-24 Main Estimates excludes the additional funding received to support Canada’s Black
students and postdoctoral fellows (included in the previous TB Submission item). When included, 2023-
24 Main Estimates are $39.0 million (an increase of $3.5 million over 2022-23 Main Estimates).
35.5 38.0 2.5
Other – Increases
To support the Pan-Canadian Women's Health Research Coalition
• This transfer aligns to the National Women's Health Research initiative. The purpose of this
transfer to provide funding to advance a coordinated research program that addresses under-researched
and high-priority areas of women’s health and ensure that new evidence improves women’s care and
health outcomes.
• Total funding for this initiative amounts to $9,600,000 over the next four fiscal years (starting in
2023-24), which includes an annual transfer of $1,000,000 from WAGE to CIHR ($4,000,000) and
$5,600,000 from CIHR (funded from the Budget 2021 item).
0 1.0 1.0
To address the opioid crisis
• This represents an increase in the transfer amount from Health Canada to address the opioid
crisis.
1.3 2.3 1.0
Various other increases
• Relates mainly to employee benefit plan adjustments.
7.7 8.8 1.1
Sunset – Decreases
Networks of Centres of Excellence Program (NCE)
• The program supports large-scale academically led research networks that harness the creativity
and inventiveness of Canadian health, natural, and social scientists and engineers. Partners from
industry, government and not-for-profit organizations contribute additional expertise and cash and in-
kind support.
• The last cohort of renewed funding for the NCEs took place in 2020.
• Since then, funding for the NCE program has been gradually transferred to the New Frontiers in
Research Fund with CIHR funding ending in 2022-23.
5.6 0 (5.6)
Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR)
• As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the CECR and the Business-
led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE) programs are being consolidated and transferred to the
Strategic Innovation Fund (managed by ISED).
• CIHR funding is ending in 2022-23.
4.1 0 (4.1)
Post-traumatic stress injuries
• $3.0 million for post-traumatic stress injuries as time-limited funding ends in 2022-23.
3.0 0 (3.0)
Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19
• Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19 as time-limited funding ends in 2022-23
2.2 0 (2.2)
Funding Level Decreases
Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network (DSEN)
• The DSEN is an initiative created by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and Health
Canada in 2009 to increase the evidence on drug safety and effectiveness available to regulators,
policymakers, health care providers and patients and to build capacity within Canada to undertake high-
quality post-market research in this area.
• A new model design and approach has been developed which will see the transfer of the
majority of the DSEN funding elements to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in Health
(though Health Canada).
3.7 0.8 (2.9)
Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE)
• As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the Centres of Excellence
for Commercialization and Research (CECR) and the BL-NCE programs are being consolidated and
transferred to the Strategic Innovation Fund (managed by ISED).
• CIHR funding is ending in 2023-24.
1.5 0.4 (1.1)
Other – Decreases
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The Government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Canada’s health care system.
• The meeting between the Prime Minister and his provincial and territorial counterparts on
February 7th provided an opportunity to discuss how, collectively, we can achieve better results for
Canadians.
• The federal government will increase health funding to PTs by $196.1 billion over 10 years,
including $46.2 billion in new funding for provinces and territories. This includes:
o An immediate, unconditional $2 billion top-up to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT);
o A 5 per cent CHT guarantee for the next five years, resulting in a permanent funding increase;
o $25 billion over 10 years to support shared health priorities through tailored bilateral
agreements;
o $1.7 billion over 5 years to support wage increases for personal support workers and related
professions; and
• The Government has been consistent in its message that any new investments will need to be
tied to results, measured through data.
• The Government will invest an additional $2.5 billion over 10 years in complementary federal
support, $2 billion of which will support Indigenous health priorities, bringing total federal investments
to 198.6B over 10 years.
• Moving forward, the Government is committed to work with provinces and territories to
improve our health care system by addressing our shared priorities.
KEY FACTS
• The Prime Minister and Canada’s premiers met in Ottawa on February 7, 2023, to discuss health
priorities and present the federal plan, including a financial offer totalling $196.1 billion in increased
health funding for provinces and territories, four shared health priorities and associated results and
indicators, and the commitments sought from provinces and territories to access the new funding.
• The Council of the Federation (CoF), who announced its intention to accept the Government’s
offer on February 13th, first made a formal request for an increase in health transfers in September
2020, to address PT projected increases in health care costs. The requested increase would have caused
the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, or 35% of PT health spending.
o The CoF has continuously reiterated its demand for a 35% federal share, including most recently
with a “public awareness” campaign in October 2022.
• In July 2022, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $2 billion
one-time top-up to the CHT, to further help them to address pandemic-related health system pressures,
particularly the backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
• This is in addition to the $5 billion health care funding provided by the Government to provinces
and territories in July 2021, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the CHT to support PTs to clear the
backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support vaccine roll-out.
• Additionally, the Government provided significant pandemic-related health system investments
through the $19 billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of
virtual care services.
• Furthermore, the Government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and territories
improve the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
• In November 2022, the Government passed Bill C-31, the legislation that will enable the Canada
Dental Benefit, the first step in the Government’s proposed dental plan for low- and middle-income
families. This interim measure will provide up to $650 annually (per child) for two years directly to
families who earn $90,000 or less, to pay for dental visits for children under 12 years of age.
• For more information on federal spending, please see the Background.
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL)
• We still have more work to do to achieve better outcomes for patients, but we agree that all
Canadians deserve a system that includes:
o access to high-quality family health services when they need it, including in rural and remote
areas and for underserved communities;
o a resilient health workforce that provides them high quality, effective and safe health services
when they need it;
o access to their own health information electronically that is shared between health professionals
they see; and
o access to timely, equitable and quality mental health, substance use and addictions services to
support their wellbeing.
• We are providing $46 billion in new funding to provinces and territories to address immediate
pressures on the health care system and to transform it for the long-term.
• This includes $25 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories to support shared health
priorities through tailored bilateral agreements.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography.
• To access their share of federal funding, including the 5% growth top-up payments to the CHT,
provinces and territories are asked to commit to improve how health information is collected, shared,
used, and reported to Canadians.
• From the beginning, the Government of Canada has been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight COVID-19
and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2021-22, the Government of Canada provided $43.1 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and by over 9%
to $49.3 billion in 2023-24. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to billions in pandemic support
for provincial and territorial health care systems committed over the course of the pandemic (e.g., $4
billion to help address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government has
committed billions in direct health investments to support the fight against COVID-19, including public
health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests.
• Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health-related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion.
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON NEW FUNDING FOR MENTAL HEALTH & SUBSTANCE USE HEALTH…
• There is no health without mental health. That is why access to mental health and substance use
health supports, including at the community level, are integral pieces of work we want to undertake with
the provinces and territories to improve the health system in Canada.
• An inclusive approach to investments in health services, including health workers and data and
digital tools, is required to meet the mental health and substance use care needs of Canadians.
• Investments include an increase in the Canada Health Transfer and bilateral funding for tailor-
made agreements. The tailor-made agreements total $25 billion over ten years and cover all areas of
investment, including mental health and substance use health.
• These tailor-made agreements with provinces and territories will help expand the delivery of
timely, high-quality, and accessible mental health and substance use health services, as well as reduce
substance use harms, prevent overdose, reduce stigma, and help save lives and provide key data and
information to inform future decision-making at all levels of government.
• It is incremental to the existing $11 billion funding provided over ten years to support improved
access to home and community care, mental health, and addiction services.
• Canada’s health workforce has demonstrated its desire and commitment to move away from
stand-alone, siloed mental health and substance use health services. A collaborative health system will
allow for a better flow of patient information and reinforce the full continuum of care service that
Canadians deserve.
• Our response to mental health and substance use health is stronger when it is provided as part
of integrated care.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC…
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of Quebec,
and continues to work with the Quebec government to strengthen public health care.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreements will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support
home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our Government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec also received $1.35 billion as part of its share of the previous CHT top-ups, and a further
$225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR PRE-EXISTING BILATERAL AGREEMENTS…
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to transfer $5 billion in targeted funding
for home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021 22.
• In 2021-22, these agreements were amended to accommodate a $1 billion for Safe Long-term
Care Fund.
• Our Government is working with provinces and territories to negotiate new agreements to
enable access to the remaining 5 years of funding.
• In addition, as per the Budget 2021 commitment a further $3 billion over five years is available
to support provinces and territories in applying LTC standards and making permanent changes.
• Our meeting with the premiers on February 7, 2023, provided an opportunity to discuss how,
collectively, we can achieve better results for Canadians and improve access to care.
• We are making significant progress in our discussions with provincial and territorial counterparts
to achieve better outcomes for Canadians. Collaborative work with our counterparts is already underway
which, we hope, will soon lead to the conclusion of new bilateral agreements.
BACKGROUND
Proposed Federal Investment Offer
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister and his PT counterparts met to discuss actions needed to
improve the health care system. Following this meeting, the Government announced an investment of
$198.6 billion over 10 years, including $48.7 billion in new funding, to improve health services. This
funding would be distributed through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), bilateral agreements with PTs,
an Indigenous-specific funding stream, and complementary federal support. Premiers accepted the
federal offer on February 13, 2023.
The Government proposed to provide an immediate, unconditional $2 billion CHT top-up to address
immediate pressures on the health care system, as well as guaranteed 5% growth to the CHT for the next
five years (expected value of $17.3 billion over 10 years). To access their share of the federal funding,
including the 5% CHT growth, PTs would have to commit to improve how health information is collected,
shared, used, and reported to Canadians to promote greater transparency on results, and to help
manage public health emergencies.
The Government also announced it would provide $25 billion over 10 years to PTs to support shared
health priorities through bilateral agreements. As part of these agreements, PTs were asked to develop
action plans that will describe how funds will be spent (incremental to existing spending) and how
progress will be measured.
Funding will also be provided to support Indigenous priorities ($2 billion over 10 years) through a health
equity fund on a distinctions basis, to address unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes
to fair and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services. The Minister of Indigenous
Services, the Minister of Crown-Indigenous Relations, and the Minister of Northern Affairs will work with
Indigenous partners to prioritize investments.
Complementary federal support will also flow $505 million over 5 years to the Canadian Institute for
Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and federal data partners to work with PTs to develop
new health data indicators, to support the creation of a Centre of Excellence on health worker data, to
advance digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap, and to underpin efforts to use data to
improve safety and quality of care. The Territorial Health Investment Fund will also receive $150 million
over 5 years in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health care in the territories.
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increase in CHT:
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
cause the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, an increase of $31 billion from its current level of $45 billion in
2022-23, or an increase from its pre-pandemic 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also
called for the CHT to grow by an annual escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and has continued to
reiterate its demand for 35%, most recently with a “public awareness” campaign that was launched on
October 24, 2022, consisting of radio, print, online and billboard ads.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories (PTs) with an additional $5 billion for
health care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the
backlog of procedures caused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1
billion to support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to
address infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund
that also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
In July 2022, the Government provided PTs with an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to the CHT, to
further help them to address pandemic-related health system pressures, particularly the backlog of
surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
The CHT, the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is
tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are universality,
comprehensiveness, portability, accessibility, and public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive
$43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and to $49.3 billion in 2023-24.
Pandemic Funding:
Throughout the pandemic, the federal government has provided billions of dollars, beyond the CHT, in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems to support the fight against COVID, as
well as billions in direct federal spending to support public health and purchase vaccines and tests and
other equipment.
Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health-related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to PTs through the Safe Restart
Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over 40 billion in direct federal spending (e.g.,
spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all PTs and posted to Health Canada’s
website. New agreements will be required for PTs to access the remaining five years of this funding
(2022-23 to 2026-27).
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help PTs protect people in long-term care and support infection prevention and control.
Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on PTs demonstrating that
investments have been made according to those spending plans. PTs will be able to use this funding to
undertake a range of activities, including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness
assessments, making improvements to ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support PTs in ensuring
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The federal government will
work collaboratively with PTs, while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term
care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The Government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with PTs on improving
the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with PTs to assist health services to undertake virtual
care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to PTs through bilateral
agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure
videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end
supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
• On March 10, 2023, the Minister of Health issued a statement on the Canada Health Act,
indicating that more work is needed with provinces and territories to ensure that there are no patient
charges for insured health services.
• The statement communicates that, over the coming weeks, the government will issue Canada
Health Transfer payments and that deductions for patient charges levied during fiscal year 2020-2021,
totalling over $82 million, will be applied. This amount includes the first deductions taken under the
Diagnostics Services Policy, totalling over $76 million.
• The statement further communicates that the Minister of Health sent a letter to his provincial
and territorial colleagues on March 9 to reinforce the shared responsibility to protect our universal,
publicly funded healthcare, whether provided in-person or virtually.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians deserve universal, accessible and high-quality health care system that provides timely
access to health care services when and where they need them.
• The Government of Canada works hard to ensure that as our health care system evolves, the
interpretation and administration of the CHA must evolve with it, and Canadians have continued access
to care.
• Upholding the Canada Health Act (CHA) remains critical to protecting Canada's health care
system and ensuring Canadians have equitable access to medically necessary care based on their needs,
not their ability or willingness to pay.
• On March 10, 2023, the Government of Canada announced deductions to the Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) payments of several provinces, totalling over $82 million in respect of patient charges
levied during 2020-21 medically necessary services that should be accessible to patients at no cost.
• This includes the first deductions taken under the Diagnostic Services Policy (DSP), totalling over
$76 million, for patient charges levied for medically necessary diagnostic imaging services.
• If provinces and territories eliminate patient charges and the circumstances that led to them,
they may be eligible for reimbursement of their deductions under the Reimbursement Policy. Health
Canada continues to work with provinces to provide assistance and guidance on next steps in the
reimbursement process. This March, British Columbia received a reimbursement of over $15 million
under the CHA Reimbursement Policy.
• The Government of Canada will continue to uphold the values of equity, fairness and solidarity
that underpin the CHA.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES USING PRIVATE FACILITIES FOR THE DELIVERY OF INSURED
SERVICES…
• The Government of Canada will work with provinces and territories to ensure that its significant
10-year, $198.6 billion in health care funding to provinces and territories are used in ways that respect
the principles of the Canada Health Act.
• The Canada Health Act does not preclude private facilities from providing medically necessary
services, so long as patients are not charged to access these services.
• This Government will continue to uphold the Act so that Canadians have equitable access to
medically necessary services based on their health needs and not their ability or willingness to pay.
IF PRESSED ON THE APPEAL OF THE CAMBIE DECISION TO THE SUPREME COURT OF CANADA…
• Our government fully supports the British Columbia Court of Appeal’s decision, which validates
the fundamental principle of Canada’s health care system – access to medically necessary health services
should be based on medical need, and not on the ability or willingness to pay.
• We will continue to work with British Columbia to vigorously defend Canada’s publicly funded
health care system, which values equity and fairness over profit and preferential access to required care.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services in NB
Since March 2020, deductions totalling $334,766 have been levied against NB’s Canada Health Transfer
(CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. New Brunswick (NB),
Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical abortion services to
approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in
Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in Fredericton are
required to pay out-of-pocket. NB is the only province with a private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where
the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion services received in
private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act (CHA), and raise concerns under
the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack of coverage for abortions performed
in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution. Currently, Clinic
554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion services for $700.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
Since March 2021, deductions totalling $53,265 have been levied against ON’s Canada Health Transfer
(CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. In summer 2019, media
stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical abortion services in some
private clinics. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to
abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion
clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered by Health Canada confirmed
that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for uninsured services, while not consistently
informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to accessing insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations, the patient charges they discovered
were reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021, 2022, and
2023 deductions. In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to Health Canada,
and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical abortion services
in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action
plan and eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act (CHA) Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces
and territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them. The plan must be successfully implemented within a specified
timeframe (under the Reimbursement Policy, and as outlined in Section 25.01 of the Federal-Provincial
Fiscal Arrangements Act, a province has up to two years from the date of a deduction to be reimbursed).
Appeal of Cambie Surgeries Corporation et al. v. BC (Attorney General) to the Supreme Court of Canada
On September 29, 2022, Cambie Surgeries Corporation et al. (Cambie) initiated the process to request
that the Supreme Court of Canada hear an appeal of the British Columbia (BC) Court of Appeal decision
in Cambie v. BC (Attorney General). On July 15, 2022, the BC Court of Appeal released its decision in this
case, upholding the ruling of the Supreme Court of BC which dismissed the constitutional challenge to
provisions of BC’s Medicare Protection Act.
These specific provisions prohibit patient charges for insured services and the purchase of private
insurance to cover these services, as well as dual practice, which occurs when physicians work within the
publicly funded health care system and privately, at the same time. While the Canada Health Act (CHA) is
not under direct challenge in this case, the federal government joined the proceedings as a party to
support BC in its defence of its legislation, which mirrors the fundamental principles of the CHA, namely
that access to required care should be based on need, and not on the ability or willingness to pay.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, all deducted amounts
have been reimbursed as the province has successfully eliminated the charges.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC:
Since March 2018, BC’s CHT payments have been deducted $81,963,933 in respect of patient charges at
private surgical clinics. BC continues to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address patient
charges for insured surgical services. To date, Health Canada has reimbursed $68,021,026 of these
deductions in recognition of the province's efforts to eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy is aimed at eliminating patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic
services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the long-standing federal position that all
medically necessary services, including diagnostic services, are insured services, regardless of the venue
where the services are delivered. Seven provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic
services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
Following consultations between Health Canada and provincial and territorial governments, the
Diagnostic Services Policy was communicated to jurisdictions in August 2018 via a Canada Health Act
interpretation letter, and came into effect on April 1, 2020. These timelines were intended to give
jurisdictions time to align their health care systems with the policy’s requirements. Under the Policy,
provinces and territories were required to report on patient charges for medically necessary diagnostic
services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services have resulted in $76,465,277 in
mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated
provinces. Breakdowns by province are as follows:
• British Columbia - $17,165,309;
• Alberta - $13,781,152;
• Saskatchewan - $742,447;
• Manitoba - $353,827;
• Quebec - $41,867,224;
• New Brunswick - $1,277,659; and
• Nova Scotia - $1,277,659.
Provinces and territories have an opportunity to receive a reimbursement of any deductions taken if
they eliminate these patient charges before March 2025. A partial reimbursement of $8,582,655 (50%)
was issued to British Columbia as a result of the steps already taken by the province to address these
charges.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can be high cost, which poses significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. As
reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the Throne as well as Budget 2021, this
included working with Provinces, Territories and stakeholders to establish a national strategy for drugs
for rare diseases to launch in 2022-2023.
• On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the launch of the first-ever National
Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, supported by investments of up to $1.5 billion over three years.
This first phase aims to increase access to and affordability of effective drugs for rare diseases, which will
contribute to improving the health of patients across Canada.
• As part of the overall $1.5 billion investment, the Federal Government will make available up to
$1.4 billion over three years to Provinces and Territories to improve access to new and emerging drugs,
as well as to support enhanced access to existing drugs, early diagnosis, and screening for rare diseases..
• Similarly, to ensure that eligible First Nations and Inuit clients with rare diseases will also benefit,
the Government is providing up to $33 million over the first three years to Indigenous Services Canada’s
Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• The Federal Government is also making key investments of a total of up to $68 million for
various initiatives to help improve consistent access to drugs for rare diseases across the country.
KEY MESSAGES
• On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years.
Through this, the Government will help increase access to, and affordability of, effective drugs for rare
diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada, including children.
• As part of this overall investment, the Government of Canada will make available up to $1.4
billion to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements. This funding will help provinces and
territories improve access to new and emerging drugs, as well as support enhanced access to existing
drugs, early diagnosis and screening for rare diseases.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
• Similarly, to further support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases, $33
million from this funding will go to Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• To further help improve consistent access to drugs for rare diseases across the country, the
Government of Canada will also invest $68 million for various initiatives, including to improve the
collection and use of evidence, and for critical research and innovation in rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION, SUCH AS THE COMMON SET OF DRD, STAKEHOLDER
CONSULTATION THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION ADVISORY GROUP, AND PROGRESS ON BILATERAL
AGREEMENTS…
• The federal government is working with provinces and territories to achieve outcomes together
that build national consistency for patients, while also providing flexibility to address their own
circumstances.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
IF PRESSED ABOUT HOW THE MONEY WILL BE PROVIDED TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES…
• As part of this overall investment, the Government of Canada will make available up to $1.4
billion to provinces and territories once bilateral agreements are finalized and signed. This funding will
help provinces and territories to improve access to new and emerging drugs, as well as to support
enhanced access to existing drugs, and improve early diagnosis and screening for rare diseases.
• Similarly, to further support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases, $33
million from this funding will go to Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• Funding will flow once bilateral agreements are finalized and signed.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
public health care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can be high cost. The pharmaceutical treatments for
rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or drugs for
rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with Provinces and Territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment of
rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on drugs for rare diseases, including on new
drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national strategy.
To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partners for federal funding for drugs for rare diseases.
Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs. affordability
vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also help manage
expectations around the limits of federal funding.
In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials to
establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national strategy.
A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and continued through early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
Over the summer, as a follow up to the What We Heard Report, Health Canada continued discussions
with patients and caregivers, and other stakeholders and partners to build a strategy that will work for all
Canadians. Based on input received to date, a draft framework for the national strategy was developed
in spring of 2022. Further targeted consultations to seek feedback on this draft framework and further
inform a comprehensive model for the national strategy took place throughout April and May 2022.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries. As of 2017, this
international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for rare diseases.
Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting in 2021-2022, for the CIHR
to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-2022, in
support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over five years,
starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-start the new
Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation programming.
Budget 2021 proposed to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for drugs for rare diseases.
DENTAL CARE
ISSUE
• Government of Canada commitment on dental care.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2022, the government committed $5.3 billion over five years and $1.7 billion in
ongoing funding to provide dental care for Canadians with an adjusted net income under $90,000.
• The interim Canada Dental Benefit, the first step toward fulfilling this commitment, was
launched on December 1, 2022. The Canada Dental Benefit provides direct payments to eligible
applicants of up to $650 per child and up to $1,300 over two years.
• Work is ongoing to develop and implement a long-term comprehensive national dental care
plan.
• As a result of the Invitation to Qualify (ITQ), the Minister of Health and the Minister of Public
Services and Procurement announced on January 30, 2023 the three suppliers qualified to participate in
the next phase of the procurement process to refine the requirements for the delivery of a
comprehensive, long-term program: Express Scripts Canada, Medavie Inc., and Sun Life Financial Inc.
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• Budget 2022 set out the Government’s commitment to expanding dental care with funding of
$5.3 billion over five years, starting this fiscal year with $1.7 billion per year ongoing, to provide dental
care for Canadians with family incomes below $90,000.
• Children under 12 who do not have dental coverage and who are in families with incomes below
$90,000 a year are the first to have access to support for care as of December 1, 2022, through an
interim Canada Dental Benefit.
• By putting this interim benefit in place, the federal government has taken an important first step
towards improving dental care for Canadians.
• The federal government has been working diligently on developing a long-term national dental
care program to support all Canadians.
• Three suppliers have qualified to participate in the procurement process and will collaborate
with the Government to further refine the requirements for the delivery of a comprehensive, long-term
Canada-wide dental care program.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2022
Budget 2022 provided funding of $5.3 billion over five years and $1.7 billion ongoing.
The interim Canada Dental Benefit provides direct payments to eligible applicants totalling up to $650
per year per child for dental care services for applicants with a family income under $70,000, $390 for
those with a family income of $70,000 to $79,999, and $260 for those with a family income of $80,000
to $89,999. The benefit became available on December 1, 2022 with applications for the first year
benefit open until June 30, 2023, and the second year applications open from July 1, 2023 – June 30,
2024. On December 16, 2022, the Government announced that over 100,000 children had already
received the benefit.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental services in
2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was publicly
funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based private
health insurance plans.
Provinces and territories provide coverage for medically-necessary oral health services that take place in
hospital. In additional, all provinces and territories offer some form of public dental coverage, although
theses programs are generally targeted at a particular group (e.g. people with low incomes, children, or
seniors) and vary widely in coverage across the country.
The Government of Canada also currently provides dental coverage for public servants, members of the
Armed Forces and veterans, people incarcerated in federal correctional facilities, some newcomers,
registered First Nations people and recognized Inuit.
Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that Canadians with financial
resources or insurance are more likely to experience good oral health.
According to the Canadian Dental Association, an estimated 2.26 million school days are missed each
year due to dental-related illness, and tooth decay accounts for one-third of all day surgeries performed
on children between the ages of one and five in Canada. As well, much of the burden of dental disease is
concentrated in disadvantaged children: those from low-income families; Indigenous children; new
immigrants; and children with special health care needs.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – DELAY OF ELIGIBILITY FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL
ISSUE
• On February 2, 2023, the Government of Canada introduced legislation, Bill C-39, to extend the
exclusion of eligibility for MAID where a person's sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness for
an additional year, until March 17, 2024. Bill C-39 received Royal Assent on March 9, 2023.
On February 15, 2023, the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying tabled its second and
final report in Parliament entitled Medical Assistance in Dying in Canada: Choices for Canadians. The
Government was given 120 days to respond to the report’s 23 recommendations.
KEY FACTS
• Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause
excluding persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID until
March 17, 2023. During the two-year exclusion period, the Ministers of Health and Justice were required
to launch an independent expert review on the topic of MAID and mental illness.
• The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness released its final report in May 2022, containing 19
recommendations respecting protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests from
persons with mental disorders. The first recommendation calls upon FPT governments to facilitate the
development of MAID practice standards for use by health professional regulatory bodies. Most of the
remaining recommendations provide guidance on MAID assessment and provision in complex cases,
while others focus on broader measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime, though
training, oversight, data collection, research, and Indigenous engagement.
• The Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying (AMAD) tabled an interim report in
June 2022. The interim report focused on the topic of MAID and mental disorder and implementation of
the recommendations of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness. Its report noted concerns around
practitioner and health system readiness for March 17, 2023 (when MAID for persons with a mental
disorder as a sole underlying condition will be permitted). The Government Response to AMAD’s interim
report was tabled on October 20th, 2022.
• In its response to AMAD, the Government noted it was actively supporting the practitioner
community in ensuring the safe and consistent implementation of MAID through practice standards,
accredited MAID training and a strengthened monitoring system.
• Despite the work already underway to support system readiness, concerns about lack of
preparedness for March 2023 were echoed in the media by a number of mental health and disability
stakeholders, some Parliamentarians, and some individuals in the MAID community. Under the current
law, as of March 17, 2023, persons suffering solely from a mental illness who meet all eligibility criteria
and for whom all applicable safeguards are met would be eligible for MAID.
• On February 2, 2023, the Government of Canada introduced legislation to extend the temporary
exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness until March 17, 2024. This
legislation received Royal Assent on March 9, 2023.
KEY MESSAGES
• On March 9, 2023, the Government of Canada passed legislation to extend the temporary
exclusion of eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness.
• While important progress has been made in preparing for the end of the exclusion, delaying
eligibility for this population would allow more time for dissemination and uptake of key resources by
the medical and nursing communities.
• It would also permit more time to consider the final report of the Special Joint Committee on
MAID, released in February 2023.
IF PRESSED ON RATIONALE FOR BILL C-39
• The Government of Canada, provinces and territories, and medical and nursing communities
have made important progress in preparing for the expected March 2023 expansion of MAID eligibility.
However, more time is needed.
• The proposed extension would allow more time for dissemination and uptake of key resources
by health practitioner communities to support safety and consistency in MAID assessment and provision.
• These resources include a Model MAID Practice Standard and accredited training programs to
support health professional regulators and practitioners in complex MAID requests.
IF PRESSED ON INITIATIVES THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT IS UNDERTAKING TO SUPPORT THE HEALTH
SYSTEM
• We convened a task group that has developed a Model MAID Practice Standard, being released
on March 27th, to support the assessment of complex MAID requests, including those involving mental
disorders.
• We are also funding the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and Providers to develop a fully
accredited MAID training curriculum. Modules will begin to be rolled out early in 2023.
• Over the longer term, we will implement a research agenda that aims to provide greater insight
into the circumstances and experiences of people who seek MAID.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL DISORDERS AS THE SOLE
UNDERLYING CONDITION
• Our Government is working to support MAID practitioners who may receive MAID requests from
persons whose natural deaths are not reasonably foreseeable, and eventually, from those with a mental
disorder as a sole underlying medical condition.
• Some MAID practitioners have already assessed cases that involve mental disorders, when these
occur alongside other conditions. We are working to help providers interpret the eligibility criteria and
apply the safeguards to these complex cases through the development of a Model MAID Practice
Standard and a MAID training curriculum.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLY THOSE
WITH A MENTAL DISORDER
• The availability of MAID has not been demonstrated to have an impact on suicide rates.
• The legislation sets a high bar for access. Only individuals with severe, long-standing and
treatment-resistant mental illnesses will ever be considered for MAID.
• The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness recommended ensuring that a person’s request is
consistent, unambiguous and rationally considered during a prolonged period of stability, and not during
a time of crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
• We do not comment on individual cases, as only the individuals and the clinicians involved know
the full circumstances.
• The eligibility criteria and safeguards in the law are robust. Two independent practitioners must
confirm eligibility and an offer of available services and supports must be made and considered by the
requester.
• Improving access to health and social services remains a priority.
• The Government has introduced Bill C-22 to create a new Canada Disability Benefit. This Bill is
currently being reviewed by the Senate.
IF PRESSED ON INDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT ON MAID
• Health Canada is working with Indigenous partners to plan for the culturally safe implementation
of MAID. This work is guided by principles respecting the Government of Canada’s relationship with
Indigenous peoples, and based on recognition and respect for the right to self-determination.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Québec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon and
Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s natural
death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to be at the
end of life. The governments of Canada and Québec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new 2021 MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24
months*, and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with
making recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for
persons suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to provide
a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
* DELAY OF THE SUNSET CLAUSE ON THE EXCLUSION OF MENTAL ILLNESS
On March 9, 2023, the Government of Canada passed legislation to extend the temporary exclusion of
eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness from March 17, 2023 to March 17, 2024. The
Government, in collaboration with provinces and territories, and their medical communities have made
important progress in preparing for the original March 2023 deadline. Health Canada has formed an
expert task group that has developed a practice standard that will provide regulators and clinicians with
guidance on MAID assessments for complex requests, including those that involve mental disorders, to
be released March 27, 2023. The Government is also funding the development of an accredited
Canadian MAID curriculum to support clinician education and training.
This delay will allow more time for dissemination and uptake of key resources by the medical and nursing
communities. A delay will also provide the Government more time to consider the final report of the
Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD), released in February 2023.
IMPLEMENTING KEY RECOMMENDATIONS OF THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
The revised legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests from
individuals where mental illness is the sole underlying condition. During this exclusion period, an Expert
Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to conduct an independent review to consider
protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests by persons who have a mental illness. The
final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It
includes 19 recommendations that provide guidance on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria,
application of the legislated safeguards, and the assessment process, as well as advice on measures to
improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime more broadly.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that the existing MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards (interpreted
appropriately) buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices in related areas of healthcare, can
provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex (track two) MAID requests, including
where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations that will help
prepare the MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress
included: developing a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID
curriculum; enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of
MAID; plans for Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The new legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal
Assent. The Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The committee
reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report, specifically focused on
MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The interim report made no
formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the timely implementation of the
recommendations of the Expert Panel. AMAD’s final report, containing 23 recommendations, was tabled
on February 15, 2023. The Government was given 120 days to respond to the report.
AMENDMENTS TO MAID REGULATIONS
On November 9, 2022, the Regulations Amending the Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical
Assistance in Dying were published in Canada Gazette, Part II, and came into force on January 1,
2023.The regulatory amendments support Canada’s MAID regime by allowing for enhancements to data
collection and reporting through the federal MAID monitoring regime to provide a more comprehensive
and inclusive picture of how MAID, with expanded eligibility, is being implemented in Canada.
On January 1, 2023, expanded data collection requirements commenced and the information collected
will be reflected in the federal annual report on MAID in Canada for 2023, to be publicly released in the
summer of 2024.
INDIGENOUS ENGAGEMENT
Throughout various consultative and Parliamentary discussions on MAID, Indigenous participants, as well
as several Parliamentarians, spoke about the lack of and need for meaningful engagement with
Indigenous peoples on the topic of MAID to understand their diverse views and perspectives. This view
was most recently echoed by the May 2022 final report by the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness,
and AMAD’s interim and final reports. These calls for engagement come from the concerns raised around
the potential impacts of MAID on Indigenous peoples, such as:
• Undermining of suicide prevention efforts;
• Straining already inaccessible culturally-safe health care services, including palliative care; and
• Exacerbating systemic racism experienced by Indigenous peoples in the health care system.
FUNDING FOR MAID INITIATIVES
Expanded access to MAID (as codified in the new legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility
assessments and requires the administration of the enhanced safeguards aimed at protecting vulnerable
people who might be induced to seek an assisted death. Budget 2021 provided $13.2 million to Health
Canada over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the
development of training and guidance materials for practitioners, as well as a policy driven research
agenda. This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to support safe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
PATENTED MEDICINES PRICES REVIEW BOARD
ISSUE
• The Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is an independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in
Canada are not excessive.
KEY FACTS
• On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR)
came into force. These amendments, including the new basket of comparator countries, were designed
to provide the PMPRB with new tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices for patented medicines.
• To operationalize the amendments and modernize other aspects of its existing Guidelines, the
PMPRB proposed new Guidelines, which were published on October 6, 2022, for a 60-day consultation
period, ending December 5, 2022.
• In December 2022, the PMPRB announced that it would not implement the proposed new
Guidelines on January 1, 2023. As indicated by the PMPRB, the Interim Guidelines will remain in place
until further notice.
• On December 5, 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier resigned from her role as Acting Chairperson of
the PMPRB, and on February 20, 2023, Matthew Herder resigned from the Board.
• On February 1, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J.
Digby as the chairperson of the PMPRB following an open, merit-based process
• On February 24, 2023, NDP MP Don Davies filed a motion calling for the health committee to
conduct a study to investigate reports that the Minister of Health personally intervened with the
independent and arms-length Patented Medicine Prices Review Board to indefinitely suspend reform
that would have saved Canadians billions on drug costs.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL
INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S DECISION…
• PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his views with respect to the
proposed Guidelines.
• As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking it to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including PTs, to understand fully the short
and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB…
• On February 1, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, Thomas
J. Digby was appointed as the Chairperson of the PMPRB for a term of five years.
• The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve
the interests of Canadians.
• Health Canada would like to thank Mélanie Bourassa Forcier and Matthew Herder for their work
as members of the Board during their terms.
• Members of the PMPRB are Governor-in-Council appointments.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL…
• Officials working as staff within the PMPRB are public servants, and the PMPRB is responsible for
its own staffing. Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF
PATENT MEDICINES…
• The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are
not paying excessive prices.
• The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical landscape, and
the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting
consumers against excessive prices.
IF PRESSED ON GUIDELINES…
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
• Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB…
• As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees
charge for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price
is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian economy,
innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation ecosystem in
Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the government,
reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market. The
PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to
determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire into any
matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which form part of the PMPRB’s regulatory framework.
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Amendments included three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth, and medicine markets as Canada.
On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020 and
published its updated Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
The original coming into force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six months
due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were
informed of an initial delay of six months to January 1, 2021. In December 2020, stakeholders were
notified of another six-month delay to July 1, 2021. In June 2021, the coming into force was delayed
further to January 1, 2022. More recently in December 2021, stakeholders were informed of another six-
month delay to July 1, 2022. These delays provided additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the
new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing them to
continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic.
Since 2019, the pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically, a new context has developed brought
on by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the progression of various initiatives seeking to improve
accessibility and affordability for needed medicines. Health Canada took the opportunity in March 2022
to consult with stakeholders on a way forward. Further to these consultations, the Government
announced on April 14, 2022, it was moving forward with the coming into force on July 1, 2022, of the
new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting requirements for medicines with lowest risk
of excessive pricing of the Patented Medicine Regulations. The Government did not proceed with the
Amendments related to the new price regulatory factors, nor with the requirements to file information
net of all price adjustments.
On June 30, 2022, in anticipation of the coming into force of the amendments to the PMR on July 1,
2022, the PMPRB published Interim Guidelines for establishing non-excessive prices for drugs launched
during the period of time between the coming into force of the PMR and the publication of the Final
Guidelines. The consultation process for the interim Guidelines proposed that once the Draft Guidelines
were published, there would be a targeted consultation with key stakeholders.
Subsequently, on October 6, 2022, Draft Guidelines were published with a 60-day Notice and Comment
Period ending December 5, 2022. The PMPRB expressed an intention to issue Final Guidelines by the end
of the year and coming into effect on January 1, 2023. The enforcement period would begin in January
2024 to provide rights holders two reporting periods to adjust to the new Guidelines. In addition to the
new Schedule of 11 comparator countries, the Draft Guidelines contained a number of substantive
changes as part of the Board’s modernization efforts. As part of its consultation process, the PMPRB
opened an online consultation portal and hosted an online public consultation on the draft Guidelines on
November 3, 2022, and November 8, 2022 in English and French, respectively. Further, representatives
of the pharmaceutical industry were invited to closed webinars on November 3 and 8, 2022, in English
and French.
On November 28, 2022, the Minister of Health wrote to the Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB asking
that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to allow time to fully understand the short and
long-term impacts of the proposed guidelines. This letter was written in context of section 96(5) of the
Patent Act, which states that the PMPRB must consult with various parties, including the Minister of
Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
In December 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, Vice-Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of PMPRB,
confirmed her resignation and in February 2023, Matthew Herder confirmed his resignation from the
Board and published his resignation letter online. Douglas Clark, Executive Director (a public servant who
reports into the Chairperson) announced that he would remain as a special advisor for a specified period
but resigned from his Executive Director position in February 2023.
In February 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J. Digby as the
chairperson of the PMPRB following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, for a term
of five years.
On February 24, 2023, NDP MP Don Davies filed a motion calling for the health committee to conduct a
study to investigate reports that the Minister of Health personally intervened with the independent and
arms-length Patented Medicine Prices Review Board to indefinitely suspend reform that would have
saved Canadians billions on drug costs.
Litigation concerning the Amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations
The PMR Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information. Following this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022,
upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator
countries, but found that the three new price regulatory factors in addition to the collection of
confidential rebate information to be invalid. Neither party has decided to seek leave to appeal the
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
On December 5, 2022, the Federal Court of Appeal unanimously dismissed an appeal by Innovative
Medicines Canada (IMC) and upheld the Federal Government’s amendment to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, updating the comparator basket of countries. The decision upholds a key element of the
Government’s agenda to implement regulations that will result in lower drug prices for Canadians. IMC
did not seek leave to appeal this decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• The Government has committed to implement national universal pharmacare, including a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary, a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and a Canada
Pharmacare bill.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to provide Prince Edward
Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s efforts to
provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
• Budget 2022 announced that the federal government will continue its ongoing work towards a
universal national pharmacare program. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023, and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national
formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We are making progress with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve access to
medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
• Through this partnership, the Government of PEI is aiming to make further improvements to
their drug programs, such as increasing coverage and simplifying access. Under the Improving Affordable
Access to Prescriptions Drugs Program, those who experience the most vulnerability, including uninsured
Island residents, seniors, and families with high burden of medication cost will benefit from improved
access to medications.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to reduce the copay eligible Islanders spend
on many prescription medicines, expand access to the Catastrophic Drug Program and increase access to
the provincial High Cost Drug Program.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following broad consultations, a
multidisciplinary national panel established to develop a draft formulary framework released its final
report in June 2022. The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
• Drug coverage and the health system should respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
• As part of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs initiative supported by the
Government of Canada, PEI is adding new medications to its provincial formulary under their growing
public pharmacy program.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• This builds on previous formulary additions made by PEI to improve access to medications, as
well as changing requirements on dozens of medications to allow greater ease of access for physicians
seeking to provide these medications to Islanders.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to improve access and affordability. This
includes reducing the copays for eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in the Seniors Drug
Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program.
• PEI will also lower the cap on the amount of money a household spends on eligible medications
under the Catastrophic Drug Program. Finally, under the High Cost Drug Program, PEI will remove
barriers for those in the lowest income brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the
exclusion of households earning over $150,000 from coverage.
• This partnership between the Governments of Canada and Prince Edward Island will significantly
reduce the out-of-pocket costs of eligible PEI residents to access a wide range of medication.
BACKGROUND
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
Prince Edward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs
to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans
for Island residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its
ongoing work to advance national universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement under this program was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI
has increased formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide residents
with no cost access to these addiction treatments through its Substance Use Harm Reduction Program.
In addition, PEI is strengthening community mental health services with the addition of second
generation long acting antipsychotic medications as requested by local care providers, to the Community
Mental Health program. Other improvements include changes to special authorization requirements for
23 medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking
to provide medications to Islanders. As of December 28, 2022, PEI expanded access to 38 medications,
including two important medications, Zejula® (niraparib tosylate) and Lynparza® (olaparib), for treating
ovarian cancer. As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing
the total to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine,
multiple sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis. On March 3, PEI also announced their
intention to make the following changes over the coming months:
• Reducing copays for commonly prescribed, eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in
the Seniors Drug Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the
Diabetes Drug Program. The list includes medications used in the management of mental health,
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. The medications identified in this list represent about 60% of
prescriptions that Islanders use on a regular basis.
• Adjustment to the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the cap on the amount of money a
household spends on eligible medications, based on a percent of household income.
• Adjustment to the High Cost Drug Program to remove barriers for those in the lowest income
brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the exclusion of households earning over
$150,000 from coverage.
HEALTH WORKFORCE CRISIS
ISSUE
• Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. High patient
workloads, lack of resources, mandatory overtime and fear for personal safety have led to high levels of
burnout, absences, and turnover. The impacts reverberate across all areas of the health system,
including the closure of emergency rooms, delayed screenings and delayed surgeries and have been
extensively reported in the media.
KEY FACTS
• There are not enough health care workers to meet the current demand for services. A collective
approach is needed to address and improve systemic challenges, including retention and recruitment of
health workers as well as planning and new models of care.
• Statistics Canada continued to report all-time highs in vacancies among nursing occupations in
the third quarter of 2022 with an increase of 17% to 27,600 vacancies among Registered Nurses and
Registered Psychiatric nurses, and an increase of 20.7% to 13,100 vacancies among Licensed Practical
Nurses. The job vacancy rate in the health care and social assistance sector was 6.3% for Canada as a
whole in October 2022. In comparison the job vacancy rate in this sector was 3.5% in February 2020.
• Labour mobility impeded by a lack of pan-Canadian licensure or alternatives is impacting the
ability to recruit health workers across the country, especially in rural and remote areas.Internationally
Educated Health Professionals (IEHPs) face long and costly road to practice in Canada, resulting in IEHPs
not able to integrate within Canadian health system.
• Lack of granular, timely, and comparable pan-Canadian data on health workforce prevents policy
makers to support long term workforce planning and the ability to identify potential gaps before they
become a crisis
• Limited adoption of person-centred, integrated, team-based care model impacts health workers
ability to provide high quality care
• The shortage is expected to get worse.
• A survey of Ontario nurses found that between planned retirements and anticipated post-
pandemic departures, the workforce could see a 15.6% loss in the nursing profession within the next
year (2022-2023).
• According to a report released in September 2022 by the Mental Health Commission of Canada
that explored support for psychological self-care and protection from moral distress in the workplace, 40
per cent of health care workers are burned out, 50 per cent intend to leave the profession, and just 60
per cent are satisfied with the quality of care they provide.
• 14.5% of Canadians do not have a primary health care provider. Not only is this harmful to the
health and wellness of Canadians, but it also creates problems in other areas of the health system.
Nearly 90% of Canadians indicated that addressing shortages of doctors and nurses should be a top or
high priority in a survey conducted by the Privy Council Office in February 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health workers are the backbone of the Canadian health care system. Supporting and growing
our health workforce will help ensure that the many Canadians who are waiting for necessary care can
get it in a timely manner.
• On February 7, 2023 the federal government announced an investment of $198.6 billion over 10
years, including $46.2M in new funding to provinces and territories delivered through a top-up to the
Canada Health Transfer and tailored bilateral agreements to improve health care services for Canadians.
One of the priority areas of this funding is to further support the health workforce and reduce backlogs
caused by COVID-19.
• To access this funding, provinces and territories are also being asked to commit to streamlining
foreign credential recognition for internationally-educated health professionals, and to advancing labour
mobility, starting with multi-jurisdictional credential recognition for key health professionals.
• We are working with all interested partners to find solutions. The Coalition for Action for Health
Workers provides practical input and ideas on concrete actions that all levels of government can
implement for the health workforce.
• In particular, we are working closely with partners to support changes to enable health workers
to work anywhere in Canada and recognizing the skills of internationally educated health professionals
to help them quickly put their skills and experience to work here in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ABOUT INCREASING AND MAINTAINING SUPPLY...
• The new health care funding announced in February prioritizes a resilient and supported health
workforce that provides high-quality, and safe health services when they are needed .
• These investments will accelerate efforts already underway with provinces and territories to
support the recruitment and retention of health workers within the public health care system.
• The Government of Canada recognizes that provinces and territories have their own unique
circumstances. As such, the bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, and tailored, so that
provinces and territories can address the unique needs of their populations and geography. While
jurisdictions will have flexibility in designing their action plans, they are being asked to streamline foreign
credential recognition for internationally-educated health professionals, and to advance labour mobility,
starting with multi-jurisdictional credential recognition for key health professionals.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SUPPORT FOR HEALTH WORKERS...
• The Government is concerned about the mental health and well-being of Canadians, and of
frontline workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
• In the previous 2 years the federal government has invested more than $290 million in funding
to support the mental health of Canadians.
• In addition, new health investments announced in February include $25 billion over 10 years for
bilateral agreements that will focus on four shared priorities, including mental health and substance use.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL ACTIONS TO PROTECT HEALTH WORKERS AGAINST HARASSMENT
• All Canadians, and especially health workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe working
environment, free from violence and threats.
• Our government took action to protect health workers, through amendments to the Criminal
Code in order to ensure health workers are safe and free from threats, violence and harassment.
• In addition, new healthcare funding announced in February prioritizes the health workforce and
will allow provincial and territorial governments to address challenges faced by health workers such as
violence, discrimination, and racism.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s health system is experiencing an unprecedented health workforce crisis. The COVID-19
pandemic has amplified many of the challenges facing the health workforce and it is well understood
that the path forward must address the root causes of this crisis. It will require transformative and
innovative solutions to problems that have existed for years, with new and different levels of
collaboration required across governments and stakeholders.
FPT Collaboration
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health
services, the responsibility for the management of health workforces falls within provincial and
territorial jurisdictions and their regulators. The federal government has had ongoing engagement with
provincial and territorial counterparts on the health workforce crisis. This work has included:
• Better understanding the challenges facing the health workforce through a Health Human
Resource symposium convened by Health Canada in May 2022 which included participation from
provinces and territories.
• Collectively identifying key areas for action (e.g., recruit, retain, plan and innovate)
• Considering approaches for accelerating pathways for internationally educated health
professionals
• Studying vacancy rates for key health occupations to better understand current state and trends
related to health workforce.
Health Canada will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to drive concrete steps
necessary to address health workforce situation.
Recent Federal Investments
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT) continues to provide ongoing support to provinces and territories in
the delivery of health care. On February 7, 2023, the Government of Canada announced new federal
investments in healthcare that includes several initiatives that can support the health workforce:
• An immediate and unconditional $2 billion CHT top-up to address immediate pressures on the
health care system, especially in pediatric hospitals and emergency rooms, and long wait times for
surgeries.
• $25 billion over 10 years to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral
agreements that will support the needs of people in each province and territory in four areas of shared
priority: family health services; health workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a
modernized health system. These additional federal investments will be contingent on continued health
care investments by provinces and territories. This funding builds on the $7.8 billion over five years that
has yet to flow to provinces and territories for mental health and substance use, home and community
care, and long-term care.
• $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal support workers and
related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments work together on how best to
support recruitment and retention.
• $2 billion over 10 years to address the unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes
to fair and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services.
• $505 million over 5 years to CIHI, Canada Health Infoway and federal data partners to work with
provinces and territories on developing new health data indicators, to support the creation of a Centre
of Excellence on health worker data, to advance digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap, and
to underpin efforts to use data to improve safety and quality of care.
In addition to this funding, in the previous two years, the federal government has provided provinces
and territories with $6 billion in top up funding through the Canada Health Transfer, distributed equally
per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system pressures, including
reducing medical backlogs caused by COVID-19.
The Government of Canada continues to provide surge support, including nurses and physicians, where
needed across the country to address critical pandemic needs.
Other Federal Government Actions
The federal response to the HHR crisis is focused on sustainably increasing the supply of health workers
and helping create healthier workplaces to support retention and the mental health of health workers.
Other recent federal actions and investments include:
• On November 1, 2022, the Government of Canada established a Coalition for Action for Health
Workers. The Coalition will focus its efforts on identifying approaches to drive pan-Canadian action and
progress on policy implementation, informed by real world perspectives.
• The Coalition comprised of representatives from key groups, including nurses, doctors, personal
support workers, colleges and universities, patients, and equity-seeking communities will report to the
Deputy Minister of Health.
• On August 24, 2022, Health Canada announced Dr. Leigh Chapman as the federal Chief Nursing
Officer (CNO). Dr. Chapman will bring nursing issues in focus federally, while working closely with
provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies.
Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments, provinces and
territories and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce challenges.
This includes complementary investments from Employment and Social Development Canada through
the Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program to help connect Canadians with the training they need to
access jobs in high-demand sectors, such as healthcare, as well as the expansion of the Foreign
Credential Recognition Program and enhancements to the student loan forgiveness for providers who
practice in rural and remote communities and expand the program beyond physicians and nurses.
Mental Health
In September 2022, a Report from the Mental Health Commission noted that it remains critical to break
down cultural barriers and mental health stigma in health care organizations and prioritize psychological
health and safety beyond the pandemic.
The Government of Canada continues to make significant investments to help provincial and territorial
health systems address mental health issues and system capacity. This includes $25 billion over 10 years
to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements that will support the needs of
people in each province and territory in four areas of shared priority: family health services; health
workers and backlogs; mental health and substance use; and a modernized health system. This builds on
investments through Budget 2017 that provided $5 billion over 10 years ($3 billion remains until 2027) to
improve Canadians’ access to mental health services. The establishment of a Canada Mental Health
Transfer will build on these agreements to provide a permanent and ongoing source of funds for mental
health services.
On June 28, 2022 the Government of Canada, announced an investment of $28.2M for nine projects to
address PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential workers, and others whose mental health has been
significantly impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
• These projects will help to deliver and test interventions, develop resources for affected or at-
risk populations, and create resources and guidance for service providers and organizations.
• The investment will also facilitate a Knowledge Development and Exchange Hub, which will use
data from these projects to help inform mental health interventions and enhance Canadian public health
policy and practice.
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
• Although access to abortion services in Canada has been improved by the approval and roll-out
of Mifegymiso for medical abortion, the availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces
and territories and nationally. Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for
surgical abortion services in a limited number of private clinics in both New Brunswick (1) and Ontario
(5). Patient charges for access to abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges
under the Canada Health Act.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• In addition to enforcing the Act, over $3.6 million of funding targeted at improving access to
abortion services has been announced through Budget 2021’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER COMPLIANCE ACTION UNDER THE CANADA HEALTH ACT …
• While abortion services are insured in all provinces and territories there is still work to be done
to improve access in many areas of the country.
• Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to implement their action plan to
eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
• New Brunswick will continue to be subject to Canada Health Transfer deductions as long as the
province refuses to cover insured surgical abortion services provided at private clinics, resulting in
patient charges.
IF PRESSED ON THE SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH FUND…
• This Government is committed to making sexual and reproductive health services more
accessible, with an emphasis on populations experiencing the highest risks and greatest barriers,
including Indigenous people, racialized populations, members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, women and
youth. That is why Budget 2021 committed $45 million over three years, directed to community-based
organizations that help to improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information,
and services for people in Canada who face the greatest barriers to access.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s top priority is to protect the health and safety of people in Canada, including women
who choose to end their pregnancy. The Government of Canada unequivocally supports the right to
choose, and works to ensure that safe and legal abortion services are available to everyone. Abortion
services are deemed medically necessary and are insured in all provinces and territories. Individuals
should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where the services are
provided.
The Canada Health Act establishes criteria and conditions related to insured health services and
extended health care services that the provinces and territories must fulfill to receive the full federal
cash contribution under the Canada Health Transfer (CHT). The aim of the Act is to ensure that all eligible
residents of Canadian provinces and territories have reasonable access to medically necessary hospital,
physician, and surgical-dental services that require a hospital setting on a prepaid basis, without charges
related to the provision of insured health care services.
US Abortion Landscape
Ongoing developments in the United States, such as the overturning of Roe v. Wade and the March 2023
hearing of case in Texas seeking to suspend or revoke the USDA’s approval of Mifegymiso (medical
abortion), have galvanized the discussion about access to abortion in Canada.
Access to Abortion in New Brunswick
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals. This means that individuals who receive these services at the
private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a
private abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient
charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada
Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since
March 2020, deductions totaling $334,766 have been levied against the NB’s Canada Health Transfer
(CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for
abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without
resolution. Currently, Clinic 554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical
abortion services for $700.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive Regulation 84-20 and was granted standing
on June 2, 2021. The group argues that the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada
Health Act. The province filed their Statement of Defence on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the
CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does not violate the Canada Health Act. The case
is currently in the discovery phase and the CCLA is awaiting information from the province, which was
requested in January 2022. To date, no trial date has been set.
Access to Abortion in Ontario
In summer 2019, evidence in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical abortion
services in some private clinics. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for
physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in
the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Evidence gathered
confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for uninsured services, while not
consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to accessing insured surgical
abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations the patient charges discovered were
reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021, 2022 and 2023
deductions (totaling $53,265). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to
Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical
abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to
implement their action plan to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Under the Canada Health Act Reimbursement Policy, which came into effect in 2018, provinces and
territories that face mandatory deductions have the opportunity to be reimbursed if they work with
Health Canada to develop a plan to eliminate patient charges for medically necessary services, and the
circumstances that led to them within a specified timeframe (two years from the date of the deduction).
Additional Federal Initiatives with Respect to Sexual and Reproductive Health
Of the $45 Million committed to sexual and reproductive health in Budget 2021, the Government has
invested $3.6M to date specifically to support access to abortion in Canada. In the first six months of
funding, Action Canada served 208% more people, and provided 234% more financial support, as
compared to the same period in 2021.
STATUS OF DOMESTIC BIOMANUFACTURING CAPACITY
ISSUE
• Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, which aims to grow a
strong, competitive, and resilient domestic life sciences ecosystem, with cutting-edge biomanufacturing
capabilities, and to ensure Canada is prepared for future pandemics and health priorities.
• The Strategy’s funding opportunities are underway through the Strategic Innovation Fund, the
integrated Canada Biomedical Research Fund/Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund, and the Clinical
Trials Fund, which intend to stimulate growth and innovation and strengthen talent in Canada’s life
sciences and biomanufacturing ecosystem.
KEY FACTS
• Canada announced the creation of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy on July 28,
2021 to re-build a strong and resilient domestic biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
- Investments in biomanufacturing capacity can reduce our reliance on imported products and
strengthen our domestic industrial capacity.
- The Government will work with provinces, territories, and other partners to deliver real results
for Canadians.
- The strategy is supported by existing resources and Budget 2021 investments, including support
of $2.2 billion for the revitalization of Canada’s biomanufacturing and life science sector.
- Health Portfolio explicit work includes:
$250 million, over three years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to establish a new
Clinical Trials Fund.
Advancing regulatory modernization efforts, including: modernized clinical trial regulations, a
new pathway for advanced therapeutic products; agile regulations for the licensing of drugs and medical
devices
• The objective of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy is to grow the domestic life
sciences ecosystem, and prepare Canada for future pandemics and health priorities. In order to improve
Canada’s pandemic vaccine preparedness, the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy proposes
increasing domestic biomanufacturing capacity across multiple platforms, including those that represent
the latest in vaccine technology, such as mRNA.
KEY MESSAGES
• The government continues to work to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19.
• Canada is investing to establish world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity –
from research and development to fill and finish.
• Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy is focusing on growing our domestic life
science ecosystem to prepare Canada for future pandemics and other health priorities.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
IF PRESSED ON THE DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES…
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and they
represent an alternative to traditional vaccines, with potential for rapid development and scaling of
production.
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development and preparedness for future pandemics, outside of the COVID-19
context.
• This includes partnerships with leading mRNA vaccine developers like Moderna who is building a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec.
IF PRESSED ON THE MODERNA FACILITY…
• Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events.
• In 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna is building a state-
of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. When completed, it will produce up to 100
million pandemic vaccine doses annually.
• Moderna’s new facility will not only strengthen Canada’s preparedness for future pandemics but
will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence.
IF PRESSED ON MITSUBISHI TANABE PHARMA CORPORATION’S DECISION TO CEASE OPERATIONS AT
MEDICAGO INC. …
• Our Government was disappointed to learn of Mitsubishi’s recent decision to begin the process
to wind-down its support for Medicago’s operations.
• Medicago remains the only Canadian-based company to have received market authorization by
Health Canada for its COVID-19 vaccine. Its innovative, plant-based vaccine platform technology remains
highly regarded by experts.
• Canadians can be assured that we are in contact with both Medicago and Mitsubishi to ensure
an orderly transition process, and make sure Canadian interests are protected.
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is our government’s top priority, including
ensuring we have sufficient domestic vaccine production capacity to protect against future infectious
disease threats and pandemics.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working to re-establish domestic capacity across key vaccine platforms, to be better
prepared for future health emergencies.
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre in Montreal,
which has partnered with Novavax to produce its COVID-19 vaccine, and investments in companies like
Biovectra and Sanofi Pasteur.
• It also includes partnering with Moderna, who is building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
manufacturing facility in Quebec, and significant investment to Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON PANDEMIC VACCINE PREPAREDNESS …
• The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the importance of strengthening domestic capacity to
rapidly develop vaccines to protect all people in Canada against pandemics and other health
emergencies.
• Through strategic investments and partnerships, the Government of Canada is working to grow
Canada’s domestic life sciences sector and biomanufacturing capacity. These include those with
Moderna who is in the process of building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine production facility in Quebec,
and Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON THE VACCINE TASK FORCE AND COUNCIL OF EXPERT ADVISORS…
• We thank the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force for their critical role in advising on the Government
of Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine response efforts.
• As the scope of the Task Force’s work has expanded, the Council of Expert Advisors was
established to transition from the Vaccine Task Force and assume a long-term advisory function.
• The expertise on the Council of Expert Advisors is broad – advising on scientific, health, public
health, and industrial matters –supporting the Government’s goal of a revitalized Canadian life-science
sector and improved pandemic preparedness.
BACKGROUND
Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took early and decisive action to
strengthen Canada’s biomanufacturing capacity to protect Canadians, and to provide investment to
support domestic biomanufacturing capabilities. A key element is the implementation of the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy) announced in June 2021.
Ministers of Health and Innovation, Science, and Industry have joint accountability for the Strategy which
outlines actions to take a coordinated approach to grow Canada’s domestic capacity to rapidly develop
and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for future
pandemics or other health emergencies and sector growth. This included Budget 2021 investments of
$2.2B.
The five pillars of the Strategy are:
• Coordinating Governance;
• Strengthening Research Systems and the Talent Pipeline;
• Growing Canada’s Life Sciences and Biomanufacturing Sector;
• Operationalizing National Research Council’s Biologics Manufacturing Centre (BMC) and
Considering a National Centre; and,
• Ensuring Best-in-Class Regulation & World-Class Clinical Trials Systems.
Increasing domestic capacity and building a robust life sciences sector will require dedicated efforts to
connect and mobilize federal investments and assets in collaboration with academia and industry to the
broader life sciences ecosystem.
The emergency regulatory measures put in place during COVID-19 aim to make the system more agile,
and enable prompt access within Canada to health products needed to diagnose, treat and slow the
spread of the virus without compromising safety, efficacy and quality. Going forward, it will be important
to maintain this level of agility (especially during non-pandemic times) to ensure Canadians receive
access to needed health products. Efforts are underway to modernize regulations in areas such as agile
licensing for drugs and medical devices, clinical trials, and advanced therapeutics.
The COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force and Council of Expert Advisors (CEA)
One of the main focuses on the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy is establishing dedicated
governance to ensure the Government’s actions across the entire life sciences ecosystem are
coordinated and expertly guided to ensure alignment and the achievement of the Strategy’s objectives.
While the COVID-19 Therapeutics Task Force and the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force were formed at the
onset of the pandemic and played a foundational role in, providing invaluable insights and scientific
validation in Government of Canada’s pandemic response tactics, the Task Forces were not established
to be permanent. As the scope of pandemic response efforts shift towards more enduring operational
structures, Canada requires a permanent advisory body with broader expertise to provide guidance
during pandemic and interpandemic settings. The Council of Expert Advisors (CEA) was established to
take on this longer-term role.
The CEA brings together leading experts across biomanufacturing and life sciences to advise the
Government on overall strategic priorities, specific project proposals, funding opportunities and other
proposed actions. The CEA will also monitor progress on the Strategy’s initiatives and advise on ways to
adapt approaches and strategies to respond to new technologies and changing conditions in the
marketplace.
Investments under the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy
Budget 2021 committed $1B over seven years through the Strategic Innovation Fund to support life
science firms to innovate and expand in Canada. Thus far, one (1) project, Biovectra in Charlottetown,
Prince Edward Island, has been funded while the remaining projects are moving through the evaluation
process.
Supported through Budget 2021 commitments, the Government of Canada has launched two (2) funds
to help strengthen Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, including the Canada Biomedical
Research Fund ($250M over four years) which supports transitional and applied research, training and
talent development, to drive downstream manufacturing capacity, and the Bioscience Research
Infrastructure Fund ($500M over seven years), which will support the bioscience capital and
infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research hospitals.
• These funds are administered through Canada’s three federal research agencies, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada along with the Canadian Foundation for
Innovation (CFI).
The first of these investments has been made by CFI in November 2022, with $127 million distributed
through the Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund. This investment responds to urgent and essential
needs of postsecondary institutions and research hospitals by supporting biocontainment facilities
capable of working with pathogens.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research has launched three funding opportunities under the Clinical
Trials Fund (pan-Canadian clinical trials consortium, clinical trials training platforms, clinical trials
projects) in May 2022 and are under peer review, with funding set to begin this Fall.
Canadian Biomanufacturing Capacity Since 2020
In addition to Budget 2021 funding, the government has announced a number of investments to bolster
domestic production capacity through the Strategic Innovation Fund, Next Generation Manufacturing
Canada Supercluster, the National Research Council, Regional Development Agencies, and other
government partners, including in:
• National Research Council (NRC) (Montréal, QC) - $126 million to establish the new Biologics
Manufacturing Centre;
• Medicago (Quebec City, QC) - $173 million to develop a plant-based virus-like-particle vaccine
and for the construction of a Good Manufacturing Practice facility.
• AbCellera (Vancouver, BC) - $175.6 million in government support of antibody discovery for
clinical testing and for the construction of a GMP antibody production facility;
• Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO) (Saskatoon, SK) – $59.2M, over three years,
starting in 2021-22, to support the development of its vaccine candidates and expand its Saskatoon
facility;
• Precision Nanosystems (Vancouver, BC) - $25.1 million in government support to build a
biomanufacturing centre for production of RNA vaccines;
• KABS Laboratories (St-Hubert and Val des Sources, QC) - $54.25 million toward a biologics
production facility with a focus on antibody therapies and new fill-finish capabilities;
• Novocol (Cambridge, ON) - $32.7 million contribution for expanded fill-finish capacity;
• Providence Therapeutics and Northern RNA Inc. - $5 million through the Next Generation
Manufacturing Supercluster to expand their operations in Calgary to design and manufacture COVID-19
vaccines and build a pipeline of mRNA vaccines;
• Sanofi Pasteur (Toronto campus) – up to $415 million support towards building an end-to-end
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility; and,
• Resilience Biotechnologies (Mississauga, ON) - $199 million to increase manufacturing and
fill/finish capacity for a number of vaccines and therapeutics including mRNA technologies.
Moderna’s Canadian Facility
In 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna would build a state-of-the-
art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. Construction of the facility is underway, and when
completed, will be able to produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine doses per year in non-pandemic times
and up to 100 million doses per year during a pandemic.
Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events—not only by rapidly
developing a successful COVID-19 vaccine, but also by producing and distributing it at commercial scale.
Having an mRNA developer producing vaccines at scale in Canada represents one important piece in
Canada’s plan to rebuild the life sciences sector, and will better protect Canadians for whatever the
future holds.
Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness, but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a global
mRNA research and development (R&D) hub. As part of the agreement with the Government of Canada,
Moderna is committed to building a robust R&D Workplan, which will include Pandemic Preparedness
R&D projects along with development of partnerships with Canada’s leading research universities and
institutions to help advance research and development here at home. For example, Moderna has already
partnered with McGill University through Moderna’s mRNA Access program to accelerate vaccine
innovation, as well as with the University of Toronto to do research across a range of scientific disciplines
to develop new ways to treat infectious diseases.
The facility will boost the Canadian economy through the creation of hundreds of jobs during
construction and operation of the facility, including direct and indirect biomanufacturing and research
jobs. Moderna’s facility will also mean domestic opportunities for the brightest young minds in the field
through internships, co-op positions, and other Moderna-supported training and development
opportunities. In this way, the facility will enhance Canada’s talent pipeline by attracting, developing and
retaining a highly skilled workforce. The facility will also offer the potential for Canadian companies to
work with Moderna, and, where possible, opportunities to comprise part of Moderna’s supply chain.
In November 2022, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau Participated in the facility’s ground-breaking
ceremony. The facility is expected to be operational in 2024 at the earliest, subject to planning and
regulatory approvals. In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, the facility is expected to be able to produce
vaccines for other respiratory diseases, such as influenza – pending their ongoing development by
Moderna and approval by Health Canada.
Medicago
Medicago is the only Canadian-based company to have received market authorization for Covifenz
COVID-19 vaccine. Covifenz is the product of years of scientific efforts that began with public science
collaboration between Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and the Université Laval in the late 1990s.
Since then, Medicago has established itself as an innovative global leader in plant-based vaccines, using
living plants as bioreactors for the production of virus-like particles (VLP).
In 2020, Canada entered in to an advance purchase agreement (APA) with Medicago to secure access to
up to 76 million doses of its COVID-19 vaccine (20M firm doses and 56M optional doses). Due to
unanticipated manufacturing issues, Medicago has not marketed any lots of its COVID-19 vaccine for
commercial use.
On February 3, 2023, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation announced that it has decided to cease all
operations with Medicago Inc. That same day Health Canada’s Health Products and Food Branch were
informed that Mitsubishi Tanabe will be cancelling their vaccine authorization and withdrawing the
submission currently under review (which would had been filed to extend the use of the vaccine to the
elderly population). Health Canada will work with Medicago to close out their files.
Medicago, whose headquarters is in Quebec City and operates an additional facility in North Carolina,
employs roughly 550 people (about 400 in Canada). The company has been 100% owned by Mitsubishi
Tanabe Pharma since December 2022. Before the decision, global tobacco giant Philip Morris
International owned 21 per cent of the company's shares. Medicago’s plant-based COVID-19 vaccine,
Covifenz, was initially rejected by the World Health Organization over its ties with the tobacco industry.
Inspection and Licensing – Oversight of Drug Manufacturing in Canada
Health Canada’s role in regulating drugs is to evaluate and approve products, set requirements, monitor
safety and enforce compliance and communicate health risks. Further, Health Canada approves
establishments involved in the manufacturing of drugs marketed for use in Canada.
To ensure drugs are safe, effective and of high quality, all drug producing facilities in Canada, including
those supporting domestic biomanufacturing efforts, must hold a Drug Establishment License and be
inspected by Health Canada to demonstrate it meets Good Manufacturing Practices, known as “GMPs”.
Health Canada continues to remain supportive in strengthening Canada’s drug manufacturing capacity
and prioritizing new and continued COVID-19 drug manufacturing, enabling industry with responsive and
flexible regulations to mobilize and support current needs of the domestic market.
Health Canada is committed in providing regulatory advice and guidance in the planning and
development of operations to support domestic biomanufacturing in Canada now and into the future.
As part of Health Canada’s role in ensuring a safe and effective drug supply, inspection and other
regulatory experts will continue to promote and enforce Canada’s high standards for drug
manufacturing.
LONG-TERM CARE AND NEW NATIONAL STANDARDS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians living in long-term care
homes. Canadians are concerned about the availability of safe, high-quality long-term care services.
KEY FACTS
• On January 31, 2023, the Standards Council of Canada, Health Standards Organization and CSA
Group announced the completion and public release of new national long-term care standards.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by $198.6 billion over 10 years.
• Funding includes $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for
mental health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
• In addition, new funding announced includes $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage
increases for personal support workers and related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial
governments work together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
KEY MESSAGES
• Every senior in Canada deserves to live in dignity, safety, and comfort, regardless of where they
live.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in long-term care
homes across Canada.
• We welcome the release of complementary, independent LTC standards from CSA Group and the
Health Standards Organization (HSO).
• We have announced an investment of $198.6 billion to provinces and territories, which includes
$3 billion over five years for long-term care and $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage
increases for personal support workers and related professions.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CARE SYSTEM FUNDING…
• We announced that we will increase health funding to provinces and territories by $198.6 billion
over 10 years, including $46.2 billion to provinces and territories in new funding.
• This includes $7.8 billion over five years for long-term care, home and community care, and
mental health and substance use
• New funding includes $1.7 billion over five years to support wage increases for personal support
workers and related professions.
• These investments will provide access to safe long-term care and home care so Canadians can
age safely.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The Government is appreciative of the work of CSA Group and HSO and welcomes these new
long-term care standards as it reflects the importance of long-term care to all Canadians.
• Together, the standards focus on the delivery of safe, reliable, and high quality long-term care
services; safe operating practices and infection prevention, and control measures in long-term care
homes.
• The federal government is working collaboratively with provinces and territories to help facilitate
improvements in long-term care, while respecting their jurisdiction.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL GOVERNMENT ENFORCING STANDARDS…
• Delivery of long-term care services is a provincial and territorial responsibility. The federal
government cannot impose national standards on provinces and territories, or directly on long-term care
facilities.
• The federal government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to
help facilitate improvements in long-term care, while respecting their jurisdiction.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT…
• The Government of Canada is also committed to doing more to support seniors across the
country. We know Canadians want to age closer to home and family, but also expect long-term care to
be safe, when needed.
• As such, our government is looking at developing a Safe Long-Term Care Act to help ensure
seniors get the care they deserve, while respecting provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• In the coming months, we will move forward with consultations and engagement with
stakeholders and Canadians on a Safe Long-Term Care Act.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care (LTC) in Canada
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of LTC falls
within provincial and territorial (PT) jurisdiction.
• LTC is referenced in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as “extended health care services.” Extended
services are not covered by the five criteria of the Act or its extra billing and user charges provisions, and
therefore are not subject to the Act’s penalty provisions.
• While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
Mandate Letters
Minister of Health Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports. Specific commitments
include:
• Support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This
includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures,
identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure
seniors get the care they deserve.
• Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
On January 31, 2023, the Government of Canada welcomed the release of complementary, independent
LTC standards from the Health Standards Organization (HSO) and CSA Group and thanked them for their
dedicated work to complete the development of LTC standards. The national standards development
process was complementary to, but independent from, the Government of Canada’s collaborative work
with PTs to help support improvements in LTC. While Health Canada did not fund the recently released
LTC standards, it did provide funding to CSA Group and HSO to support enhanced engagement and
consultations with Canadians and stakeholders to ensure the diverse perspectives were considered
during the development of both standards.
Health Care System Funding
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister and his PT counterparts met to work together on improving
Canada’s health care system. First Ministers discussed shared health priorities to deliver real results for
Canadians as well as the importance to uphold the Canada Health Act to protect Canada’s publicly
funded health care system.
At the meeting with premiers, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to PTs
by $198.6 billion over 10 years, including $46.2 billion in new funding. This amount includes $25 billion
to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements, building on the $7.8 billion
over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for mental health and substance use,
home and community care, and long-term care.
In addition, new funding announced includes $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage
increases for personal support workers and related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial
governments work together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
Situation in LTC homes throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in LTC have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19 pandemic,
including: infection prevention and control; health human resources; compliance with standards and
regulations; infrastructure; and personal protective equipment. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered
major COVID-19 outbreaks and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in
LTC and seniors’ homes accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many PTs and stakeholders have
released reports and recommendations on addressing issues faced in LTC facilities.
Government of Canada initiatives to support PT actions in LTC
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with PTs throughout the COVID-19 pandemic to
protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has responded to COVID-19
through a number of initiatives, including those announced in Budget 2021:
• $3 billion over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement saving
for personal support workers.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
OAG AUDIT REPORTS DURING THE PANDEMIC
Issue
Since 2021, the Office of the Auditor General (OAG) tabled reports for four COVID-19 performance audits
that involved the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC): the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness,
Surveillance, and Border Control Measures (March 25, 2021); the Audit of Securing Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) and Medical Devices (May 26, 2021); the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and
COVID-19 Testing Orders (December 9, 2021); and COVID-19 Vaccines (December 6, 2022). PHAC has
been actively working on addressing the recommendations from these audits.
Key Facts
• Management has accepted the recommendations found in all four Audits.
• A Deputy Head approved Management Response and Action Plan (MRAP) was developed for
each Audit, which includes milestones and timelines.
• PHAC has begun making progress toward the completion of actions to respond to the Audit
recommendations.
• The status of MRAPs is monitored on an ongoing basis and progress on deliverables and
deadlines is reported quarterly to the PHAC Executive and Departmental Audit Committees.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s top priority is supporting Canada’s response to the COVID-
19 pandemic. The Agency will be taking all lessons learned into account to be prepared for potential
future pandemics.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the recommendations from the four Auditor
General reports related to the pandemic that involve the Agency. Work is underway to respond to these
recommendations.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to consider these findings, along with other
audits, evaluations, and further lessons learned from the response to COVID-19, to inform future
planning and to position Canada well to respond to future global health events.
If pressed on how PHAC has addressed the recommendations from the audits
• The Agency accepts each of the Auditor General’s recommendations and work is currently
underway to respond to the recommendations from these four audits.
Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
• In the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, the Auditor
General made seven recommendations for the Agency related to pandemic planning, health surveillance
information, early warning of public health threats, and border measures.
• The Agency has begun making progress in addressing recommendations related to health
surveillance information and early warning of public health threats.
• Some recommendations will be completed by March 31, 2025, as the Public Health Agency of
Canada and its partners resume regular operations.
Audit of Securing PPE and Medical Devices
• The Audit of Securing PPE and Medical Devices resulted in two recommendations for the Public
Health Agency of Canada related to assessing needs and managing the National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile.
• The Agency has already completed one recommendation, specifically related to documenting
and enforcing a contract management protocol and governance structure, and has begun work on the
remaining recommendation.
Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
• For the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, the Public Health
Agency of Canada has developed a corresponding action plan to address the recommendations.
• Action plans slated for completion by the beginning of 2024, involve improving the Agency’s
enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit the spread of COVID-19 and improving the use of
information on the outcomes of its referrals for follow-up.
Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines
• For the Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines, the Public Health Agency of Canada has developed action
plans in response to the recommendations related to reducing wastage, completing the implementation
of VaccineConnect, expediting work on the Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, and resolving barriers to
sharing vaccine surveillance data.
• The Agency has begun making progress in addressing these recommendations.
If pressed on how PHAC will address standing issues and be better prepared for the next pandemic
• There are and will be many lessons for everyone from this pandemic, in Canada and around the
world, which we are learning from in order to adjust our approach and ensure we remain well positioned
and prepared to respond to future global health events.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s response, its guidance, and its advice have evolved during
the pandemic and been informed by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert
opinions, which can change as new information becomes available.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) plays a leadership role in preparing for and responding to
public health emergencies.
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC has directed the implementation of border restrictions
and border control measures to help prevent travellers from spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 in
Canada.
On March 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory quarantine
under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
Since then, there has been a strong focus from the Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) on the
Health Portfolio.
Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
On March 25, 2021, the Auditor General of Canada tabled a performance audit of Pandemic
Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures. Both PHAC and the Canada Border Services
Agency were implicated in this audit. The audit objectives were to:
• Determine whether PHAC was prepared to respond to a pandemic to protect the health and
safety of Canadians, supported by accurate and timely public health surveillance information;
• Determine whether PHAC and the Canada Border Services Agency implemented border control
and quarantine measures to limit the introduction and further spread in Canada of the virus that causes
COVID 19.
Taking into consideration the OAG’s recommendations, PHAC’s response, its guidance, and its advice
have evolved during the pandemic and have been informed by the latest available scientific evidence,
epidemiology, and expert opinions, which can change as new information becomes available. PHAC has
been actively working to address the OAG’s recommendations to be better prepared in the future.
Audit of Securing Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and Medical Device
On May 26, 2021, the OAG tabled their audit on PPE and Medical Devices, which implicated PHAC,
Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada. This audit focused on:
• whether PHAC and Health Canada, before and during the COVID-19 pandemic, helped meet the
needs of provincial and territorial governments for selected PPE and medical devices; and
• whether Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support.
Selected equipment for this audit included N95 respirators, medical gowns, testing swabs and
ventilators. These items were considered to be at risk due to high global demand, limited suppliers,
specific technical requirements and limited domestic production.
PHAC recognized that this audit identified areas for improvement to be better prepared for future health
events, including for the management of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile. PHAC is committed
to acting on these recommendations to enhance its preparedness for future public health emergencies.
Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Within the same year of the first two audits, the OAG conducted their third PHAC audit, the audit of
Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders. This audit, concentrating solely on PHAC, was
the follow-up on the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures. This
audit focused on:
• Whether PHAC improved its administration of mandatory orders to limit the introduction of the
COVID-19 virus and its variants in Canada;
• Whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures introduced in early 2021
(such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and quarantine of air travellers at government-
authorized hotels pending the results of their on-arrival COVID-19 tests).
PHAC is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better follow up with
travellers who are subject to border measures and is implementing gender-based analysis plus (GBA+)
considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and future programs on diverse and
vulnerable groups.
Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines
On December 6, 2022, the OAG tabled the Audit of COVID-19 Vaccines. This audit concentrated on PHAC,
Health Canada, and Public Services and Procurement Canada. This audit focused on whether:
• Public Services and Procurement Canada provided adequate procurement support to secure
COVID-19 vaccines;
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada efficiently provided access to COVID-19
vaccines; and
• the Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada’s surveillance of COVID-19 vaccines was
effective and timely.
Based on their four findings, PHAC will:
• reduce vaccine wastage and continue working with stakeholders to adjust the management of
COVID-19 vaccine surpluses;
• complete the implementation of VaccineConnect, the national vaccine management information
technology system;
• expedite its work with provinces and territories to complete the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy in order to improve access to quality data;
• resolve barriers to sharing vaccine surveillance data and provide access to the Canadian Adverse
Events Following Immunization Surveillance System for Health Canada and case-level details, as needed,
to the World Health Organisation and vaccine companies in a timely manner.
PHAC will continue to address the action plans and complete them accordingly, taking into consideration
the ongoing response to the pandemic.
DESIGNATED QUARANTINE FACILITIES
Issue
A Written Question (Q-998) was recently tabled regarding contracts with the Westin Calgary Airport
hotel and the Acclaim Calgary airport hotel for the provision of quarantine facilities and accommodations
during the COVID-19 pandemic.
On January 30, 2023, Michelle Rempel Garner published an article showing that the government spent
over $450,000 per person on hotel rooms.
Key Facts
• Quarantine Facilities were designated under Section 7 of the Quarantine Act. The costs
associated with this program included lodging, meals, security, traveller support and transportation.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority. During
the COVID-19 pandemic, maintaining quarantine facilities was an important part of our plan to protect
Canadians.
• A total of 22,188 travellers were quarantined or isolated at Designated Quarantine Facilities
between March 22, 2020 and September 30, 2022.
• The Agency’s approach to border measures, like its guidance and advice, has evolved during the
pandemic and continues to be informed by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and
expert opinion, which can change as new information becomes available.
• Travellers arriving in Canada, on or after October 1, 2022, are no longer required to be
vaccinated against COVID-19 to enter Canada, nor are they required to meet COVID 19 testing,
quarantine or isolation requirements, including stays at a designated quarantine facility as directed by a
quarantine officer.
• Several other countries that had quarantine hotels for travellers, continued these programs into
2022, including New Zealand and Hong Kong.
If pressed on expenditures (provisional data not previously published only as accounting continues given
program recently cancelled)
• $388.7 million was expended on Designated Quarantine Facilities between April 2020 to
December 2022.
• $158.5 million in 2020-21, $153 million in 2021-22, and $77.2 million in 2022-23.
• Quarantine facilities have been maintained by the government to quarantine travelers who could
not safely quarantine at home. Maintaining these facilities, as a contingency, was an important part of
protecting Canadians.
• Upon the elimination of the border measures on October 1, 2022, the Public Health Agency of
Canada was managing 17 Designated Quarantine Facilities, and had access to rooms in one provincial
site, with a total room capacity of 1,465 rooms for travellers in 14 cities across Canada.
If pressed on Assault Charges
• In February 2021, a man was charged by local police with sexual assault, break and enter, and
harassment at the Sheraton Montreal Designated Quarantine Facility. The victim was a quarantined
traveller. Any questions on this should be referred to local police.
ORIGIN OF THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Issue
The precise origin of COVID-19 remains unknown. There has been an increase in media attention
regarding its origins following a Wall Street Journal (WSJ) article on February 25, 2023. The WSJ reported
that a classified U.S. intelligence report indicates that the U.S. Energy Department concluded with ‘low
confidence’ that the COVID-19 pandemic arose from a laboratory incident.
Key Facts
• The closest known sequence to SARS-CoV-2 is a sequence of a strain of coronavirus previously
identified by genetic sequencing from a horseshoe bat. The possible intermediate host of SARS-CoV-2
remains unknown, but plausible options include a domestic animal, a wild animal, or a domesticated
wild animal.
• Additional data-driven studies, inclusive of broad expertise, are needed to better understand the
origins of COVID-19.
Key Messages
• Canada is supportive of all efforts that will contribute to a clear understanding of the origins of
the virus.
• This work must continue to follow the facts, be independent and transparent, and be free from
politicization or interference.
• It is not possible to provide an informed opinion on the conclusions reported in the media at this
time as we have not had the opportunity to review the U.S. Energy Department’s report or supporting
evidence.
If pressed on Canada’s perspective on the origin of COVID-19:
• Canada continues to work with international partners to better understand the origins of COVID-
19.
• We are supportive of a collaborative, transparent, and science-based international process.
• International cooperation to pinpoint the origins of COVID-19 could assist in mitigating future
pandemics.
Background
In addition to the U.S. Energy Department’s conclusion that the pandemic arose from a laboratory
incident, previous reports suggest that the Federal Bureau of Investigation also concluded with
‘moderate confidence’ (2021) that the virus likely spread via an unintended laboratory-related incident.
Four other US intelligence agencies, and a national intelligence panel, concluded that transmission from
an infected animal was likely, and two other Agencies did not reach a conclusion.
While the analyses from the agencies differed, the Wall Street Journal reported that there is an existing
consensus that COVID-19 was not the result of a biological-weapons program.
There are currently four hypotheses regarding the pathway of emergence, including:
• Direct zoonotic transmission, or a spillover event;
• Introduction through an intermediate host followed by zoonotic transmission, or spillover;
• Introduction through the cold/food chain; or
• Introduction through a laboratory incident.
At this time, there is no consensus amongst the intelligence community on the origins of COVID-19.
Mission on the origins of COVID-19
• On January 14, 2021, a team of WHO-convened international experts went on a mission to China
to trace the zoonotic origins of SARS-CoV-2 and its route of introduction into the human population. On
March 30th, following the release of the full report of the WHO-convened COVID-19 origins study, 14
countries – including Canada – joined a U.S.-led Joint Statement on the study. The Statement reiterated
commitment to working with the WHO and global community to understand the origins of the
pandemic, expressed concerns regarding the study (e.g. that it was delayed and the lack of access to
complete, original data and samples), and underscored the need for further study on the origins. The
European Union (EU) also issued a joint statement and New Zealand subsequently released a statement
following the publication of the report. On April 7, the New York Times published an open letter from a
group of scientists to highlight similar shortfalls of the mission and to call for another investigation.
• At the 74th World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2021, Canada spoke to the importance of
international scientific collaboration and information sharing, and the need for additional data-driven
studies to understand the origins of the virus. The U.S., the EU, Australia, the United Kingdom, Japan,
and Germany expressed similar messages.
• On July 28, 2021, Canada’s Chief Science Advisor, Dr. Mona Nemer, supported a statement from
the U.S. Director of the Office of Science and Technology Policy, which called on China to reconsider its
decision to not engage in the next phase of the origins study. Canada sent a supportive letter to WHO DG
Tedros to express appreciation for sharing a clear path forward for the second phase of the origins study.
Subsequent WHO actions:
• The WHO established a new Scientific Advisory Group for the Origins of Novel Pathogens (SAGO)
in 2021; this new technical structure serves all Member States and provides advice to the WHO
Secretariat on technical and scientific collaboration regarding novel pathogens.
o SAGO convened its first meeting on November 23rd, 2021.
• WHO released a statement on August 12th 2021. The statement emphasized the need for
depoliticization and cooperation, and not finger-pointing or attributing blame, noting:
o WHO priority is for scientists to build on the first phase of studies, implement the
recommendations outlined in the March 2021 report and accelerate scientific efforts on all hypotheses,
including examining the raw data from the earliest cases and sera from potential early cases in 2019.
o WHO are working with a number of countries that have reported detection of SARS-CoV-2 in
samples from stored biological specimens from 2019. They encouraged sharing raw data and giving
permission for the retesting of samples in labs for all countries, including China.
o China and a number of other Member States have written to WHO regarding the basis for
further studies of the SARS-CoV-2 “lab hypothesis” and to express concern about the politicization of
origin-studies.
o Based on the review of the phase one study report, the WHO determined that there was
insufficient scientific evidence to rule out any of the hypotheses.
o Further, to address the “lab hypothesis,” it is important to have access to all data and consider
scientific best practice; analysing and improving lab safety and protocols in all laboratories around the
world, including in China, is an important endeavor for biosafety and security.
PANDEMIC INSTRUMENT
Issue
Member States of the World Health Organization (WHO) are developing a new WHO convention,
agreement or other international instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery (a “pandemic instrument/treaty/accord”).
Key Facts
• On December 1, 2021, Canada and other WHO Member States agreed to launch a process to
develop a pandemic instrument.
• Development of the instrument is at an early stage. Negotiations began in February 2023. A
progress report will be presented at the 76th World Health Assembly in Geneva, Switzerland in May
2023, and a final outcome (i.e., a finalized instrument) is expected to be presented for consideration at
the 77th World Health Assembly in May 2024.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• COVID-19 has demonstrated the need to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for
the next pandemic. Canada is working closely with international partners, including the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), and the broader global
community to strengthen global health security.
• With respect to global health threats that cross borders, such as pandemics, we can best
advance and protect Canadian interests through effective rules-based international systems, which helps
structure and advance our cooperation.
• Canada supports the development and negotiation of a WHO international instrument to
improve multilateral cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
• Canada’s view is that a pandemic instrument would be helpful to enhance our collective action
and accountability to address gaps and strengthen our work on global pandemic prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery.
If Pressed – Canada’s Position on the Pandemic Instrument
• Canada’s overarching objectives are to address recognized gaps in pandemic prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery while strengthening the global health architecture and, in
particular, the WHO’s existing core international legal instrument, the International Health Regulations
(2005).
• Canada believes the pandemic instrument should be based on science and evidence, aim to
enhance health equity and gender equality, respect national contexts and be complementary and
coherent with existing tools.
• The Government of Canada has informed provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations,
and other partners and stakeholders of the work underway and will continue to hold targeted
engagements to inform Canada’s views and positions as this process advances.
If Pressed – Sovereignty Considerations
• When negotiating a new international instrument, the Government of Canada always carefully
considers its potential impact on Canada’s domestic laws and policies.
• While Canada supports the development of the instrument, no decision has been made yet on
whether Canada will sign and ratify the agreement.
• The WHO does not have jurisdiction in Canada. Canada will remain in control of any future
domestic decisions about national restrictions or other measures related to pandemics.
If Pressed – PMB C-293 - An Act Respecting Pandemic Prevention and Preparedness
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians remains a top priority for the Government of
Canada, and this includes ensuring preparedness for future pandemics and global health events.
• As the COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted, the impact of public health events on both society
and the economy is immense. That is why we must work to improve our emergency management
preparedness and response posture, taking an approach that is informed by the lessons we have learned
from this pandemic, to be better prepared for the next emergency.
• The Government of Canada supports the designation of a pandemic prevention and
preparedness coordinator and the development of a pandemic prevention and preparedness plan. With
amendments, the government will be supporting this bill.
If Pressed – How will issue XYZ be addressed?
• Development of the pandemic instrument is still at an early stage.
• Member States are still discussing how issue XYZ could be addressed.
If Pressed – Engagement with Provinces, Territories, Indigenous Organizations and other Partners and
Stakeholders on the Instrument
• Development of the pandemic instrument is still at an early stage.
• The Government of Canada has informed provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations,
and other partners and stakeholders of the work underway, including opportunities to engage directly
with the WHO.
• A hybrid Forum to discuss the Pandemic Instrument will take place on March 21-22. 2023, in
Ottawa. It will serve as a platform to hear the views of Canadian partners and stakeholders to inform the
development of Canada’s priorities in the drafting and negotiation the pandemic instrument
• Future engagements will occur as draft progresses so that partners and stakeholders are
involved throughout the pandemic instrument’s development.
If Pressed – Health, Social and Economic Impacts of the Instrument
• Global efforts to enhance pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery are
expected to yield significant health, social and economic benefits for Canadians and the broader global
community.
• Development of the pandemic instrument is still at an early stage and it is too early to predict
the exact provisions of the instrument and how they might be implemented in Canada.
If Pressed – Other Work Underway to Strengthen the Global Health Architecture
• The new instrument will be one tool among others to improve how the world prevents, prepares
for, responds to and recovers from future health emergencies of international concern.
• Countries are also working together to strengthen the International Health Regulations (IHR)
(2005), an overarching legal framework that defines countries’ rights and obligations in handling public
health events and emergencies that have the potential to cross borders. This includes considering
potential amendments to the IHR (2005), as well as operational and policy measures that could
strengthen the instrument.
• Member States are also considering ways to strengthen the technical and policy capacity of the
WHO, as the directing and coordinating authority for health within the United Nations system, including
options to ensure more sustainable, predictable and flexible financing for the organization.
Background
On November 29 to December 1, 2021, the World Health Assembly met to adopt a milestone decision,
“The World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response“, which was co-sponsored by upwards of 120 Member States,
including Canada. The decision established an intergovernmental negotiating body (INB), open to all
Member States, to draft and negotiate a new WHO convention, agreement or other international
instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and recovery.
The first INB meetings established a process to develop the pandemic instrument, including timelines,
milestones and modalities for stakeholder engagement. Member States are currently working towards a
draft instrument and have identified that a finalized instrument will be considered as a legally binding
treaty, convention or agreement, without excluding the option to adopt the instrument as binding
regulations. Member States will submit a progress report to the 76th World Health Assembly in May
2023, and a final outcome to the 77th World Health Assembly in May 2024.
Potential substantive elements of the pandemic instrument could include: health equity, One Health,
antimicrobial resistance, leadership and governance issues, surveillance, access and benefit sharing
related to genetic resources, health system strengthening, access to medical countermeasures, trade and
related topics, vaccine confidence and misinformation/ disinformation, travel and border measures and
global rapid response mechanisms for pandemics.
Canada is actively engaged in the pandemic instrument process and is committed to a whole-of-
government and whole-of society approach. Canada’s stakeholder engagement strategy is based on
principles of transparency, accountability, and inclusivity, and outlines Canada’s guiding principles in the
development of the instrument, including evidence informed decision making and respect for national
contexts, as well as key multi-sectoral issues such as One Health and health equity. The Health Portfolio
is working with Global Affairs Canada to engage relevant federal government departments, provincial
and territorial governments, National Indigenous Organizations, and other partners and stakeholders in
the development of the instrument. Cabinet approved a principles and objectives based negotiating
mandate on February 15 and negotiations began on February 27.
The fourth meeting of the Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) took place from February 27 –
March 3, 2023 in Geneva, Switzerland to conduct a first reading of the Zero Draft (ZD) of the pandemic
instrument, to agree to modalities and begin negotiations. Members States were brought together to
discuss modalities, and a first reading was conducted through line-by-line discussions.
SAFETY OF BREAST IMPLANTS
ISSUE
• What is the Government doing to protect the health and safety of Canadians in regard to
monitoring the safety of breast implants?
KEY FACTS
• Like all medical devices, breast implants have benefits and risks.
• Breast implants undergo the highest level of review before authorization.
• Health Canada has undertaken a number of post-market actions for breast implants, including
suspending the authorization for devices that posed a higher risk of developing a rare form of cancer.
• Health Canada has worked with manufacturers to implement comprehensive labelling changes,
including a boxed warning and patient decision checklists to support informed decision-making.
• Health Canada continues to actively monitor breast implants and makes information available to
Canadians in a variety of formats, including website updates, a data blog, a subscription service, and
directly in meetings with patient groups. Health Canada also continues to work with its international
regulatory partners on the safety of breast implants.
KEY MESSAGES
• Breast implants undergo a rigorous scientific review by Health Canada before they are
authorized for sale in Canada.
• All health products are associated with both benefits and risks. Some risks may not be known
until later as medical and scientific information evolves.
• Health Canada continues to monitor the safety of all medical devices, including breast implants,
once marketed as scientific and medical information is continuously evolving.
• The monitoring of breast implants has supported decisive actions, including the suspension of
higher risk breast implants, improved labelling to support informed decision-making by patients and
healthcare professionals, and communication of these actions.
• Health Canada also continues to engage with key stakeholders to facilitate discussions on their
perspectives on breast implant registries and other tools.
IF PRESSED ON A BREAST IMPLANT REGISTRY …
• Discussions around the creation of a registry reflect the complexity of the issue, as there are
important privacy considerations, and discussions involve health authorities and organisations, as well as
provincial and territorial governments.
• Health Canada is playing a key role in engaging with a wide scope of stakeholders to facilitate
exploring potential options.
• In order to further explore the topic of a Canadian breast implant registry, Women and Gender
Equality Canada led a “Best Brains Exchange” event in March 2023, in collaboration with Health Canada.
• Once a report from this event has been finalized, the Department will carefully review the
conclusions to inform next actions.
BACKGROUND
Anaplastic large cell lymphoma (ALCL) is a rare cancer. It is a type of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma. Breast-
implant associated anaplastic large cell lymphoma (BIA-ALCL) is a subtype of ALCL. Reported cases are
seen almost exclusively in patients with a textured surface implants (as opposed to a smooth or micro-
textured surface).
There are different types of breast implants. They may be filled with a saline solution or a silicone gel. All
breast implants in Canada undergo a scientific review for safety and effectiveness before Health Canada
issues an authorization. Once authorized, Health Canada monitors breast implants through recalls, and
reports from consumers, manufacturers, hospitals and health care providers. The Department follows up
on these reports and takes actions if required. These actions may include a label change, controlling
distribution, recalling the device, communicating with Canadians, and suspending the authorization.
Health Canada completed post-market safety reviews of breast implants in 2017, 2019 and 2022. The
2019 safety review found an increased risk of BIA-ALCL with the use of macro-textured breast implants.
As a result, Health Canada suspended the medical device licences of Allergan’s Biocell macro-textured
breast implants, which were the only macro-textured implants available in Canada at that time.
The latest safety review in April 2022 found that the risk of BIA-ALCL continues to be higher with macro-
textured breast implants compared to breast implants with other surface textures (micro-textured or
smooth). The review found that, as of September 2021, Health Canada has received 64 confirmed
Canadian cases of BIA-ALCL, including 3 deaths. The implant texture was known in 51 of the 64
confirmed cases, and all 51 cases involved textured devices.
These reviews have supported a number of actions, including:
o Suspending the medical device authorization for a breast implant associated with the risk of
developing a rare form of cancer
o Implementing comprehensive labelling changes, including a boxed warning and patient decision
checklists
In addition, Health Canada continues to publish information for Canadians and health professionals to
support decision making. This includes, for example:
o the use of social medial to increase overall awareness
o a detailed website for breast implants on Canada.ca
o a new service where readers can subscribe to receive updates on breast implant information
o the Health Infobase data blog with the 2021 surveillance data.
Health Canada continues to actively monitor for new or increasing risks associated with breast implants.
Health Canada does not cover fees for surgery, provide medical or legal advice, regulate medical
decisions by doctors, or maintain a database linking individuals with the specific types of implants they
have.
Breast implants have been the subject of media attention. Since 2019, for the purposes of informing
additional risk assessment and potential risk management, Health Canada met with Canadian patients
representing patient advocacy groups on breast implant safety issues and has discussed breast implants
at multiple meetings of the Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women.
The Standing Committee on Health (HESA) plans to conduct a study in the coming weeks to follow up on
the improvements that have been put in place to assess the feasibility of establishing a central breast
implant traceability registry. Health Canada is expected to be called as a witness.
A breast implant registry could be used for different concepts:
o Individual Canadians wish to be informed when there is a problem with their breast implants.
o Physicians and researchers wish to have detailed information to inform clinical practice.
Health Canada participated in a Best Brains Exchange to explore the topic of a Canadian Breast Implant
Registry to support patient safety communications on March 7, 2023.
SHORTAGE OF PEDIATRIC ANALGESICS
ISSUE
• The supply of non-prescription pediatric acetaminophen and ibuprofen products is stabilizing,
but there is a need to stay vigilant.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada continues to take action to address the shortage of children’s analgesics by
working closely with key stakeholders, including industry and health care system partners, to implement
shortage mitigation measures to increase supply and monitor distribution across the country.
• Between November 2022 and March 2023 domestic suppliers released 5.8 million units of
children’s acetaminophen and ibuprofen products into the Canadian market, with additional supply
expected in the months ahead.
• Despite ramping up domestic production, suppliers of pediatric acetaminophen and ibuprofen
products have yet to confirm that supply is meeting demand.
• Over 2.8 million units of foreign authorized supply of both ibuprofen and acetaminophen have
been imported as of March 7, with more also expected to be imported until demand is fully met.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government has been using all levers at its disposal to help alleviate the shortage of
pediatric acetaminophen and ibuprofen products and we now see continued signs of improvement.
• We know how important these medications are for families, caregivers, and health care
professionals who rely on them to reduce fever and pain in infants and children.
• Domestic suppliers have ramped up production to release 5.8M units into the Canadian market
over the last four months, and more is coming.
• Health Canada also approved the exceptional importation of over 2.8M units of foreign-labelled
product for hospitals, retail, and community pharmacies as of March 7.
• Health Canada will pursue its efforts until the supply fully meets the demand of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON WHY THE SHORTAGE ISN’T YET RESOLVED …
• With the increase in viral infections during fall 2022 and into winter 2023, there was significant
demand for analgesic products.
• Manufacturers have ramped up production to record levels, and Health Canada authorized
products for exceptional importation continue to supplement the supply in Canada.
• These measures have directly contributed to restoring a better balance between supply and
demand.
• My Department continues to work closely with stakeholders to ensure a stable supply that fully
meets demand.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO ADDRESS THE SHORTAGE …
• Health Canada has been using all levers at its disposal to address this shortage and will remain
focused on solutions until the shortage is fully resolved.
• My Department continues to meet with provinces and territories, and industry and health care
stakeholders to share strategies to minimize the impact of this shortage.
• Health Canada has also worked with manufacturers to allow the importation of foreign product
to supplement Canada’s supply.
• My Department continues to assess importation proposals based on need.
• I have also asked my officials to explore policy options to further support drug supply resilience
in Canada in the long term.
IF PRESSED ON WHY THIS HAS BEEN SO PRONOUNCED IN CANADA (HAVE OTHER COUNTRIES
EXPERIENCED THE SAME SHORTAGE?) …
• Other countries have reported signals of supply constraints, so this is not an issue felt only in
Canada, though we were the first to experience it.
• We saw demand for analgesics rise over the summer months in 2022, which is the period
manufacturers normally use to re-stock analgesics for the fall and winter seasons.
• Combined with the increase in viral infections circulating and the attention on the issue in
Canada in mid-August, this resulted in a drastic and unprecedented spike in demand.
• We have been seeing continued improvement in supply and will remain vigilant and actively
engaged until supply fully meets demand.
IF PRESSED ON WHY TURKISH ACETAMINOPHEN AND IBUPROFEN ARE BEING IMPORTED TO ALBERTA
• The Province of Alberta contacted Health Canada indicating its interest in procuring and
importing foreign authorized children’s acetaminophen and ibuprofen products from a manufacturer in
Turkey.
• In reviewing Alberta’s proposal to import foreign products in the context of the pediatric
analgesics shortage, Health Canada verified that the product was safe, effective and of quality
comparable to a product authorized in Canada.
• Health Canada also verified that all necessary safety packaging and labelling information was
made available in both official languages and that proposed quantities did not exceed demand.
• On that basis, Health Canada was able to authorize children’s acetaminophen and ibuprofen for
importation from Turkey.
BACKGROUND
Constraints on supply of children’s analgesics started to be reported in spring 2022, though suppliers
indicated an ability to meet demand generally with some sporadic, localized supply issues anticipated.
On August 16, 2022, media reported that the SickKids Hospital in Toronto was warning parents and
caregivers that, due to nationwide shortages, a prescription would be required for liquid acetaminophen
and ibuprofen products, and that a pharmacist would provide the medication to them.
CBC News and Sick Kids issued corrective statements clarifying that prescriptions for these products
were not required. However, this media attention triggered a further spike in demand for these products
nationally, following reports of intermittent supply constraints that had been previously reported.
Companies have indicated they have ramped up production beyond normal historical demand levels but
that the current demand is outpacing production.
On August 30, the Canadian Pediatric Society issued guidance directed to caregivers and parents on the
use of these products.
Health Canada has actively worked with the manufacturers and all stakeholders across the supply chain
to identify mitigation measures to increase supply and meet demand for these products, including
reviewing proposals that required regulatory flexibility or consideration of foreign supply. Manufacturers
maximized production, with some companies producing at 100% more than they were at the same time
in 2021. Between November 2022, and March 2023, over 5.8M units of children’s acetaminophen and
ibuprofen products were released into the Canadian market by domestic suppliers.
The Department has prioritized information-sharing with provinces and territories via various FPT tables.
The Department has also involved PTs in broader multi-stakeholder discussions to identify solutions as
quickly as possible.
Health Canada has approved the importation of foreign supply of pediatric ibuprofen and
acetaminophen for use in hospitals, community pharmacies and retail stores. More than 2.8M bottles of
product have already entered Canada to supply hospitals, community pharmacies and retailers and
products are appearing on store shelves. Health Canada will continue to assess additional proposals for
exceptional importation based on needs.
Health Canada is prioritizing public communication by providing information and advice to Canadians.
This was done via a Departmental Statement, and Public Advisory issued on October 7, 2022. A webpage
was also launched on October 26, 2022, dedicated to the analgesic shortage. Health Canada will
continue to keep Canadians up to date on this shortage and the products that have been approved for
importation through this webpage.
In addition to discussions with suppliers, on November 2, 2022, November 17, 2022, and December 15,
2022, the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, hosted roundtable discussions on the
pediatric and children’s analgesics shortage in Canada. In attendance were external participants
representing manufacturers, distributors, pharmacists, children’s hospitals, and pediatricians. The
objective of the roundtables was to highlight actions to date and provide participants with an
opportunity to share perspectives on the shortage, measures taken, and ongoing challenges, while
underscoring the need for all stakeholders to continue taking measures to end this shortage as soon as
possible.
The Province of Alberta contacted Health Canada indicating its interest in procuring and importing
foreign authorized children’s acetaminophen and ibuprofen products for hospitals, community
pharmacies and retail locations.
After extensive review and discussions with the Alberta-based MHCare on its proposal to import Turkish-
labelled products, the Department did not authorize this exceptional importation for the retail setting
due to significant safety concerns with product packaging. On December 29, the Department authorized
a new proposal for hospitals and concluded that it would not object to the importation of Turkish-
authorized acetaminophen only Alberta hospitals for inpatient use. The decision was communicated to
the company on December 30, 2022.
On January 4, 2023, Health Canada received a new proposal for the exceptional importation of Turkish-
authorized acetaminophen for use in community pharmacies in Alberta, with revised packaging and risk
mitigation measures. The Department approved this proposal on January 26, 2023.
On January 9, 2023, Health Canada received a new proposal from the importer for the importation of
Turkish-authorized ibuprofen for use in Alberta hospitals and retail settings. On February 10, 2023, the
Department notified the importer of its decision to allow the exceptional importation.
PESTICIDES - GENERAL
ISSUE
• In general, pesticides are toxic chemicals intentionally released into the environment to control
pests on crops, including in homes and workplaces, and in industrial processes. These can include
personal insect repellents, wood preservatives, pool sanitizers and products to control invasive species.
• There are more than 600 registered active ingredients in more than 7600 registered pesticide
products in Canada.
• Pesticides are stringently regulated in Canada to ensure they pose minimal risk to human health
and the environment. Under authority of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA), Health Canada:
o registers pesticides after a science-based evaluation that ensures any risks are acceptable;
o re-evaluates the pesticides currently on the market on a 15-year cycle to ensure the products
meet current scientific standards; and
o promotes, monitors and enforces compliance with the PCPA.
• In 2021, the Federal Government announced a $42 million investment in Health Canada’s PMRA
to further strengthen pesticide monitoring and protection of human health and the environment, and
increase transparency.
KEY FACTS
• The Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) is the branch of Health Canada responsible for
regulating pesticides under the authority of the Pest Control Products Act. PMRA’s primary mandate is to
prevent unacceptable risks to Canadians and the environment from the use of these products.
• Before a pesticide can be registered for sale in Canada, pesticide applicants are required to
provide PMRA with extensive scientific data to show that their product does not pose unacceptable risks
to health and the environment, and that the product has value.
• This same approach is used to regularly and systematically review whether pesticides already on
the Canadian market continue to meet modern scientific standards.
• The PMRA has established a Transformation Agenda, which focuses on four major areas:
strengthen human and environmental health and safety oversight and protection through modernized
business processes, improve transparency to increase the public’s participation in the decision-making
process for pesticides, increase use of real-world independent data and independent advice to better
inform regulatory decision making, and a targeted review of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA).
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada takes pesticide safety very seriously, and is committed to making
evidence-based scientific decisions.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes increasing use of independent data, modernizing business processes, and
improving transparency.
• The development of a national water monitoring program, a pesticide use data collection
program, and of new transparency measures are currently underway. Implementation of elements of the
new approach to continuous oversight of pesticides across their regulatory life-cycle has also started.
IF PRESSED ON THE CONTINUED USE OF GLYPHOSATE IN CANADA …
• Health Canada scientists have conducted an extensive review of this chemical and have
concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions are followed.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO MONITOR GLYPHOSATE IN THE ENVIRONMENT …
• Health Canada is establishing a national water monitoring framework with provinces, territories,
and other key stakeholders, to collect real-world data on the presence of pesticides, including
glyphosate, in surface and groundwater in Canada.
• This framework will help to better inform regulatory decisions on pesticides. Sampling began in
the summer of 2022 and the first results were published in December 2022. PMRA is currently reviewing
these results.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN FOOD …
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) shows levels found are compliant
with the maximum residue limits allowed to be in or on food. As such, the levels detected by the CFIA
are not a cause for health concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN DRINKING WATER …
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk of glyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosate was found not to be of
concern.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA – WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES OF
NEONICOTINOIDS – IS TAKING A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSURE FROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR …
• As part of the public consultation on its proposed decisions on neonicotinoids, Health Canada
received more than 47,000 comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental
organizations and provinces. A significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies
and papers from various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory
authorities were reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these neonicotinoid
insecticides in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S DECISION TO CANCEL THE USE OF STRYCHNINE FOR RICHARDSONS’S
GROUND SQUIRREL CONTROL IN SASKATCHEWAN AND ALBERTA DESPITE A STUDY SUBMITTED FROM
SASKATCHEWAN …
• Health Canada’s scientists reviewed all pertinent information, including the study from
Saskatchewan, before concluding that no practical mitigation measures could be implemented to protect
the environment adequately. Therefore the registration was cancelled.
BACKGROUND
Pesticides are toxic chemicals intentionally released into the environment to control pests, including on
crops, in homes and workplaces, and in industrial processes. These can include personal insect
repellents, wood preservatives, pool sanitizers, and products to control invasive species. Pesticides also
include biologicals (derived from natural sources such as bacteria, fungi, viruses, plants, animals and
minerals) and devices (e.g., “bug zappers”, ultraviolet light emitting devices to kill bacteria). There are
more than 600 registered active ingredients in more than 7600 registered pesticide products in Canada.
Before a pesticide is allowed to be used or sold in Canada, it must undergo a rigorous scientific
assessment that provides reasonable certainty that no harm to human health and the environment will
occur when it is used according to label directions. Depending on the type of pesticide being evaluated,
results from up to 200 scientific studies (or more in some cases) may be required to determine whether
the pesticide would have any negative effect on people (e.g. chronic effects such as cancer), animals or
plants, including organisms in the soil and water. This assessment also takes into consideration sensitive
populations, such as pregnant and nursing women, infants, children and seniors.
Health Canada’s PMRA must also periodically re-evaluate pesticides that are on the market to determine
whether they continue to meet the Department’s health and environmental standards and hence,
whether they should continue to be permitted for use in Canada. The PCPA also requires Health Canada
to initiate a special review of a registered pest control product when there are reasonable grounds to
believe that the health or environmental risks of the product are, or its value is, unacceptable, or when
an OECD member country prohibits all uses of an active ingredient for health or environmental reasons.
On August 4, 2021, the Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada’s Pest
Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)’s pest
management research, to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
To deliver on this commitment, the PMRA has established a Transformation Agenda, which focuses on
four major areas: strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the environment
through modernized business processes; increasing the availability of independent data and
independent advice to better inform regulatory decision making; improving transparency to increase the
public’s understanding of the decision-making process for pesticides; and conducting a targeted review
of the PCPA.
NEUROLOGICAL CASES in NEW BRUNSWICK
Issue
In February 2022, the Government of New Brunswick (NB) closed its investigation into the 48 cases
previously known as a "cluster” of neurological syndrome of unknown cause (NSUC), concluding there
was no cluster or common illness. The Government of NB acted as the lead investigator as it fell within
their jurisdiction and, at the request of the Government of NB, the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) provided support up until May 2021. The Minister of Health and Health Portfolio officials
continue to receive correspondence from stakeholders and patient advocates who are dissatisfied with
the outcomes of the NB-led investigation, seeking a new investigation at the federal level.
Recently, media attention has increased at the one-year mark since NB concluded its investigation and a
number of patients remain without a diagnosis. The lead clinician for these patients and patient
advocates claims there are more cases (up to 147) and are suggesting a herbicide or environmental toxin
(e.g., glyphosate) as the possible cause of the neurological cases in NB. NB is not requesting assistance
this time.
Key Messages
• The Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• Our thoughts are with the patients and families of those involved.
• At the request of Public Health New Brunswick, the Public Health Agency of Canada provided
support to the investigation which found that the cluster did not represent a cluster of neurological
syndrome of unknown cause.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work closely with provinces and territories,
partners and stakeholders to monitor and understand risks to human health from neurological diseases.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also continuing to enhance and modernize the national
Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD) surveillance system.
If pressed:
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is available to support provinces and territories who request
assistance. Available support includes epidemiological surge capacity, field epidemiologists, specialized
public health expertise and laboratory services.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and
territories to monitor and understand risks to human health from neurological diseases and build
additional capacity to address them.
Background
New Brunswick has completed its investigation
NB completed its investigation related to a group (48) of individuals who have been experiencing signs
and symptoms of an atypical neurological syndrome. The lead clinician was originally exploring an
infectious disease diagnosis – focusing on CJD or expressing concerns of a new prion-like infectious
disease. For this reason, cases were originally referred to PHAC’s Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance
System (CJDSS) which conducts prospective national surveillance for all types of human prion disease in
Canada, including case management work with clinicians and diagnostic services to rule our CJD. These
case referrals do not replace provincial reporting requirements based on public health legislation and
regulations.
On March 5, 2021, the office of the NB Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH) issued a memo to health
professionals in the province to notify them of this cluster of progressive neurological syndrome of
unknown cause and encourage them to notify Moncton Hospital’s Mind Clinic if they have patients who
may be part of this cluster. The memo also instructed healthcare professionals to refer suspected cases
of CJD to the CJDSS as usual.
The NB investigation included three components:
1. Clinical oversight committee – Announced by the NB Minister of Health in June 2021, to
investigate possible diagnoses of the syndrome through review of case files. The Government of NB
committed to ongoing communication and transparency with family members/patients. On February 24,
2022, Public Health New Brunswick (PHNB) released its Final Report and Recommendations accepting
the Oversight Committee Report which concluded that there is no evidence of a shared common illness
or a syndrome of unknown cause. The following recommendations were made:
PHNB may request a clinical review of cases by a second specialist physician prior to including
cases in a cluster of unknown etiology. If the two physicians do not agree, the case should be presented
to a board of specialty doctors or an oversight committee for a decision.
The Reporting and Diseases Regulation under the Public Health Act should be amended to
require a suspect case of any existing or new variant of human or animal prion disease be reported to
Public Health.
PHNB should continue to build on collaborations with PHAC and other federal and provincial
partners to improve and modernize the national CJDSS and to establish or improve processes related to
outbreak investigations, including those where prion disease has been excluded.
2. Epidemiological questionnaire – Co-developed with PHAC, NB conducted 34 telephone
interviews with affected patients and/or family members (of the 48) to collect data on possible common
features among cases. NB released an epidemiologic report of their findings on October 27, 2021, which
concluded that no specific behaviours, foods, or environmental exposures were identified as potential
risk factors.
3. Specialized clinic, The Mind Clinic – Established by Horizon Health Network at the Moncton
Hospital aimed at treating and supporting patients and their families. The lead clinician is no longer
affiliated with this clinic.
PHNB has updated a webpage for public communications, which includes information on the
investigation, epidemiology, actions, and Q&As. PHAC provided extensive input to NB on the proposed
content.
PHAC was an active contributor to the PHNB investigation until May 2021. Over the course of the
investigation, PHAC took on several roles to support PHNB, including participating in a federal/provincial
working group, providing specialized diagnostic laboratory services and expertise (e.g., to rule out CJD),
and through the Canadian Field Epidemiology Program, deployed epidemiologists, and assisted in the
development of an epidemiological questionnaire.
PHAC publicly noted that it was pleased that the investigation had come to a close and supported the
(six neurologists unanimous) investigation’s findings that the cluster did not represent a neurological
syndrome of unknown cause (e.g., novel infectious disease). PHAC publicly committed to continue to
work closely with the provinces and territories to enhance and modernize the national CJD surveillance
system, a long-standing federal program, established in 1998. PHAC commitments included for example:
modernizing IM/IT systems, protocols, and processes, enhancing information sharing and collaborative
mechanisms internally as well as with P/T partners and stakeholders
To deliver on these commitments, PHAC reallocated some resources internally to strengthen the
program and in May 2022, PHAC established the Prion Diseases Division (PDD) within the Centre for
Foodborne, Environmental and Zoonotic Infectious Diseases, which houses the CJD surveillance system.
Over the next 2 years, the division is implementing public commitments to enhance and modernize the
CJDSS. These enhancements include the creation of information-sharing agreements between PHAC and
provinces/territories, beginning with NB in 2023, and the formation of a federal/provincial/territorial
working group to engage partners on CJDSS modernization and to better prepare for unknown disease
events, including those where prion disease has been ruled out.
In 2022, the Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) conducted a consultancy at PHAC Senior
Management’s request to undertake an internal review of lessons learned into PHAC’s involvement in
the investigation. The review included interviews with both PHAC officials and NB representatives and
proposed a series of next steps to focus strengthening on the program implementation.
Since the conclusion of the NB-led investigation into 48 cases, a number of patients or their advocates
note they remain without a diagnosis. This issue continues to garner considerable media attention, ATIs,
and correspondence to Health Portfolio senior management – particularly as it has been one year since
the conclusion of that investigation. Requests from patient advocates, including stakeholder
organizations and family members are increasing that a new investigation based on “science” be
launched and “to get at the root cause”. The lead clinician has stated that he is now seeing 147 cases.
This number has also been reported through the media, with the new hypothesis that these individuals
may have been exposed to an environmental toxin.
PHAC continues to receive letters from stakeholders and patient advocates which suggest that a
herbicide or environmental toxin (e.g., glyphosate) may be the possible cause of the neurological cases
in New Brunswick. The province is not requesting investigative assistance from PHAC at this time.
Additional information on PHAC’s Federal Role
PHAC’s CJDSS sensitized NB to the possible existence of an epidemiological cluster related to this
investigation. Since the conclusion of the investigation, PHAC continues to provide support to NB,
including providing laboratory testing and neuropathology, to detect known forms of human prion
disease, as PHAC does for other jurisdictions
Prion diseases are rare, fatal neurological conditions caused by abnormal proteins. In humans, the most
prominent and consistent clinical feature of prion disease is rapidly progressive dementia. Autopsy
results to date have been negative for known prion diseases.
With respect to laboratory services, PHAC’s National Microbiology Laboratory offers cerebrospinal fluid
testing for CJD consisting of detection of the disease-associated form of the prion protein. In addition,
sequence analysis of the prion gene can be performed if blood or other tissues are available. These tests
can, in some circumstances, all but rule out CJD. Neuropathology examinations, considered the "gold
standard" for ruling in or out a prion disease diagnosis, are performed on deceased patients at the
University of Ottawa, which is retained on contract with PHAC to deliver these services. To date,
neuropathology results on the small number of deceased patients within NB have all been negative for
prion disease.
PALLIATIVE CARE
ISSUE
• Federal action to improve access to palliative care in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has strained resources and exposed gaps and systemic vulnerabilities in
palliative care delivery across all settings.
• Federal investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021 and $29.8 million from 2021 to 2027 will
advance the Government’s Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated
action on supportive care needs.
• This funding complements federal investments exceeding $6 billion over 10 years to provinces
and territories for home and community care, including palliative care, under the Common Statement of
Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians with serious illness or approaching the end of life deserve to receive care in the
setting of their choice with comfort and dignity.
• Our Government has collaborated with provinces, territories, health care providers and
stakeholders, to develop a Framework and implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care, including
investments of $24 million from 2019 to 2021, and $29.8 million from 2021-2027.
• This funding complements federal support exceeding $6 billion over 10 years to provinces and
territories for home and community care, including palliative care.
IF PRESSED ABOUT THE ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE …
• The Action Plan is Health Canada’s plan to tackle issues identified in the Framework. Actions
include raising awareness about palliative care and grief; improving palliative care skills and supports for
health care providers and others; enhancing data and research; and improving access to culturally
sensitive palliative care.
• A public education campaign will raise awareness of palliative care and grief. Phase I will launch
in early March 2023 for providers who are not palliative specialists. Phase II will launch in late May 2023,
for the public.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
o While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to palliative
home care services.
o Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care unit.
COMPLEMENTARY MECHANISMS
The Framework on Palliative Care sets out an approach under which all governments, communities, and
Canadians play a role in improving palliative and end-of-life care. The Framework was built through
participation and direction-setting with key organizations, provinces and territories (P/Ts), other federal
government departments and individuals, including people living with a life-limiting illness, caregivers,
health care providers, and researchers. The penultimate version of the Framework was shared with P/Ts,
stakeholders, and other participants in the development process, and their feedback incorporated.
Although formal endorsement was not sought, other jurisdictions and key stakeholders were
comfortable in sharing their approaches to palliative care to be included in the Framework and being
named as contributors in the final document. A list of the main groups and individuals that contributed
to the development of the Framework is contained in the document.
The Action Plan on Palliative Care focuses on the federal role in implementing the Framework. The
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, as described below, outlines the way that
the federal government and provincial and territorial governments work together to improve palliative
care, and complements the Framework and Action Plan.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, FPT Ministers of Health (except Quebec) agreed to the Common Statement of Principles
on Shared Health Priorities (CSoP) which sets out a shared agenda for improving access to home and
community care (including palliative care) and mental health and addiction services supported by federal
investments. Based on the asymmetrical agreements of 2004, the Government of Canada and the
Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from the CSoP.
Following the endorsement of the CSoP, the Government of Canada negotiated and finalized bilateral
agreements with each jurisdiction, which are posted publicly online. These agreements detail how each
province or territory will use federal investments to increase access to services in the two priority areas.
Each jurisdiction developed its own action plan, annexed to the bilateral agreement, which identifies the
new or expanded programs in home and community care and mental health and addiction services to be
supported by the federal investments.
Six billion dollars in funding over 10 years was committed for home and community care (including
palliative care) and was allocated to each province and territory on a per capita basis. While the first
phase of bilateral agreements recently expired (March 31, 2022), federal, provincial and territorial
governments will work together to renew or extend agreements in fiscal year 2022-23 so that provinces
and territories can use the remainder of the funding over the next five years to support home and
community care (including palliative care).
RESPONDING TO NEEDS CREATED OR EXPOSED BY COVID-19
In addition to the initiatives identified in the Action Plan on Palliative Care, Health Canada and its
partners are also working on initiatives that will contribute to the delivery of palliative care in the new
environment created by the pandemic. They have responded to current priorities including symptom
control, information sharing, virtual care, advance care planning, and isolation. Recent activities include:
Funding projects in support of palliative care delivery:
• The Canadian Virtual Hospice has received $586,534, in addition to the $2.5 million already
committed to develop resources for underserved populations (francophones, LGBTQ2S, children, MAID),
to develop a series of online learning modules for caregivers and palliative care patients; host discussion
forums for healthcare professionals; raise public awareness; and develop modules to provide grief
support to care providers.
• William Osler’s RELIEF Project received $1.4 million to facilitate palliative care delivery to
vulnerable populations through the use of technology to enable Remote Self-Reporting of Symptoms by
Patients with Palliative Care Needs.
• University of British Columbia received $2.25 million for its Volunteer Navigation in Palliative
Care: Adapting and Expanding the Nav-CARE program - in which trained volunteers provide navigation
services to persons living at home with life-limiting illness using a palliative and compassionate
community approach.
• Pallium Canada received $450,000 to provide webinars, training and other resources to clinicians
responding to the pandemic. In addition, Pallium is receiving new funding of $5 million for Project ECHO.
This project is building local palliative care capacity among health care providers through a tele-
mentoring approach, including the regular and ongoing provision of information, resources, and ongoing
supports, such as how to effectively deliver virtual palliative care services.
• Bruyère Research Institute received $2.5 million to expand the work of the Pan-Canadian
Palliative Care Research Collaborative in conducting 14 research studies to improve patient and caregiver
outcomes, palliative care health system performance, and people’s experience of palliative care, and by
building knowledge translation capacity to share the results of this research;
• McMaster University received $1.5 million to expand its Strengthening a Palliative Approach in
Long-Term Care Program, which aims to improve the access and use of knowledge, tools, and resources
to improve the quality of living and dying for residents and their family members within all long-term
care homes in Canada, by curating, adapting, and disseminating resources for direct care, program
development and staff training, and consolidating these resources in an accessible national repository.
• With $2M over four years (2022-2026), Healthcare Excellence Canada in collaboration with the
Canadian Partnership Against Cancer has launched the Improving Equity in Access to Palliative Care
project. This project will support up to 20 teams to design and implement strategies to improve access to
palliative care for persons experiencing homelessness or who are vulnerably housed. Using a
partnership-based approach, participating communities will work with people with lived and living
experience of homeless or vulnerable housing and with First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years with $69.1 million
ongoing to improve home and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. In addition,
funding was identified in Budget 2021 for Health Canada to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care,
including funding earmarked for the development of a distinctions-based Indigenous palliative care
framework and targeted investments for Indigenous palliative care.
Health Canada is currently co-developing the distinctions-based palliative care framework with
Indigenous partners. This includes leveraging results from relevant engagement processes led by other
government departments to reduce engagement fatigue and partnering with Indigenous organizations
carrying out Indigenous-led engagement. The resulting framework will provide a road map for initiatives
to improve palliative care for Indigenous peoples in Canada.
PALLIATIVE AND END-OF-LIFE CARE FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
Children and youth who have a life-limiting illness or condition, or who have a family member or friend
with one, require appropriate supports and acknowledgement of their experience, including when they
are grieving a loss. Depending on their needs, young people may be cared for by their family physician,
pediatrician, allied health care providers, and/or pediatric palliative care specialists. Young people and
their families and caregivers may also benefit from community and online information and other
resources which address their experiences and aim to alleviate their suffering. The federal government
has supported the development of content for websites such as:
• CaringTogether.Life to educate, support, and empower parents caring for a seriously ill child and
those who are experiencing pregnancy or infant loss;
• LivingOutLoud.Life for teens and young adults living with advanced illness; and
• KidsGrief.ca, for parents supporting their children when someone in their life is dying or has
died.
PALLIATIVE CARE AND MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)
Concerns have been raised in the media and by certain stakeholders that Medical Assistance in Dying
(MAID) receives more support and funding than palliative care, and that people may choose MAID to
relieve their suffering because they can not access palliative care.
The available evidence does not suggest that the choice to seek MAID is driven by inadequate palliative
care services, nor lack of availability of these services.
The Third Annual Report on MAID in Canada indicates that, in 2021, the majority of MAID recipients
(80.7%) received palliative care. This compares similarly to 2019 and 2020 (82.1% and 82.8%
respectively). Of the MAID recipients who did not receive palliative care, 88.0% had access to these
services if they required them.
These findings are consistent with those reported by Quebec’s Commission on End-of-Life Care, as well
as those of an Ontario-based study, both of which found that most MAID recipients had received
palliative care.
The state of palliative care is one of the topics to be addressed by the Special Joint Committee on MAID
(AMAD).
OTHER FEDERAL INVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), is supporting the Canadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centres
of Excellence Program, with an investment of $47.8 million between 2012 and 2023. This network aims
to improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through the development, evaluation,
and implementation of health care technologies.
Between 2017-2018 and 2021-2022, CIHR invested more than $484 million in research on aging. This
includes research to promote healthy aging and to address causes, prevention, treatment and palliation
for a wide range of conditions associated with aging.
HOME CARE
ISSUE
• Canadians ultimately want to age at home or in their community, close to family and loved ones.
Increased access to high-quality home care services is necessary in order to help people receive needed
care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-term care facility, and to live as independently as possible
in the community.
KEY FACTS
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by $198.6 billion over 10 years.
• Funding includes $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage increases for personal
support workers and related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial governments work
together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
• This funding builds on the $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and
territories for mental health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
• In October 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Seniors announced that the National
Seniors Council (NSC) will serve as an expert panel to examine measures, including a potential aging at
home benefit, to further support Canadians who wish to age within the comfort of their own homes.
• Funding for home and community care will help provinces and territories:
o Spread and scale models of home and community care that are integrated and connected to
primary care;
o Enhance access to palliative and end of life care at home or in hospices;
o Increase support for caregivers; and
o Enhance home care infrastructure, such as digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology
and facilities for community-based service delivery.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians ultimately want to age at home or in their community, close to family and loved ones.
• The Government of Canada recently announced an investment of $198.6 billion of health
funding over 10 years, including an investment of $1.7 billion to support hourly wage increases for
personal support workers and related professions.
• Separate from this, the Government of Canada is providing $6 billion over ten years – which
started in 2017 – for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care services,
including palliative care.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CARE SYSTEM FUNDING… (92 words)
• We announced that we will increase health funding to provinces and territories by $198.6 billion
over 10 years, including $46.2 billion in new funding.
• This funding builds on the $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and
territories for mental health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
• New funding includes $1.7 billion over five years to support wage increases for personal support
workers and related professions.
• These investments will improve access to home care and safe long-term care so Canadians can
age safely.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Our Government committed to strengthening our healthcare system, especially for vulnerable
members of our communities – this includes care at home.
• Budget 2021 announced a $90 million investment to launch the Age Well at Home initiative to
assist community-based organizations in providing support to help low-income and vulnerable seniors
age in place.
• Also, the Government announced that the National Seniors Council will serve as an expert panel
to examine measures, including a potential aging at home benefit, to further support Canadians who
wish to age at home.
BACKGROUND
Home Care in Canada
Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and territorial
(PT) governments.
While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for health care
services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these services,
including home care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
Home care is referenced in the Canada Health Act (CHA) as an “extended health care service.” Extended
services are not covered by the five criteria of the Act or its extra billing and user charges provisions, and
therefore are not subject to the Act’s penalty provisions.
Mandate Letters
Minister of Health/ Minister of Seniors Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports.
Specific commitments include:
• Support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This
includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures,
identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure
seniors get the care they deserve.
• Train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
• As a part of the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promote seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
• Establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit, with the support of the Minister of Health.
Health Care System Funding
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister and his provincial and territorial counterparts met to work
together on improving Canada’s health care system. First Ministers discussed shared health priorities to
deliver real results for Canadians as well as the importance to uphold the Canada Health Act to protect
Canada’s publicly funded health care system.
At the meeting with premiers, the federal government announced it will increase health funding to
provinces and territories by $198.6 billion over 10 years, including $46.2 billion in new funding. This
amount includes $25 billion to advance shared health priorities through tailored bilateral agreements,
building on the $7.8 billion over five years that has yet to flow to provinces and territories for mental
health and substance use, home and community care, and long-term care.
In addition, new funding announced includes $1.7 billion over five years to support hourly wage
increases for personal support workers and related professions, as federal, provincial, and territorial
governments work together on how best to support recruitment and retention.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years targeted to improve home and community care ($6
billion), and mental health and addictions ($5 billion). Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all provinces and territories, and posted to
Health Canada’s website.
For home and community care, all bilateral agreements set out provincial/territorial action plans,
including activities in one or more of the following actions:
• Spreading and scaling evidence-based models of home and community care that are more
integrated and connected with primary health care;
• Enhancing access to palliative and end of life care at home or in hospices;
• Increasing support for caregivers; and
• Enhancing home care infrastructure, such as digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology
and facilities for community-based service delivery.
New agreements will be required for provinces and territories to access the remaining funding, which is
part of the $7.8 billion over five years available to provincies and territories, mentioned above.
Expert Panel on Aging at Home
In October 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Seniors announced that the National Seniors
Council (NSC) will serve as an expert panel to examine measures, including a potential aging at home
benefit, to further support Canadians who wish to age within the comfort of their own homes. The panel
will report to the Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health.
TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND
ISSUE
• The Territories have called for additional health funding to address the unique challenges of
providing health care services in the North.
KEY FACTS
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced an investment of $198.6 billion over
10 years to improve health care for Canadians. The funding includes $175 million over five for the
Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF), in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering
health care in the territories.
• The renewed funding for the THIF will start in 2023-24. Of the $175 million in total funding, $75
million will be allocated to Nunavut, $50 million to the Northwest Territories, and $50 million to the
Yukon.
• Funding will be used to strengthen health care systems and improve health outcomes through
health care system innovation. It may also be used to offset medical travel costs incurred by each
territory.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Territorial Health Investment Fund has supported the territories in delivering health care in
the North, where each faces high costs to provide necessary care for their residents.
• Territories have used funding delivered through the Territorial Health Investment Fund to
develop and implement key health system improvement projects in area such as collaborative care,
primary care, and health human resources and capacity building.
• On February 7, 2023, the federal government announced $198.6B over 10 years to improve
health care for Canadians. This funding includes $175 million over five years for the Territorial Health
Investment Fund in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health care in the territories.
• This renewal will allow territories to further implement innovative projects within their health
systems and ensure Northerners have access to the health care they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE AMOUNT OR DURATION OF THE RENEWED FUNDING…
• The recently-announced funding of $175M over five years for the Territorial Health Investment
Fund will provide stable and predictable funding for territories to support necessary costs they incur,
including medical travel, and projects that can address the innovative delivery of health care in a
northern and remote context.
• The February 7th announcement also included funding for a new Indigenous Health Equity Fund,
which will provide an additional $2 billion over 10 years to help ensure access to quality and culturally
safe health care services, in line with the priorities of Indigenous partners.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with territories to ensure they are supported
as they look to implement key initiatives funded by the Territorial Health Investment Fund.
BACKGROUND
Territorial Health Investment Fund
The Territorial Health Investment Fund (THIF) recognizes the particular challenges of health care delivery
in the North. The objective of the THIF is to support territorial governments’ efforts to innovate and
transform their health care systems and ensure Northerners have access to the health care they need.
There are two streams of funding under the current THIF:
• the Innovation Funding Stream to support territorial efforts to innovate and transform their
health care systems; and
• the Medical Travel Stream to offset medical transportation costs to ensure Northerners have
access to the health care they need.
Budget 2021 renewed the THIF for two years, with $54M in new funding for 2021-22 and 2022-23. Of
that funding, $12.8M will be allocated to the Yukon ($6.4M per year, with $2.1M for medical travel and
$4.3M for innovation), $14.2M to the Northwest Territories ($7.1M per year, with $5.0M for medical
travel and $2.1M for innovation), and $27M to Nunavut ($13.5M per year, with $9.2M for medical travel
and $4.3M for innovation).
In 2021-22, key activities included:
• The Northwest Territories undertook work under its Primary Health Care Reform Initiative,
including associated demonstration projects, and began the first of two years of work to implement a
System Sustainability Plan, with a goal of strengthening health care service delivery in the territory.
• Yukon developed new cultural safety and humility training, continued to work towards the
launch of integrated and collaborative health service delivery models, and continued its rollout of the
Yukon’s integrated electronic health record system. It also continued to focus on implementing the
transformative recommendations set out in Putting People First (the report of the Independent Expert
Panel on the comprehensive review of health and social services in the Yukon).
• Nunavut supported work in its priority areas of health human resources and capacity building,
including initiatives to support the participation of Nunavut Inuit paraprofessionals within the health
workforce. It also continued to focus on its tuberculosis program, and the further implementation of the
community oral health program.
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister announced significant long-term federal investments of
$198.6 billion over 10 years through the Working Together to Improve Health Care for Canadians funding
package. Of this, $175 million over five years in grant funding was announced to renew the THIF, in
recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health care in the territories. Of this funding, $75
million will be allocated to Nunavut, $50 million to the Yukon, and $50 million to the Northwest
Territories.
Additional Funding
Since the February 7th announcement, territorial Premiers noted their appreciation for the renewal of
the THIF but have as noted in the press, have raised concerns about its amount and duration. Nunavut
has also continued to stress that it should receive a 50% share of the funding, given the territory’s
unique needs in terms of population health status and reliance on medical travel. Premiers have been
clear in their position that greater investments are needed in the THIF. They are requesting that the
federal government increase the THIF to align with the territorial business case (i.e. $750 million over 10
years), and have stated that the current federal offer is inadequate and unsustainable for their
governments to deliver health care in the territories. Territories have noted that additional THIF funding
will be critical to further advancing reconciliation in respect to health care delivery in the North.
CANNABIS
ISSUE
• Since its coming into force on October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act has created a strict legal
framework for controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada.
• The legislation is designed to keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and profits out of the
pockets of organized crime by fostering a robust legal and regulated industry.
KEY FACTS
• The legal cannabis market continues to displace the illicit market. According to Statistics Canada
data, the legal share of the value of cannabis consumed has steadily increased to 71% in the fourth
quarter of 2022, compared to just 9% prior to legalization.
KEY MESSAGES
• Since 2018, the Government has implemented a robust public health approach to keeping
cannabis out of the hands of youth and ensuring adults have access to a quality-controlled and regulated
supply, while reducing the illicit market.
• Since legalization, rates of use among youth have not changed significantly, and more and more
Canadians who consume cannabis are purchasing from legal retailers.
• Health Canada has launched an independent review of the legislation to examine the progress
made towards achieving the Act's objectives, and identify priority areas for improvement. An Expert
Panel is leading this credible and inclusive review.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT …
• The Act requires a legislative review to start three years after coming into force, and a report to
be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 18 months after the review begins.
• On September 22, Minister Bennett and I launched an independent legislative review, which will
assess the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives.
• The review focuses particularly on the health and cannabis consumption habits of young
persons, the impact of cannabis on Indigenous persons and communities, and the impact of the
cultivation of cannabis plants in a housing context.
IF PRESSED ON INCLUDING THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW …
• The Government actively monitors the medical access program and has committed to evaluate
the framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
• There has been significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for medical purposes
framework and this legislative review presents an opportunity to hear the views and perspectives of
these stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE MEDICAL ACCESS FRAMEWORK …
• Our Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis for medical purposes
for individuals who have the support of their health care practitioner.
• Health Canada is working to reduce the potential for abuse in partnership with the provincial
and territorial regulators of health care professionals, law enforcement and municipalities.
• The Government continues to actively monitor the medical access program and has committed
to evaluate the framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
IF PRESSED ON DRUGS CONTAINING CANNABIS …
• Prescription drugs containing cannabis, remain subject to requirements of the Cannabis Act and
the Food and Drugs Act, and require oversight by a health care practitioner.
• In July 2022, the Science Advisory Committee on Health Products Containing Cannabis provided
a final report to the government that outlined their independent scientific advice on safety, efficacy and
quality standards for potential non-prescription health products containing cannabidiol (CBD).
• The Committee’s report is one of many sources, including stakeholder feedback and scientific
evidence, informing the development of a pathway for non-prescription health products containing CBD.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITH A HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION …
• Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen oversight and reduce the risk of abuse.
• Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
health or public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
• As of February 28, 2023, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 1,530 registrations under
the Cannabis Regulations, including over 950 for reasons of public health and public safety.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES GRANTED TO INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS …
• Our Government remains committed to ensuring patients have access to cannabis for medical
purposes, while providing safeguards to reduce the risk of abuse of the system.
• Health Canada actively supports law enforcement by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a
day and seven days a week to assist with active investigations.
• When law enforcement action has been taken against individuals, Health Canada reviews the
information to determine if compliance and enforcement actions are warranted, and registrations for
cannabis production could be revoked.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS RESEARCH …
• Ongoing research is fundamental to understand the health and safety effects of cannabis use.
• Since 2017, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research has invested almost $30M in research on
cannabis.
• The Government has made investments of $20 million over five years for the Canadian Centre on
Substance Use and Addiction and Mental Health Commission of Canada to support research and assess
the impacts of cannabis on mental health.
• Health Canada has created a new framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate non-
therapeutic research on cannabis.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISE IN PEDIATRIC CANNABIS POISONINGS …
• Health Canada is concerned about the potential harms to children who accidentally consume
cannabis.
• This is why the Department issued a public advisory in December 2021 and an updated version
in April 2022. The advisory provides guidance on how to properly store cannabis, recognize and react to
accidental cannabis consumption and poisoning, and identifying the difference between legal and illegal
cannabis.
• Health Canada continues to educate Canadians on this important issue and monitors reports of
adverse reactions to cannabis.
IF PRESSED ON NON-COMPLIANT EDIBLE CANNABIS PRODUCTS THAT EXCEED THE REGULATORY LIMIT
FOR THC …
• The Cannabis Act and its regulations were designed first and foremost to protect public health
and public safety.
• Health Canada is aware of non-compliance regarding edible cannabis products with
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) quantities that exceed the allowable 10 mg per container limit.
• Health Canada is working with regulated parties to resolve these issues in a timely and
appropriate manner.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS WAX …
• The Cannabis Act and its regulations set out strict controls for legal cannabis products like
cannabis wax.
• We are aware of the issues regarding the sale of illicit cannabis wax products in certain
provinces. Illegal products are not subject to regulatory controls, are often appealing to youth and can
carry additional health risks.
• Health Canada continues to advise consumers to purchase and consume legal cannabis products,
choose products containing lower amounts of THC, and ensure that legal cannabis wax products comply
with all applicable rules.
IF PRESSED ON THE ANNOUNCEMENT BY PRESIDENT BIDEN PARDONING ALL FEDERAL OFFENSES OF
SIMPLE CANNABIS POSSESSION …
• We have a strong working relationship with the United States and are following President Biden’s
recent decision to pardon all prior federal offenses of simple cannabis possession.
• In Canada, adults convicted of simple possession of cannabis (without the intent to traffic) are
eligible to apply for a cannabis record suspension. While a cannabis record suspension does not erase a
conviction, it sets it aside from other criminal records.
• The Parole Board of Canada is responsible for granting record suspensions.
BACKGROUND
Cannabis
On October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act came into force, legalizing, strictly regulating and restricting
access to cannabis in Canada. The Act implements a new comprehensive public health approach that will
be more effective in protecting youth and keeping profits out of the pockets of criminals and organized
crime.
The Cannabis Act creates a legal and regulatory framework for controlling the production, distribution,
sale and possession of cannabis in Canada. This framework was informed by the recommendations of
the Task Force on Cannabis Legalization and Regulation.
The Act restricts youth access to cannabis; prohibits promotions that are designed to encourage youth to
use cannabis; imposes serious criminal penalties on people who break the law, especially those who
import or export cannabis illegally, or provide cannabis to youth; establishes strict product safety and
quality requirements; reduces the burden on the criminal justice system; provides for the legal
production of cannabis; allows adults to possess and access regulated, quality-controlled, legal cannabis;
and, enhances public awareness of the health risks associated with cannabis.
Implementation is a shared responsibility between the federal, provincial and territorial governments.
Subject to provincial or territorial restrictions, adults may legally: purchase limited amounts of fresh
cannabis, dried cannabis, cannabis oil, cannabis seeds, or cannabis plants from retailers authorized by
the provinces and territories; possess up to 30 grams of dried legal cannabis or equivalent in non-dried
form in public; consume cannabis in locations authorized by local jurisdictions; grow up to four cannabis
plants per household (not per person) for personal use, from licensed seeds or seedlings from licensed
suppliers; share up to 30 grams of dried cannabis or equivalent with other adults; and, make legal
cannabis-containing products at home, such as food and drinks, provided that dangerous organic
solvents are not used in making them.
Possession, production, distribution and sale outside the legal system remains illegal and subject to
criminal penalties proportionate to the seriousness of the offence, ranging from ticketing up to a
maximum penalty of 14 years’ imprisonment.
To further protect youth, the Cannabis Act prohibits anyone from selling or providing cannabis to any
person under the age of 18 years. The Cannabis Act creates two new criminal offences, with maximum
penalties of 14 years in jail for: giving or selling cannabis to youth; and, using a youth to commit a
cannabis-related offence.
To prevent youth from using cannabis, the Cannabis Act also prohibits: products, promotions, packaging
and labelling that are appealing to youth; the sale of cannabis through self-service displays or vending
machines; promotion of cannabis, except in narrow circumstances where the promotion could not be
seen by a young person; and, false, misleading or deceptive advertising, sponsorships, testimonials and
endorsements or other forms of promotion that could entice young people to use cannabis.
Driving while impaired by cannabis, or any other drug, is illegal. Law enforcement officers are trained to
detect and deter drug-impaired drivers using Standardized Field Sobriety Testing and Drug Recognition
Experts.
Border rules have not changed. Taking cannabis, or any product containing cannabis, across Canada’s
international borders, whether you are leaving or entering Canada, remains illegal and can result in
serious criminal penalties both at home and abroad. Cannabis is illegal in most countries. Previous use of
cannabis, or any substance prohibited by local law, could result in a traveller being denied entry to his or
her destination country.
Legislative Review
The Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its administration three years
following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and that a report of the review’s
findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of the start of the review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of the
Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young persons
in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of cannabis plants
in a dwelling-house.
On September 22, 2022, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions
launched the legislative review of the Act. An Expert Panel, chaired by Morris Rosenberg, is leading the
review, and a report including findings or recommendations resulting from the review will be tabled in
both Houses of Parliament within 18 months.
On September 22, 2022, an online engagement process to gather perspectives from the public,
stakeholders and Indigenous groups on the cannabis framework was launched. The results will inform
the Panel’s work.
The Government of Canada has made progress toward the implementation of the cannabis framework
by putting in place measures aimed at protecting children and youth from accessing cannabis;
establishing a strictly regulated, legal supply chain for cannabis, and by making significant investments in
public education, awareness, research, monitoring and surveillance efforts.
The review provides an initial and early opportunity to assess progress towards achieving the objectives
of the Act, and to help ensure that the legislation is meeting the needs and expectations of Canadians
through a credible, evidence-driven review process.
Medical Access Framework
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers the medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
Within the current regulatory framework, individuals who have an authorization from their health care
practitioner can access cannabis for medical purposes in one of the following ways:
• purchase quality-controlled cannabis from a wide variety of federally licensed sellers inspected
by Health Canada;
• produce an authorized amount of cannabis for their own medical purposes; or
• designate someone to produce it for them.
As of December 30, 2022, there were 224,371 patients registered with federally licensed sellers (Note:
these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than one licensed
seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of February 28, 2023, there were 19,990 individuals registered with Health Canada for personal and
designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis products,
including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties on
cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Canadians who have been authorized by their health care practitioner can access cannabis for medical
purposes by producing cannabis or by designating someone to produce it for them.
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements, which are designed to
ensure that cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized
health care practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in excess
of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate, and may not sell cannabis to any person.
Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized to
produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for them, can
tend to the plants.
Health Canada appreciates that, as in any regulatory framework, there will be instances where
individuals choose to operate outside of the law. Health Canada supports law enforcement
representatives on a daily basis by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a day and seven days a week
to confirm, when necessary, that specific individuals are authorized to produce cannabis for medical
purposes.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure it is
abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
Drugs Containing Cannabis
The authorization of a therapeutic product in Canada is based on a review of an application submitted by
a manufacturer. The decision to submit an application for review is made by the company. In the absence
of an application from a company, Health Canada cannot authorize marketing of a therapeutic product.
Within this cannabis legislative framework, two prescription drugs containing cannabis and one synthetic
cannabinoid have been approved for sale. Sativex (nabiximols) contains tetrahydrocannabinol (THC) and
cannabidiol (CBD), and Marinol (dronabinol) contains THC. Sativex is available to Canadian patients, but
Marinol was voluntarily withdrawn from the market by its manufacturer in 2012.
Health Canada currently has two submissions under review for a drug containing cannabis, including one
with synthetic THC (dronabinol) and another with CBD.
Drugs containing the synthetic cannabinoid nabilone have also been approved. Nabilone, a synthetic
cannabinoid which does not exist in nature, is not captured by the definition of cannabis in the Cannabis
Act, and remains scheduled under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act as a narcotic.
There are currently no authorized veterinary drugs containing cannabis.
Accidental Pediatric Ingestion of Cannabis and Poisonings
Various sources of evidence indicate significant associations between cannabis legalization and increases
in cannabis-related emergency department visits, hospitalizations, intensive care unit admissions and
poison centre calls, both in Canada and across many U.S. states.
These increases have been attributed to accidental ingestion of edible cannabis in those under 12 years
old. This is largely driven by children younger than 5 and sources of cannabis that are either unknown or
illegal. Illegal edible products – often referred to as ‘copycat’ products – resemble popular confectionary
products (e.g. Starbursts, Skittles) that come in colorful packaging and are appealing to children. Further,
illegal edible products can contain 100 mg of THC or more per package, whereas legal cannabis products
cannot exceed more than 10 mg of THC per package. The 10 mg THC limit on legal edible cannabis
products exists to protect against accidental consumption and overconsumption and poisoning.
A recent research paper reported that between January 2020 and September 2021 when the full range
of cannabis products were accessible including edible cannabis, the hospitalization rate among children
in Alberta, British Columbia, Ontario was 7.5 times higher relative to the pre-legalization period. In
Quebec, the hospitalization rate during the same period of time was only 3 times higher than the pre-
legalization period.
Since the coming into force of the Cannabis Act and its regulations, Health Canada through the Canada
Vigilance Database monitors, assesses and reports on adverse reactions associated with cannabis. The
findings are used to inform evidence-based information on health and safety risks with cannabis,
including risk communications and educational resources.
Non-Therapeutic Research on Cannabis
Since the Cannabis Act and its regulations first came into force, stakeholders have indicated that the
clinical trial framework has resulted in challenges in conducting non-therapeutic research on cannabis.
Previously, most non-therapeutic research on cannabis involving human participants was considered a
“clinical trial” under the Food and Drug Regulations. Many researchers have been unable to meet the
requirements and therefore have had difficulty securing authorization under the Food and Drug
Regulations using legal, regulated cannabis products available for purchase by adult consumers. These
difficulties, which are largely due to the fact that these products do not meet the Good Manufacturing
Practices requirements that are necessary for clinical trails in Canada and internationally, have led to
missed opportunities to advance the knowledge and evidence base about cannabis, including its effects
and uses in a non-therapeutic context.
Health Canada created a new framework under the Cannabis Regulations to facilitate non-therapeutic
research on cannabis to increase the knowledge about cannabis, and the risks of using cannabis
products and to reduce the regulatory burden on stakeholders. The amendments facilitate such research
by solely regulating them under a cannabis research licence issued under the Cannabis Regulations.
Research with cannabis for therapeutic purposes will continue to be regulated under the clinical trial
framework under the Food and Drug Regulations and will continue to be conducted with the same level
of rigour and concern for patient safety.
Cannabis Wax
Cannabis wax is a term used to refer to chemically concentrated extracts of cannabis dissolved in a
petroleum-based solvent. Other terms used include hash oil, shatter, and budder. These products have
high THC amounts. They are consumed by “dabbing” – which is inhaling the vapours created when the
product is heated at a very high temperature (but not combusted).
Cannabis wax is a federally legal product, and is regulated under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations. Cannabis wax and similar products fall under the “cannabis extracts intended for inhalation”
class of cannabis products, and can be legally produced by federal license holders and sold by authorized
retailers.
Federal Regulatory Controls
Cannabis wax is subject to various regulatory controls including rules governing the production of licit
cannabis products, including the Good Production Practices, rules around potency and THC limits, and
rules around packaging and labelling so these products are not appealing to young persons. They meet
the definition of a concentrate (products with more than 3% THC and are subject to a maximum public
possession limit of 7.5 grams.
President Biden Pardoning all Federal Offenses of Simple Cannabis Possession
On October 6, 2022, U.S. President Biden announced that he is pardoning all prior federal offenses of
simple cannabis possession, and called on state Governors to do the same at the state level. This does
not apply to charges for trafficking.
The White House estimates that 6,500 people with prior federal convictions and thousands of such
convictions under Washington, DC law could benefit from this relief.
This decision does not legalize or decriminalize cannabis in the US, but it does represent a shift away
from the War on Drugs approach to cannabis at the federal level.
In the same announcement, President Biden instructed the Secretary of Health and Human Services and
the Attorney General to initiate the administrative process to review how cannabis is scheduled under
federal law. In the U.S., cannabis is currently a Schedule 1 drug, the same schedule as heroin, fentanyl
and other dangerous narcotics. The review by the FDA could take years and reclassification of cannabis is
not guaranteed.
In Canada, individuals must make an application to have a simple cannabis possession charge waived. On
August 1, 2019, Bill C-93, An Act to provide a no-cost expedited record suspension process for simple
possession of cannabis, came into force. This legislation waives record suspension application wait
periods and application fees for those convicted only of simple possession of cannabis. The record
suspension will be ordered so long as the individual can show that their only convictions are for simple
possession of cannabis.
MEDICAL ACCESS PROGRAM
ISSUE
• Successive court decisions have established the right of individuals to have reasonable access to
cannabis for medical purposes. Health Canada continues to take action to strengthen its oversight and
reduce the risk of abuse of the medical access program using authorities under the Cannabis
Regulations.
KEY FACTS
• The number of individuals registering to produce cannabis for medical purposes has decreased
significantly in the past year due to various factors, including the actions that Health Canada has taken to
address risk of abuse of the program.
• Currently, the number of registrations for the program is the lowest since the implementation of
the Cannabis Act.
• As of February 28, 2023, there were 19,990 individuals registered with Health Canada for
personal and designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
• As of December 31, 2022, there were approximately 224,370 patients registered with federally
licensed sellers.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis for medical purposes
for individuals who have the support of their health care practitioner.
• Health Canada is working to reduce the potential for abuse in partnership with the provincial
and territorial regulators of health care professionals, law enforcement and municipalities.
• The Government continues to actively monitor the medical access program and has committed
to evaluate the framework within the legislative review of the Cannabis Act.
IF PRESSED ON ACTIONS TAKEN TO ADDRESS HIGH AUTHORIZATIONS …
• During the registration process, Health Canada actively seeks additional evidence from health
care practitioners to substantiate or support high authorizations and communicates any concerning
trends with the appropriate regulatory colleges on a regular basis.
• To date, Health Canada has sent more than 3,490 letters to health care practitioners and
applicants requesting more information.
• If a request is not substantiated and represents a risk to public health and safety, Health Canada
uses its authority to refuse a registration.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH CANADA SUPPORTS LAW ENFORCEMENT
• Health Canada actively supports law enforcement by providing a dedicated 24-7 service to
confirm whether specific individuals are authorized to possess or produce a limited amount of cannabis
for medical purposes.
• The Department also provides information, where appropriate, to law enforcement and other
authorities to assist with active investigations.
• Health Canada is prepared to act on evidence that individuals who are registered to grow
cannabis for medical purposes are not respecting the terms and conditions of their registration or the
regulatory requirements.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH CANADA IS ADDRESSING PUBLIC HEALTH AND SAFETY RISKS …
• Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada may refuse or revoke a registration on public
health or public safety grounds, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market or
activity.
• As of February 28, 2023, Health Canada has refused or revoked over 1,530 registrations under
the Cannabis Regulations, including over 950 for reasons of public health and public safety.
• Health Canada has also increased compliance monitoring, including increasing the number of
risk-based inspections of personal/designated production sites in 2022-23 by 40% from the previous
year.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH CANADA ACTS ON COMPLAINTS …
• Health Canada takes all complaints seriously and is prepared to act on any evidence received
that individuals who are registered to grow a limited amount of cannabis for medical purposes are not
respecting the terms and conditions of their registration.
• If warranted, after further investigation, Health Canada will take appropriate action to correct
any potential non-compliance with the Cannabis Regulations.
• 621 complaints have been tracked since November 9, 2020 and 406 compliance promotion
letters (as of February 28, 2023) have been sent based on complaints.
IF PRESSED ON HOW HEALTH CANADA SUPPORTS HEALTH CARE PRACTITIONERS …
• Health Canada has published documents on its website for health care practitioners that provide
information on research into the medical use of cannabis, dosing and administration, and information for
patients.
• The Government of Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research through the
Integrated Cannabis Research Strategy are investing in research to understand the potential therapeutic
and non-therapeutic benefits and risks of cannabis use.
• Over the last five years, the Government of Canada, through the CIHR, has invested nearly $49
million in cannabis research.
BACKGROUND
Medical Regime
Health Canada administers the medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis
Regulations.
Within the current regulatory framework, individuals who have an authorization from their health care
practitioner can access cannabis for medical purposes in one of the following ways:
• purchase quality-controlled cannabis from a wide variety of federally licensed sellers inspected
by Health Canada;
• produce an authorized amount of cannabis for their own medical purposes; or
• designate someone to produce it for them.
As of December 31, 2022, there were approximately 224,370 patients registered with federally licensed
sellers (Note: these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than
one licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
As of February 28, 2023, there were 19,990 individuals registered with Health Canada for personal and
designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis products,
including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties on
cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
Canadians who have been authorized by their health care practitioner can access cannabis for medical
purposes by producing cannabis or by designating someone to produce it for them.
Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements, which are designed to
ensure that cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized
health care practitioner.
Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—the relevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in excess
of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate, and may not sell cannabis to any person.
Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals authorized to
produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it for them, can
tend to the plants.
Health Canada appreciates that, as in any regulatory framework, there will be instances where
individuals choose to operate outside of the law. Health Canada supports law enforcement
representatives on a daily basis by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a day and seven days a week
to confirm, when necessary, that specific individuals are authorized to produce cannabis for medical
purposes.
Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to ensure it is
abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
REGULATING PEDIATRIC MEDICINES
ISSUE
• Access to medicines for children in Canada has been a long-standing issue, and is a global
challenge. Health Canada is working with national and international partners to improve both access to
and the regulation of medicines for children.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is responsible for regulating all therapeutic products, including medicines for
children.
• Health Canada has mechanisms in place to prioritize the review of medicines addressing unmet
needs for children.
• During the pandemic, Health Canada expedited the review of several vaccines and treatments
for COVID-19, some of them for use in children.
• Providing access to drugs for children remains a priority for Health Canada. Currently, the
majority of drugs prescribed to children are used off-label, meaning outside of the approved use of the
drug.
• Health Canada has an action plan in place to increase access to needed drugs, including
appropriate formulations that were specifically developed and studied in children.
KEY MESSAGES
Access to Drugs for Children
• Health Canada prioritizes the review of drugs addressing unmet needs, including drugs for
children, with a target review time of 180 days compared to the regular timeframe of 300 days.
• Health Canada authorized 17 new drugs for use in children in 2020 and 10 additional new drugs
in 2021. Health Canada recognizes that more needs to be done to increase access to safe and effective
medicines for children and is working with key stakeholders to make this happen.
• In 2020 Health Canada established a Pediatric Drug Action Plan, with the ultimate vision that
children in Canada have access to the medicines they need in age-appropriate formulations. A number of
policy and regulatory actions are currently being implemented.
Rare Diseases and Children
• Canada’s national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, led by Health Canada, which will be
launched later this year, would help to ensure patients have improved access to effective rare disease
drugs, leading to better health outcomes.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO MEDICINES FOR CHILDREN …
• Health Canada is committed to increasing access to drugs for children by implementing
regulatory measures similar to those that exist in other jurisdictions. For example, Health Canada is
looking to compel pharmaceutical companies to conduct pediatric studies on medicines that are
expected to be used in pediatric populations, and to submit those data to Health Canada for approval. A
pilot is under development to implement the pediatric regulation in policy in late 2023.
• Health Canada is also working closely with the Canadian pediatric medical community to
develop a draft list of priority medicines to include in Canada’s first National Priority List of Pediatric
Drugs.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada Initiatives to Increase Overall Access to Drugs for Children:
Access to medicines for children in Canada has been a long-standing challenge. Up to 75% of drugs
prescribed to children in Canada is done off-label (i.e. without safety or efficacy data in the pediatric
population) because pharmaceutical developers tend not to focus their research on children.
To address this gap, the Department has developed a Pediatric Drug Action Plan (PDAP) with the
ultimate vision that children and youth (0-17 years) in Canada have access to the medicines they need in
age appropriate formulations. There are a number of specific actions within the plan that are tied to its 3
main goals:
• Increasing the development of pediatric medicines and formulations;
• Improving access to pediatric medicines and formulations; and
• Providing more information to Canadians.
Pediatric stakeholders across the country (i.e., academics, clinicians, patient organizations, Health
Technology Assessment organizations and industry) were consulted regularly throughout the
development of the PDAP, and continue to be engaged through early implementation. The pediatric
stakeholder community are broadly supportive of the goals and focus areas of the PDAP.
Implementation of various activities within the PDAP has begun and will continue over the next 5 or
more years. Current priorities include:
• Developing a “pediatric regulation” (pediatric provisions within the Food and Drug Regulations)
that will bring Health Canada into alignment with other jurisdictions in requiring pediatric studies to be
completed and submitted when it is expected that a drug will be used in the pediatric population;
• Assessing the impact of our current pediatric incentive (see below), and exploring other
incentive models to bring more pediatric products to Canada; and
• Working with pediatricians across Canada to develop a National Priority List of Pediatric Drugs
that are needed for the pediatric population. Health Canada will identify the regulatory pathways and
flexibilities that can be offered to bring these products to Canada.
Health Canada is looking to include the new “pediatric regulation” in the Food and Drug Regulations in
2025/26. These new pediatric provisions will be tested via a policy pilot scheduled for launch in 2023.
Current Pediatric Incentive: Under the current regulations, all manufacturers of innovative drugs are
provided with a guaranteed minimum period of eight years of market exclusivity. If a sponsor provides
clinical trial data that increases the knowledge about the use of the drug in pediatric populations,
regardless of whether the data results in a pediatric indication, an additional six months may be added
to this period of market exclusivity if the data is found to be acceptable by Health Canada. The sponsor
may submit this information at any point during the first five years of the eight-year period of market
exclusivity in order to obtain the six-month extension.
National Priority List of Pediatric Drugs (NPLPD): The purpose of the list will be to highlight the pediatric
therapies most urgently needed in Canada, and to work with industry stakeholders to support the
submission and approval of these products. The NPLPD will be developed by Health Canada based on
the expert advice from the pediatric medical community.
Because improving access to medicines for pediatric populations is a global and multi-faceted issue, in
order to address the challenges and barriers, Health Canada will work across the health and other
government departments, and with our external national and global partners, on key initiatives. This
collaborative approach will take time, but is already underway through, for example:
• Regulatory Cooperation Forum: the European Medicines Agency and Health Canada are working
together on a pediatric workplan that aims to align regulatory approaches to pediatric medicines in both
jurisdictions
• World Health Organization – Paediatric Regulatory Network: brings together regulators from
across the world to address global issues of access to medicines for children. Health Canada is the co-
chair of this network.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. Approximately
50% of people affected by rare diseases are children, and 70% of rare diseases with a genetic basis start
in childhood.
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors. These issues are exacerbated for children with rare diseases.
Economic, ethical, regulatory, and infrastructure considerations associated with the conduct of health
research in children have limited the numbers of clinical trials conducted with children.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up to $500
million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. We are
working with provinces, territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases to be launched in the near future.
HEALTH PRODUCT SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Health product shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic and
recent shortages such as the pediatric analgesic shortage further exposed vulnerabilities in the health
product supply chain that impacted supplies of products required to treat patients with COVID-19 and
other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national health product supply continues. With the
creation of an internal Drug Shortages Task Force, Health Canada has bolstered its capacity for
surveillance, data collection and analysis, and engagement with provinces and territories, key supply
chain players, and patient groups to mitigate impacts of shortages and move towards prevention where
possible. Health Canada is also exploring medium- and longer-term policy options to improve resilience
of health product supply for Canada.
KEY FACTS
• Canada is a small market that relies heavily on imported products, making it vulnerable to
shortages. During the pandemic, global supply challenges and unprecedented demand further
contributed to shortages in Canada.
• Lessons learned from the pandemic informed the development of new regulations that provide
new tools to address health product shortages.
• As of March 6, 2023, 74 drug shortages were de-escalated from critical status, out of a total of
100 that were deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
• As of March 6, 2023, 343 of the 468 medical device shortages reported through the mandatory
framework are now resolved.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed health products is a top priority for our
Government.
• Considerable efforts have been made during the pandemic to respond to disruptions in the
supply of health products; the recent shortage of pediatric analgesics demonstrates the need to remain
vigilant.
• In 2021, additional regulations came into force to provide new tools to help prevent and mitigate
health product shortages and to protect supply.
• Health Canada continues to work with provinces and territories, industry, the health care sector
and patient groups as well as our international partners to closely monitor supply to minimize the impact
of shortages and prevent, when possible.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PREVENT FUTURE SHORTAGES …
• Health Canada has bolstered capacity to address shortages by establishing an internal Drug
Shortages Task Force. We are also exploring medium-to-longer-term policy options to improve Canada’s
health product supply resilience.
• The Department remains focused on doing everything possible to ensure Canadians have access
to the health products they need, when they need them.
BACKGROUND
Shortages in Canada
Health product shortages are a growing global issue. Canada is particularly vulnerable to shortages due
to its small market share and reliance on imported products. 68% of Canadian drugs are imported from
outside of Canada and 83% of activities related to drug production (e.g., manufacturing, packaging,
labeling) are performed outside of Canada. Similarly, the majority of medical devices on the Canadian
market are imported. Further, Canada holds only 2% of the global market share for drug sales and 1.8%
of the global market share for medical devices.
Health Canada’s Role
Health product shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of health product shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
federal leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
and practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and territories
and stakeholders across the supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory
measures, and to explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Several factors are taken into account to determine both the potential impact of a shortage of health
products and the actions required by Health Canada. Factors such as whether the shortage is national in
scope, whether alternative supplies are available and whether the product is considered medically
necessary are all considered in determining the potential impact.
Health Canada established the Drug Shortages Task Force in November 2022. The Task Force has
bolstered the Department’s capacity for surveillance, data collection and analysis, and to support the
development and implementation of medium- to longer-term policy options to improve Canada’s drug
and other health product resilience.
New tools to address shortages
The pandemic has had major impacts on drugs and medical devices in Canada and globally. The number
of national/critical shortages increased significantly throughout the pandemic. As well, secondary effects
from the pandemic are expected to persist in the medium to long term, such as fluctuating demand,
supply chain challenges and healthcare system recovery.
Additional authorities were added in the Food and Drug Regulations and the Medical Devices
Regulations, which allow the Minister to:
• Permit the exceptional importation of drugs and medical devices to address a shortage or an
anticipated shortage. Imported products in this case do not need to fully meet Canadian regulatory
requirements but must be manufactured to comparable quality standards.
• Require manufacturers and importers of specified medical devices to report shortages and
discontinuances that could lead to a shortage.
• If required, request that drug establishment licence holders and medical device manufacturers,
importers, and distributors provide information needed to assess, prevent, or alleviate a shortage.
The regulations also respond to risks posed by bulk importation frameworks, such as the one established
by the United States. A prohibition was put in place on drug establishment licence holders from
distributing certain drugs intended for the Canadian market for use outside of Canada if that distribution
could cause or exacerbate a shortage. This serves to ensure that bulk importation frameworks do not
cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Health Product Shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage health product shortages and has
leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify
shortage signals earlier. For example, through FPT collaboration, a process for the allocation of imported
critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The process enables
companies to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial governments to allocate supply
where it is needed most. This has been effective in managing limited supplies of therapies being used to
treat COVID-19 (e.g., Tocilizumab, Remdesivir) as well as drugs authorised by Health Canada facing a high
global demand (e.g., Paxlovid), and to ensure fair distribution of imported foreign-labelled products in
Canada (e.g., pediatric analgesics).
Working with provinces and territories, Health Canada established a COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve in
2020 that complemented other drug shortage mitigation efforts. It included 12 drugs used to support
patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives, pain relievers,
antibiotics, muscle relaxants, and inhalers. The Critical Drug Reserve served as a backstop for Canada’s
existing supply, complemented the existing drug shortage management systems, and mitigated critical
drug shortages, which relieved pressures on provincial and territorial health care systems through
several pandemic waves. This pandemic initiative ended on June 30, 2022.
During the pandemic and beyond, Health Canada has worked with FPT partners to address medical
device shortages. Work continues to formalize FPT collaboration and strengthen relationships in the
medical devices sector.
With the above-noted new tools in place, and a strong basis of FPT and stakeholder collaboration, Health
Canada has improved its ability to help address shortages of health products.
In light of more recent shortages of children’s analgesics, antibiotics and adult cough and cold medicines,
the Department is now focused on exploring options to improve signal detection, data collection and
analysis to inform response measures, and medium- to longer-term policy options, practices and
approaches to further improve Canada’s supply resilience. This work will continue to be based on federal
leadership in mobilizing key players to take action in their domains, while continuing to use the
regulatory framework to support federal action, such as authorizing exceptional importation of health
products to fill supply gaps.
INFANT FORMULA SHORTAGE
ISSUE
• The Abbott manufacturing facility in Sturgis, Michigan was closed on February 17, 2022, due to
possible bacterial contamination and has been gradually resuming production since July 1, 2022. The
Canadian supply continues to be fragile for some infant formulas available to consumers as well as
specialized products reserved for medical use. The voluntary recall by the manufacturer Perrigo for one
of its infant formulas on March 18, 2023 represents a very small proportion of the Canadian powdered
infant formula market, but may heighten concerns among Canadian families about infant formula supply.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada reacted promptly after the Sturgis closure by publishing an interim policy on
March 10, 2022, to facilitate the importation of equivalent products from other countries in order to
mitigate the shortage. To date, the importation of 72 products (46 specialized products, 9 regular infant
formulas, and 17 hospital products) has been authorized pursuant to the interim policy and the list is
updated regularly. The interim policy was extended until December 31, 2023.
• The extended absence of Abbott products has destabilized the market, affecting the supply of
different types of products over time.
• In the spring and summer of 2022, the supply of specialized products for people with rare
metabolic diseases and for infants with food allergies reached critical levels in Canada.
o Metabolic products are not available to the general public. Their supply is very limited and is
managed by specialized distributors in close collaboration with healthcare professionals caring for
patients with metabolic disorders. Health Canada continues to play an important role in promoting
information sharing between these partners and manufacturers to improve shipment predictability and
ensure that the needs of Canadian patients are met. Return to regular distribution of Abbott products is
expected this Spring.
o Health Canada mitigated the shortage of hypoallergenic formula by permitting the importation
of products from countries with similar regulatory requirements, convening regular stakeholder
(provinces, territories, manufacturers, distributors, health professionals, non-governmental
organizations) meetings, recommending conservation measures, developing communication materials
for the public and for the healthcare community, monitoring supply, and assisting with equitable
distribution. The supply of hypoallergenic formula is now stable and meets the needs of Canadian
families.
• Abbott’s Sturgis plant reopened on July 1, 2022, initially prioritizing specialized products.
Currently, production remains limited and is mainly destined for the U.S market, with the exception of
certain metabolic products shipped to Canada.
• Given the ongoing absence of most Abbott products on the Canadian market and the related
disruptions this has caused, the regular infant formulas are now more regularly out of stock, in particular
powdered formulas since they are less expensive than the liquid formats. Health Canada has secured
additional shipments of powdered generic brands between November and January. Since February, a
powdered formula imported under the interim policy has reached store shelves.
• Since Fall 2022, Abbott has been unable to fulfil their contracts for specialized hospital products,
including formulas for premature babies. Other manufacturers have been successfully filling the gap and
confirm having the capacity to continue doing this moving forward.
• A voluntary recall was issued in Canada by the manufacturer Perrigo on March 18, 2023, for
three lots of Nestlé Good Start Soothe, a regular powdered infant formula, due to possible
contamination, as a precautionary measure. While this recall occurs in the context of ongoing concerns
over limited supply of regular infant formulas in Canada, the number of units affected by the recall
represents only a small percentage of the Canadian market.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is working tirelessly to address the limited supply of infant formula. We know
how challenging this situation is for families.
• Health Canada’s interim policy is an important tool to mitigate the limited supply of infant
formula. Products from other countries have helped strengthen the Canadian supply of infant formulas
available to consumers as well as products reserved for medical use.
• The Perrigo recall is a precautionary measure, contamination has not been detected in the
recalled products.
• Health Canada continues to actively engage with manufacturers and retailers to help strengthen
the supply for all types of formula.
• Health Canada plays a key role in information sharing and has issued a range of relevant
information to the public and healthcare professionals to help them navigate the limited supply of infant
formula.
• Health Canada will continue collaborating with provinces, territories, and key stakeholders to
manage the limited supply until the situation has fully stabilized.
IF PRESSED ON THE PERRIGO RECALL…
• The recall does not appear to be related to any systemic problems in the manufacturing plant.
• The recall affects only three lots of products in Canada. Similar products from other
manufacturers are available.
• Health Canada continues to work closely with manufacturers to increase the supply of all types
of infant formula.
IF PRESSED ON THE DURATION OF THE SHORTAGE…
• Abbott’s Sturgis plant had resumed production July 1, 2022, but the return to production has
been slower than expected. Production is expected to return to normal levels around the middle of
2023.
• Health Canada works closely with manufacturers to maintain a continued supply of all types of
infant formulas, including those that are available at retailers and those reserved for medical purposes.
• Many products are approved for temporary importation to strengthen supply.
• Health Canada will continue to work hard to minimize the impacts of the limited supply of infant
formula on Canadian families until the situation has fully stabilized.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL ACTIONS THE GOVERNMENT SHOULD TAKE…
• Given the serious nature of this situation, we have been working closely with stakeholders to
proactively resolve barriers that could compromise access to products as the situation evolves.
BACKGROUND
1. RECALLS
Recall of Abbott products and plant closure in February 2022
A recall of certain Abbott brand powdered infant formula was issued on February 17, 2022, after cases of
infant illness caused by Cronobacter and Salmonella bacteria were reported to the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration (FDA) between September 2021 and January 2022, including one fatal case associate
with Cronobacter sakazakii. Another fatal case linked to this bacterium was reported about a week after
the recall. No cases of illness linked to the recalled formulas were reported in Canada.
• Cronobacter is not commonly linked to human disease. In rare instances, it is associated with
severe intestinal infection (necrotizing enterocolitis) and blood poisoning (septicemia), especially in
newborns.
• Salmonella usually causes short-term symptoms such as fever, headache, vomiting, nausea,
abdominal pain and diarrhea. However, young children, pregnant women, the elderly and people with
weakened immune systems can develop more severe and sometimes fatal symptoms.
Recalled products were from the Abbott manufacturing facility in Sturgis, Michigan. Although five strains
of Cronobacter were found in the production plant, none of them was an exact match for the patient
samples.
The recall includes regular and specialized infant formulas including hypoallergenic products. Only
powdered formulas were affected by the recall. Liquid ready-to-feed formulas and liquid concentrate
have not been recalled and are safe.
The Sturgis facility in Michigan is a key supplier for many countries including the United States (US) and
Canada. Most of its production was destined for the US market and the rest to more than 30 countries.
Its closure created a global shortage of these products, although the North American market appears to
be most affected. Other manufacturers have increased their production capacity, but it is difficult to fully
compensate the volume usually produced at the Abbott Sturgis facility. There are currently no facilities
manufacturing infant formula in Canada.
Although Abbott’s Sturgis plant has been reopened since July 1, the return to normal production is
slower than anticipated and may still require several months.
Perrigo recall in March 2023
A voluntary recall was issued in Canada by Perrigo on March 18, 2023, for three lots of Nestlé Good Start
Soothe, a regular powdered infant formula for babies 0-12 months old. The recall was initiated by the
manufacturer due to potential bacterial contamination with Cronobacter.
The product is being recalled as a precautionary measure. No products impacted by the recall have
tested positive for contamination and no illnesses have been reported in Canada or the USA. While this
recall occurs in the context of ongoing concerns over limited supply of regular infant formulas in Canada,
the number of units affected by the recall represents only a small percentage of the Canadian market.
The recall does not appear to be related to any systemic problem in the manufacturing plant. However,
given that the manufacturer will destroy some product, this may make the current limited supply more
challenging for the next two months. Therefore, the recall could exacerbate concerns from families who
are already struggling to find supply.
The recalled product is a regular formula but contains partially hydrolyzed proteins suitable for babies
with gastrointestinal discomfort. Alternate products with comparable features are currently available on
the Canadian market.
2. TYPES OF PRODUCTS AND SUPPLY
Metabolic products
• Metabolic products are used for the treatment of inborn errors of metabolism that result in the
inability to metabolize specific amino acids, carbohydrates or fatty acids.
• Approximately 2000 Canadian patients (infants, children and adults) currently require metabolic
products; while the incidence of metabolic disorders is relatively low (1 in 30,000 to 1 in 200,000
newborn babies, depending on the disorder), these products are essential to the survival of affected
individuals.
• Metabolic products are used only under medical supervision and are not available at retail. In
Canada, they are obtained through the National Food Distribution Centre, a non-profit organization
solely dedicated to the distribution of metabolic products. They work in close collaboration with
registered dietitians and health care professionals and apply just-in-time inventory management for the
whole country.
• Patients using metabolic products are particularly affected by the shortage, because there are
few or no equivalent products, and switching metabolic formulas can cause problems with palatability
and gastrointestinal intolerance.
• This situation has remained sensitive since February 2022. Abbott has signaled that new
production of metabolic products from Sturgis should be shipped to Canada in April/May 2023, which
should provide relief to the metabolic community.
Hypoallergenic infant formula
• Hypoallergenic formulas contain extensively hydrolyzed proteins (for mild allergies) or are amino
acid based (for severe or multiple allergies). Symptoms of allergy include digestive disturbances that may
affect infant growth. Cases of severe allergy can result in an anaphylactic shock.
• Up to 2-2.5% of infants have food allergies, with an estimated 1.2% suffering from allergies to
milk protein. Considering the birth rate and the breastfeeding rate in Canada, it is estimated that this
represents between 3,000 and 6,000 Canadian infants. Sales data suggests that these products are more
widely used than accounted for by allergy prevalence, due in part to consumer perception of benefit,
and re-imbursement of these products in some provinces. The supply of hypoallergenic formula reached
a low point in June. Since that time the shortage has largely subsided and is now replaced by a limited
but stable supply.
• In the spring and summer of 2022, Health Canada recommended that hypoallergenic formula be
accessed only at the pharmacy counter during the shortage to help manage the supply and to facilitate
the distribution of products imported under the Interim Policy.
• Hypoallergenic formulas meeting bilingual labelling requirements have returned their products
to store shelves since October 2022. Some products imported during the shortage under the Health
Canada Interim Policy do not meet bilingual labelling requirements; these will continue to be available
for order at the pharmacy counter while supplies last, even after the interim policy expires. Bilingual
labels are available on Health Canada’s website and from the pharmacist.
Regular formula
• Regular infant formula will typically contain intact proteins, although some products may also
contain partially hydrolyzed proteins for babies with intolerances and gastrointestinal discomfort.
• Regular infant formula continued to be available on shelves during the shortage. Health Canada
has been receiving signals since the fall that the supply of regular infant formula is now more sensitive
than it was earlier in 2022. In particular, less expensive options such as store brand powdered formulas,
have been frequently out of stock in most of Canada.
• Health Canada receives inquiries from concerned members of the public and elected officials
regarding the supply of regular infant formula, highlighting difficulties associated with switching to a new
infant formula and the limited supply of lower cost options.
• Health Canada engaged with manufacturers to discuss the supply needs and explore solutions to
increase options for consumers.
· Shipments of generic brands of powdered formulas already sold in Canada, such as Kirkland
(Costco) and Parent’s Choice (Walmart), were increased between November and January to alleviate
some of the pressures for Canadian families. Regular shipments of these formulas will continue moving
forward, although volumes will be lower than the fall. The production of the President’s Choice product
line (Loblaws/Shoppers Drug Mart) has been discontinued.
· One powdered infant formula imported under the Health Canada Interim Policy (Abbott’s Similac
Advance) is now available across Canada to offer more lower cost options for Canadian families. This
product has an English label. Signage on store shelves direct the consumer to the manufacturer website
or the pharmacy counter for translated label information. A hyperlink is also provided on our interim
policy webpage to access bilingual information, as is the case for all listed products that would be
available to consumers.
· Health Canada is actively working with Modilac, a foreign manufacturer with no footprint in the
Canadian infant formula market, to facilitate the importation of their powdered formula.
Hospital products
• Since October-December 2022, Abbott’s ability to fulfill contracts with Canadian hospitals has
been limited with most of their specialized hospital products now out of stock.
• Another manufacturer (Reckitt/Mead Johnson) has been successfully filling this gap and will
continue to do so moving forward. Several hospital products have been added to the Interim Policy in
order to ensure an uninterrupted supply of specialized products to Canadian hospitals.
• Ongoing Health Canada engagement and information sharing with provincial and territorial
representatives can help identify emerging concerns in a timely manner.
Additional pressures
• The closure of the Abbott Sturgis facility has occurred in a context where manufacturers were
already facing supply issues for certain ingredients due to the pandemic, including a shortage for some
of the materials needed to make the plastic components of their packaging.
• The situation is now also influenced by the economic context in Canada. Families are increasingly
affected by inflation, including increases in food prices. The lack of availability of lower-cost powdered
formulas may therefore be of particular concern to Canadians.
• Considering the current limited supply of powder infant formula in Canada, this last recall from
Perrigo could potentially create more anxiety for parents and may lead to pantry loading/panic buying
that would further destabilize the market.
3. HEALTH CANADA ACTIONS TO MITIGATE THE SHORTAGE
Health Canada has been taking strong action in two key areas: supply and distribution as well as
communications.
Supply and distribution
• Health Canada implemented an interim policy on March 10, 2022, to facilitate the importation of
equivalent infant formula from countries with similar regulatory standards to Canada. The list of
products suitable for importation is included in the interim policy and is updated regularly. Our experts
conduct a safety assessment of each product before adding them to the list. These products are safe to
use, even if they differ from products available on the Canadian market in terms of labelling or
composition. Bilingual labelling provisions continue to apply. Health Canada continues to add to this list
to meet the needs of Canadians.
• The Department is monitoring the situation very closely, for both metabolic products and
hypoallergenic formulas or regular formulas to understand the status in terms of product availability
across the country. We are gathering information from distributors (for hypoallergenic and regular
formula) and from the National Food Distribution Centre (for metabolic products).
Communication
• The Department has proactively taken on a facilitator role to promote information sharing since
the beginning of the shortage. This includes sending targeted information to the healthcare community
and caregivers as well as the development of several communication products for the public, healthcare
professionals and pharmacists to help them navigate the shortage. In addition, we have contacted
various associations to raise awareness and explore ways to reduce or eliminate barriers to providing
rapid and fair access to product.
• Many communication materials were developed by Health Canada:
o Information for the public include a public advisory and a detailed fact sheet for families, with
two separate social media campaigns to further emphasize key messages and reach a broader audience.
In addition, information about the shortage was posted on Service Canada screens across the country
between July 1 and August 31, 2022. Health Canada regularly updates its website, most recently in
February 2023, to inform the public of the current situation.
o Information for healthcare professionals include a clinical decision tree jointly developed by a
broad community of healthcare stakeholders to guide treatment decisions and help families make
appropriate choices while rationing the use of specialized infant formulas.
o Information for pharmacists were developed to help them order hypoallergenic formula during
the shortage and answer questions from the public.
4. ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
The situation in the United States
The United States is showing signs of supply recovery. Recent engagement from Health Canada senior
managers with key manufacturers and retailers underscored the urgent need to maintain a stable
Canadian supply. These meetings helped improve information sharing and collaboration, resulting in
improved access to regular infant formulas at retail and a better understanding of the supply forecast for
metabolic products.
Media presence
The shortage has elicited media attention in the United States since early May. In Canada, coverage has
been sporadic. Media focused initially on understanding measures taken domestically to alleviate the
effects of the shortage, including efforts to import products to Canada, and questioning the absence of
domestic production of infant formula (see section on Canada Royal Milk, below). During the summer of
2022, Canadian news stories were around the challenges faced by families when trying to access
specialized formula. Some media reports were positive and reiterated key information published by
Health Canada. More recently, stories have focused on the frustrations experienced by parents who
must often switch regular formula as more popular products are out of stock, and on the rising price of
formula.
Canada Royal Milk
Canada Royal Milk (CRM) owns a production plant in Kingston, Ontario, that manufactures fortified cow
milk powder, whole goat milk powder and skim goat milk powder that may be used in fortified milk
products for adults and for infant formula production. These products are not for the Canadian market
and are exported to other countries including China. Contrary to certain media reports, CRM does not
produce infant formula.
CRM cannot sell infant formula on the Canadian market until the company receives pre-market approval
from Health Canada. The company met with Health Canada to discuss information requirements to
support a pre-market submission to produce and sell infant formula in Canada. Redacted- Confidential
Information
GLOBAL COVID-19 EFFORTS
Issue
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO) to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to
global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
Key Facts
• Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss
COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S.
• Canada and Member States are engaged in the process of developing a new international
instrument on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and health systems recovery under the
WHO. Formal negotiations are underway as of February 2023 and are set to conclude by May 2024.
• Canada and Member States are engaged in a process to strengthen and modernize the
International Health Regulations (2005) based on lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and
other health emergencies. Formal negotiations began in February 2023 and a package of amendments is
expected to be considered by the 77th World Health Assembly in May 2024.
Key Messages
• Canada has committed more than $2.9 billion to the global fight against the virus.
• As part of our commitment to COVAX, so far, we have donated the equivalent of more than 196
million doses, including at least 41.5 million doses deemed surplus from Canada's domestic supply. As of
December 15, 2022, over 25 million of the doses Canada has donated to COVAX have been delivered to
countries, and more than 3.7 million doses have been donated directly to countries through bilateral
agreements.
• Canada has provided $50 million CAD to the Pan American Health Organization to support
efforts to facilitate access to COVID-19 vaccines for those living in situations of vulnerability across the
Caribbean and Latin America. Portions of this grant are being used to procure vaccine doses for countries
through the Organization, which are in addition to Canada’s commitment to COVAX.
• In November 2022, Canada announced $15 million CAD to PAHO for Improving Manufacturing
Capacities for Vaccines in Latin America and the Caribbean as part of a larger CanGIVE funding envelope.
On 13 January 2023, the Minister of International Development announced $45 million CAD for
“Improving Equitable Access and Vaccination Coverage Against COVID-19” in Kingston, Jamaica.
If Pressed – Development of a Pandemic Instrument Under the WHO
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• COVID-19 has demonstrated the need to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for
the next pandemic. Canada is working closely with international partners, including the World Health
Organization (WHO) and the Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), and the broader global
community to strengthen global health security.
• With respect to global health threats that cross borders, such as pandemics, we can best
advance and protect Canadian interests through effective rules-based international systems, which
require international instruments and cooperation.
• Canada supports the development of a WHO convention, agreement or other international
instrument to improve multilateral cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery.
• Canada’s view is that a pandemic instrument will be helpful to enhance collective action and
accountability, as well as address gaps in global pandemic prevention, preparedness, response and
recovery.
• Development of the pandemic instrument is still at an early stage. It is too soon to predict the
exact provisions of the instrument and how they might be implemented in Canada.
• The Government of Canada has informed provinces and territories, Indigenous organizations,
and other partners and stakeholders of the work underway, including opportunities to engage directly
with the WHO.
• The Government of Canada is also planning a hybrid partner and stakeholder forum on March 21
and 22 in Ottawa to inform Canada’s views and positions.
If Pressed – Amendments to the International Health Regulations (2005)
• Protecting the health and safety of all Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The International Health Regulations are important as they help keep Canadians healthy and safe
through commitments and obligations that require countries to work together in a global health
emergency, like the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Canada agrees that we need to take action to strengthen the International Health Regulations
based on lessons learned from COVID-19 and previous health emergencies.
• We are working with key federal, provincial, and territorial stakeholders, as well as international
partners to develop a common understanding of amendment proposals and shared goals.
• Negotiations are at a very early stage and will continue until the end of the year.
Background
Canada has participated in various multilateral and bilateral discussions at the WHO, G7, G20, and other
tables on ways to finish the fight against COVID-19 and strengthen our collective capacities to prevent,
prepare and respond to future health emergencies.
On January 10, 2023, the Prime Minister attended the North American Leaders’ Summit in Mexico City
along with U.S. President Joseph Biden and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López Obrador. The three
leaders committed to strengthen regional prevention, preparedness and response to future health crises
by revising the North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza (NAPAPI). The revised NAPAPI
will use a flexible and cross-sectoral framework to strengthen North America's coordination in
responding to health security threats. Canada and the U.S. continue to advance the health commitments
outlined in the February 2021 Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership, including supporting
global affordable access to and delivery of COVID-19 vaccines, and providing strong support for
multilateral institutions, including the WHO and UN development agencies.
Ministerial-level discussions have also contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key partners
such as the US and the EU. Japan has assumed the Presidency of the G7 for 2023 and has identified
three key priorities for its Presidency: (1) developing and strengthening global health architecture for
public health emergencies, with a particular focus on pandemic prevention, preparedness, and response
and the need for joint health and finance to enhance cooperation; (2) contributing to achieving a more
resilient, equitable, and sustainable universal health coverage; and (3) promoting health innovation to
address various health challenges, with particular mention of facilitating innovation in support of
equitable access. The G7 Health Ministers’ Meeting is scheduled to take place May 13-14 in Nagasaki,
Japan. The Leaders’ Summit is scheduled to take place on May 19-21 in Hiroshima, Japan.
Under its Presidency, Japan will seek to ensure continuity of G7 work from previous years, as well as the
implementation of measures previously adopted by the group.
India assumed the G20 Presidency for 2023 on December 1, 2022, with the theme of One Earth, One
Family, One Future. Canada will work closely with its G20 partners to support the objectives of the
Presidency. India has proposed three priorities for the Health Track: (1) Prevention, preparedness, and
response for health emergencies; (2) Strengthening cooperation in the pharmaceutical sector with a
focus on availability and access to safe, effective, and affordable medical countermeasures; and (3)
Digital health innovation and solutions to aid universal health coverage and improve healthcare service
delivery. The G20 Health Ministers’ Meeting is scheduled to take place on August 19, followed by the
Joint Finance-Health Ministers’ Meeting on August 20 in Gandhinagar, India. The Leaders’ Summit is
scheduled to take place September 9-10 in Delhi, India.
In addition, senior and technical staff of the Health Portfolio have engaged with their counterparts in a
variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally, including from the World Health Organization (WHO),
the Pan American Health Organization, U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Global Health
Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert and Response Network, to exchange information and best
practices that have informed and enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
75th World Health Assembly and Amendments to the International Health Regulations
The 75th World Health Assembly (WHA) was held May 22 to May 28, 2022. Minister Duclos was head of
Canada’s delegation and had a strong bilateral program with counterparts as well as meeting with the
Director General (DG) of the WHO, Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who was re-elected to a second
five-year term as DG.
WHO sustainable financing, the ongoing pandemic, and strengthening WHO preparedness and response
have also emerged as key themes. This included decisions to start a forward process to negotiate
amendments to the International Health Regulations (2005) and adopt an amendment to the regulations
that reduces the time, from 24 months to 12, for these future amendments to enter into force. This will
help make the instrument more agile, and ensure that future amendments that we agree to are
implemented without delay.
In Canada’s view, amendments should be limited in scope and should address specific issues, challenges
or gaps that are critical to supporting IHR implementation and compliance that cannot be effectively
addressed otherwise.
The 76th WHA will be held in Geneva from May 21 to 30, 2023. Preparations for Canada’s delegation will
begin following the WHO Executive Board meeting (January 30 to February 7, 2023).
Development of a Pandemic Instrument under the WHO
In light of gaps revealed by the COVID-19 pandemic, and in response to numerous expert reviews
recommending improvements to the global health security architecture, Member States of the WHO are
developing a new, international instrument to strengthen global pandemic prevention, preparedness,
response and health systems recovery. Canada has been supportive of this process, as a stronger and
better coordinated global health security architecture for disease outbreaks is essential to securing the
health and safety of Canadians.
The first Intergovernmental Negotiating Body (INB) meetings established a process to develop the
pandemic instrument, including timelines, milestones and modalities for stakeholder engagement.
During the second meeting of the INB, Member States reached a consensus identifying Article 19 of the
WHO Constitution (legally binding treaty/convention/agreement), without excluding Article 21 (binding
regulations), as the appropriate mechanism for a new pandemic instrument. A zero draft of the
instrument was circulated to Member States in early February 2023. This formed the basis for the start
of negotiations at the fourth meeting of the INB (February 27-March 3). Member States will submit a
progress report to the 76th World Health Assembly in May 2023, and a final outcome to the 77th World
Health Assembly in May 2024.
SYNDROME POST-COVID-19
Issue
While most people with COVID-19 recover fully from their illness, many people, including some with a
milder initial episode, report experiencing symptoms for weeks or months after their initial infection.
These longer-term symptoms (often wide ranging and varying in severity) are referred to as “post COVID-
19 condition” (PCC), or “long COVID”.
Key Facts
• PCC refers to symptoms that last for at least two months, that cannot be explained by an
alternative diagnosis, and that are experienced at 12 weeks or more after the onset of COVID-19.
• PCC can affect both adults and children, with preliminary evidence suggesting it is more common
among adults. Known risk factors include female sex, hospitalization due to COVID-19, pre-existing
chronic health conditions, and repeated SARS-CoV-2 infection.
• There are many scientific uncertainties about PCC, including how it develops, who is most at risk,
the effect of variants, and the potential longer-term socioeconomic impacts.
• The best way to currently prevent PCC is to take measures to avoid getting infected with COVID-
19. This includes getting vaccinated and continuing to take personal protective measures.
• Emerging evidence suggests that COVID-19 vaccination with two or more doses helps to reduce
the risk of developing PCC among individuals who get vaccinated prior to a COVID-19 infection.
• Early treatment with safe and effective COVID-19 therapies may also help reduce the risk of
developing PCC.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that many Canadians who contract COVID-19 face a prolonged
recovery, with symptoms that persist for some time after their infection.
• While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building, there is still
much that is unknown. The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international
experts to build the evidence base on PCC.
• In addition, earlier this month, Canada’s Chief Science Advisor (CSA), Dr. Mona Nemer, released
her PCC Task Force report, Post-Covid-19 Condition in Canada: What we know, What we don’t know and
a framework for action.
• Officials from across the Health Portfolio are reviewing findings from the CSA report, which will
inform future government action in responding to PCC.
• Work has already started to respond to the Task Force’s recommendations:
o The Government has provided funding and scientific support for the development of Canadian
evidence-based PCC guidelines for Canadians, and the establishment of a pan-Canadian PCC Research
Network.
o Additionally, the Public Heath Agency of Canada has established a PCC Secretariat to bring
greater coordination and strategic direction to the on-going work relating to the condition.
If pressed on the PCC Task Force Report
• I would like to thank Dr. Nemer, and all the members of the Task Force for their exceptional
work. This report outlines the breadth, scope and complexity of issues surrounding PCC. It covers areas
related to labour and the economy, clinical practice and research, data collection, coordination and
infrastructure, impacts on individuals and communities.
• The recommendations will provide an invaluable source of information to help inform
government actions to address PCC.
If pressed on govt actions
• The Government of Canada has made significant investments to build the evidence-base to
better understand PCC. Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research has invested
$394.3 million into COVID-19 research, and partner organizations have added another $20.5 million. Of
this $414.8 million total, $17.7 million has been funding targeted to the study of PCC.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has established a PCC Secretariat within PHAC to
coordinate a whole-of-government approach to address evidence and data gaps around the condition,
along with supporting Canadians in managing and eventually recovering from it.
• Through Budget 2022, the government is investing $20 million over five years, to enable the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research to establish a new Canadian PCC Research Network, called Long
COVID Web, dedicated to understanding and addressing the biological, clinical, mental health, and
health system and population health impacts of the condition.
• Budget 2022 also included $9 million over 3 years for PHAC to support the development,
dissemination, and evaluation of Canadian evidence-based guidelines and tools for the identification,
prevention, self-management, and clinical treatment of PCC. PHAC is providing this funding to the team
of expert methodologists at the Cochrane Canada and GRADE centres at McMaster University who will
develop the guidelines.
If pressed on the prevalence or impacts of PCC in Canada
• PHAC continues to monitor developments on scientific evidence nationally and internationally.
This includes working with the provinces and territories to better understand the long-term effects of
COVID 19.
• Results from the October 2022 release by Statistics Canada of provisional data, from the
Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey, indicated that 14.8% of Canadian adults who self-
reported a COVID-19 infection reported longer-term symptoms 3 or more months after the acute
infection.
• PHAC is currently reviewing evidence on the global prevalence of PCC and potential risk factors.
Results are expected later this year.
• Understanding the socio-economic impacts of PCC in Canada and its potential implications for
the health care system and the broader economy is important. A review commissioned by PHAC found
that approximately 17-19% of workers miss work due to PCC. A Canadian study also has found that PCC
patients have about a 50% increase in health care utilisation.
• These endeavours will help refine our understanding of the prevalence and risk factors of PCC in
Canada, as well as its potential impacts.
If pressed on the impact of vaccination on PCC in Canada
• Early evidence suggests that vaccination with two or more doses of COVID-19 vaccines helps to
reduce the risk of developing PCC if individuals become infected.
• The best way to prevent PCC is to take measures to avoid getting infected in the first place. This
includes following personal preventive practices, such as staying up to date with your COVID-19
vaccinations and paying attention and taking precautions in response public health alerts and signals in
your area.
If pressed on clinical services and supports available to Canadians with PCC
• The provincial and territorial governments are responsible for the management, organization
and delivery of health care services for their residents. Many jurisdictions have developed local
resources on PCC. This includes specialized clinics dedicated to PCC recovery.
Background
In October 2021, the World Health Organization (WHO) released a clinical case definition of PCC (PCC) in
adults as follows: “PCC occurs in individuals with a history of probable or confirmed SARS CoV-2
infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19 with symptoms that last for at least 2 months
and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis.” In February 2023, WHO released a clinical case
definition for children and adolescents as follows: “PCC in children and adolescents occurs in individuals
with a history of confirmed or probable SARS-CoV-2 infection, when experiencing symptoms lasting at
least 2 months which initially occurred within 3 months of acute COVID-19”.
There are currently many scientific uncertainties related to PCC and the evidence is slowly evolving. PCC
can affect many different organs, including the brain, the heart, and the lungs. The reported range of
symptoms is broad, varying from mild to severe, and can fluctuate in intensity and sometimes disappear
and reappear over time. Common PCC symptoms include fatigue, cough, shortness of breath, brain fog,
intolerance to physical activity, and others. Often these symptoms have a significant impact on everyday
functioning and quality of life. Although, a large number of therapeutics are being assessed in clinical
trials, none are currently approved by any international medical regulators. Due to a lack of PCC
diagnostic tests, patients are diagnosed based on clinical assessment. Given the broad range of PCC
symptoms, there is evidence that models of care based on a multi-disciplinary approach offer the most
benefits to patients.
PCC can affect both adults and children, regardless of the presence and/or severity of their initial COVID-
19 symptoms. Studies in adults have reported that females, those with underlying conditions, and those
who were hospitalized or needed intensive care during recovery are at increased risk of experiencing
longer-term effects and PCC.
The impacts of PCC on public health and the health care system in general, are anticipated to be
significant and long-term. At this point, there is insufficient evidence to determine the socio-economic
impacts of PCC in Canada, and its potential burden on the health care system, or the broader economy.
The Health Portfolio is actively monitoring the latest research, as well as engaging experts and policy
makers (domestic and international) to help inform public health action.
National Surveillance and Research
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and partners
Statistics Canada, in partnership with PHAC and in consultation with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
have been working on the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS – Cycle 2). The data
collection for the survey is now complete.
• On September 6th, 2022, Statistics Canada released preliminary results from the CCAHS – Cycle
2 via “The Daily” page on the Statistics Canada website. Using responses received as of July 15th, 2022,
this first release highlighted the proportion of Canadian’s self-reporting positive cases for COVID-19, as
well as self-reported suspected infections.
• On October 17, 2022, further preliminary results about adults reporting longer-term symptoms
following a SARS-CoV-2 infection were released by Statistics Canada. Data from the CCAHS estimate that
14.8% of Canadian adults who contracted COVID-19 experience longer-term symptoms 3 months or
more after initial COVID-19 infection. This represents approximately 1.4 million Canadian adults, or 4.6%
of the adult population. Data were collected from April 1 to August 15, 2022.
PHAC is also collaborating with Statistics Canada on a crowdsourcing survey that uses the CCAHS-Cycle 2
electronic questionnaire. Launched on February 14, 2023, the Canadian Health and COVID-19 Survey
(CHCS) is being used by participating jurisdictions to better understand the health impacts of the COVID-
19 pandemic, including PCC, on subpopulations of interest in their jurisdictions.
The Canadian Paediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a joint project of PHAC and the Canadian
Paediatric Society, launched a new two-year surveillance study of PCC in children and youth in Canada in
early September 2022. The CPSP study will also provide information on risk factors, symptoms and
impacts on daily functioning.
Through Budget 2022, PHAC received $9 million over the next three years (2022-2023: $1 million; 2023-
2024: $4 million; 2024-2025: $4 million) to develop and disseminate evidence-based guidelines on PCC.
Aligned with the PCC Task Force’s recommendation, PHAC is providing funding to the team of expert
methodologists at the Cochrane Canada and GRADE centres at McMaster University who are leading the
development, dissemination, and evaluation of evidence-based guidelines for Canadians, including
patients, health practitioners, and decision-makers. Potential topics may include guidance for the
identification, prevention, self-management, and clinical treatment of PCC. PHAC is collaborating with
partners to:
• Scope guidelines and evidence that are already available,
• Prioritize guideline topics and focus,
• Identify knowledge gaps and priority areas, and
• Establish a guideline panel of experts.
These guidelines will consider the Canadian context, and both general and some specific population
subgroups, where feasible. The guidelines will begin to be released in early 2024.
Budget 2022 also includes another $1 million to undertake additional surveillance activities.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested $394.3 million COVID-
19 research, to which partner organizations have added $20.5 million, and resulted in 965 COVID-19
research projects; including $17.7 million to fund 41 targeted research studies on PCC. Spanning a wide
range of research interests the funded projects across Canada will yield important results, including
scientific findings on the clinical management and treatment of individuals with PCC.
Budget 2022 also provided an additional $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for CIHR that
will support the creation of a Canadian PCC Research Network, called Long Covid Web, focussed on
improving the understanding of the clinical, mental health, health systems, and biological impacts of
PCC. The competitive funding opportunity was launched on October 19, 2022, with an announcement of
the successful team in March 2023. In early February 2023, CIHR organized a kick-off meeting to
introduce the successful team to key policy players in the Health Portfolio and to enable and facilitate
coordination and cohesion across various Government of Canada initiatives and investments on PCC.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease
Preparedness. This global initiative is an alliance of research funding organizations that facilitates
coordinated investment to improve preparedness and a rapid research response to epidemics and
pandemics.
Office of the Chief Science Advisor of Canada
In the summer of 2022 the Chief Science Advisor of Canada, Dr. Mona Nemer, convened a Task Force on
post COVID-19 condition. With a focus on the Canadian context, the key objectives of the Task Force
were to summarize evidence that could inform the management of PCC, and to identify knowledge gaps
in order to address the health and socioeconomic impacts of PCC in Canada. The Task Force released its
recommendations in a pre-report disseminated on December 14 2022, and the full report was released
at the beginning of March 2023.
Since this time, the Government of Canada has established a PCC Secretariat within PHAC to coordinate
a whole-of-government approach to address evidence and data gaps around the condition. Health
Portfolio officials will review all recommendations to help inform future government action in
responding to PCC.
Prevalence of PCC
There is still uncertainty about the prevalence of PCC. Based on early published reports in 2020 and
before the development of a first case definition, the WHO estimated that at least 10% to 20% of people
would experience PCC after their initial COVID-19 infection. Several evidence reviews (including one led
by PHAC) from the initial phase of the pandemic (prior to the Omicron variant and roll out of vaccination
campaigns) found that about 30% to 40% of those not hospitalized still reported at least one symptom,
whether it be mild or more severe, beyond 12 weeks since their initial COVID-19 infection.
In these reviews, the prevalence estimates of PCC vary wildly, ranging from below 5% in some studies to
around 80% in studies among those with severe initial illness. The variation in estimates is likely due to
differences in the definitions used for PCC, in the characteristics of the study populations (e.g.,
hospitalized for COVID-19 or outpatients), and in the methods and timing of assessment of PCC-related
symptoms.
Some preliminary evidence, including from the October 17, 2022 release from the CCAHS, suggests that
infections caused by the Omicron variant may be less likely to lead to PCC compared to other variants.
More research is needed to understand whether this is due to differences in variants or other factors
such as increasing population immunity (from vaccination and/or infection), or a combination of both.
The impact of multiple infections on the risk of PCC is also not yet well understood, but preliminary and
limited evidence suggests that the risks of PCC may increase with the number of reinfections.
At this time, the prevalence of PCC in children is not yet well-established, with high variability in
estimates being observed from only a small number of studies. These estimates will become more
precise as more studies, including the CPSP, are conducted and new evidence emerges.
PHAC is currently undertaking a review to synthesise the available evidence on the global prevalence of
PCC and potential risk factors for the condition. Results are expected later in 2023.
Socioeconomic impacts of PCC
The socioeconomic impacts of PCC are emerging, for example in relation to the labour market. In the
United States, for example:
• Around 16 million working-age Americans (those aged 18 to 65) presently have PCC;
• Of those, 2 to 4 million are out of work due to PCC; and
• The annual cost of those lost wages alone is around $170 billion a year (and potentially as high
as $230 billion).
• In the US, estimates of the total economic burden vary between $50-$600 billion/year.
Estimates extrapolated from US results suggest that the economic burden to Canada could range from
$5-$60 billion/year. In addition, job loss (including retirement and long term disability) is estimated to be
1-3%.
The volume of media stories highlighting the plight of individuals suffering from PCC continues to
increase. These often focus on the dual barrier of accessing care, as well as the dire financial
implications; including loss of homes, jobs, custody of children, and draining of personal pension funds.
We learned from CCAHS that among adults with longer-term symptoms, 21.3% said that their symptoms
often or always limited their daily activities. Among adults with longer-term symptoms who were
employed or attending school, approximately three-quarters (74.1%) missed some work or school due to
their symptoms. On average, they missed 20 days. This loss of productivity results in adverse social and
economic consequences (e.g., loss of income, loss of employment among those experiencing symptoms
over a long time period).
PHAC is using modelling to quantify the economic impact of PCC cases averted due to vaccination (from
December 2020 to March 2022), focusing on the economic costs associated with treatment and
production loss due to reduced labour force participation among those with PCC. The results from the
modelling work will be published in 2023.
In addition, PHAC has commissioned a living evidence review with COVID-END that synthesizes the
available evidence addressing the impact of PCC on return to work, productivity loss, and the overall
economic burden of PCC, including economic impacts directly related to mental health symptoms
associated with PCC. The recently published report has found that the proportion of workers who
experience substantial absence from work due to PCC varies, but is likely around 17-19%. One Canadian
study has found that PCC patients have about a 50% increase in health care utilisation compared to
patients who did not have COVID-19. At this stage, there is no significant evidence on the impact of PCC
on productivity loss and none of the key studies reported the economic impact which might be
attributed to mental health conditions in those with PCC.
Vaccination and post COVID-19 condition
PHAC continues to closely monitor the evidence for the impacts of vaccination on PCC. Findings from
PHAC’s latest review of the evidence (published up to July 7, 2022) continue to suggest that COVID-19
vaccination with two or more doses helps to reduce the risk of developing PCC among individuals who
get vaccinated prior to a COVID-19 infection. More research is needed to quantify the extent to which
additional doses may provide additional protection.
Support for Canadians with PCC
In terms of financial support, Canadians suffering from COVID-19 or PCC, who are unable to work, may
be eligible to receive income support through Employment Insurance (EI) Sickness Benefits. In
recognition that some individuals require more time to recover from an illness or injury, the Government
of Canada permanently extended EI sickness benefits from 15 weeks to 26 weeks. Those extra weeks are
available for new EI claims established on or after December 18, 2022.
To align with this change, the maximum length of unpaid sick leave available to federally regulated
private sector employees was also increased from 17 to 27 weeks under the Canada Labour Code. This
change also came into effect on December 18, 2022 to ensure that employees have the right to take
unpaid job-protected leave while receiving the extended EI sickness benefits.
SECURITY AT THE NATIONAL MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY
Issue
Given the previous motion for the production of papers by the Special Committee on Canada-China
relations, and the subsequent creation of an ad-hoc committee of parliamentarians, there has been
interest in security protocols at the National Microbiology Laboratory.
Key Facts
• Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) is known around the world for scientific
excellence and contributions to global health. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) engages in
important scientific research relationships to advance public health research and science aimed at
improving public health. Collaborations with labs outside of Canada are critical to advance public health
research into infectious diseases.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada takes threats to research security, intellectual property and business
interests seriously.
• The National Microbiology Laboratory is a world class facility and abides by all Government of
Canada mandatory procedures for secure facilities.
• All individuals working within the National Microbiology Laboratory undergo a security screening
and must adhere to Government of Canada security protocols, procedures and policies based on the
level of access required.
If pressed on scientific collaborations with other countries
• Collaborations with laboratories outside of Canada are critical to advancing public health
research and science aimed at improving public health on a global scale, including research into
infectious diseases.
• As an institution with global partnerships, the National Microbiology Laboratory looks to open
science and collaboration as core to its work and has policies and processes that allow for scientific
collaboration.
If pressed on collaborations between NML and China
• While the NML does not have institutional-level collaborations with China, Canada’s scientists
have collaborated with Chinese scientists to contribute to the global public health fight against deadly
diseases, such as Ebola. These collaborations have yielded vaccine and treatment candidates for
diseases, as documented in peer-reviewed journals.
Background
Collaborations
The NML continues to strengthen its processes to allow for appropriate scientific collaboration while
adhering to established policies and security controls.
While active collaborations may be time-limited, publications resulting from collaborations can be
expected for many years. Publications must acknowledge the contributions of the individuals involved
through the scientific process, from inception to final write up. It is not possible to say how many future
publications could result from previous experimentation. The research work is intended to result in
academic publications for the advancement of science and knowledge, and so the intent is that papers
will be openly published in the normal community of peer-reviewed journals. The preparation and
publication of these manuscripts is being done in accordance to government policy in support of open
science.
As of February 14, 2023, the Government of Canada will not fund grant applications that involve
conducting sensitive research if any of the participants are affiliated with a university, research institute,
or laboratory connected to the military, national defence, or state security entities of foreign state actors
that pose a risk to our national security. This policy decision does not have an impact on the NML since
the NML is not a funding agency.
Queries Regarding Employment Status
PHAC has received numerous questions from media as well as members of parliament regarding the
employment status of individuals as well as work performed at the NML. PHAC has important obligations
under the Privacy Act. As such, employment status with PHAC is not considered personal information,
but any additional information about individuals that are not or were not employees is considered
personal information and cannot be disclosed.
Security Screening at PHAC
Federal departments and agencies are responsible for managing the security screening process following
the Treasury Board Policy on Government Security. Approvals are granted by the Deputy Head/President
of PHAC or delegated official. At PHAC, the Chief Security Officer is responsible for the management of
the security screening program.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. The Government has an ambitious target to
reduce tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035.
KEY FACTS
• Approximately 3.8 million Canadians smoke cigarettes – about 12% of the population over the
age of 15.
• Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330M investment
over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and people who do not smoke.
• Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death, and we are
working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Canada will become the first country to introduce written health warnings on cigarettes. Health
Canada will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke from
becoming addicted and to provide Canadians with information on the health hazards of tobacco use.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE
• We urge Canadians who smoke to consider quitting. When you give up cigarettes, your body
starts to renew itself as early as the first day, reducing your chance of developing heart disease, cancer,
breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help.
• Canadians can contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
them develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community where available.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
• The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act was tabled in Parliament on December
9th, 2022.
• The review found that the Act appears to be making progress towards protecting youth and
achieving its vaping-related objectives. Youth vaping rates, which were rising rapidly, have leveled off
over the past two years yet remain relatively high.
• It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
• The second review will be conducted in 2023.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO COST RECOVERY
• The tobacco industry is responsible for the leading preventable cause of disease and premature
death in Canada.
• That is why Minister Bennet’s mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobacco
manufacturers to pay for federal public health investments in tobacco control.
• Health Canada is working with partners within the federal government to examine options and
determine next steps.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS
• The Government of Canada is committed to reducing the harms of tobacco use.
• We are proposing to extend health warning messages to all tobacco product packages to
maintain their effectiveness.
• We are also proposing that Canada introduce written health warnings on individual tobacco
products, so it would be impossible to avoid health warnings.
• We held a 75-day consultation in 2022, to seek input from Canadians on these proposed
measures. We are currently reviewing the feedback and will consider them as the proposal moves
forward.
BACKGROUND
Data released on August 26th 2022, from the 2021 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), show a
second year of declines in smoking. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a
national average rate of 12% (3.8M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. Daily smoking also declined to 9%
(2.7M) from 10% (3.2M) in 2019. A reliable estimate on daily smoking for youth aged 12 – 17 or 15-19
cannot be determined for 2021.
While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking, reminding us that, despite
decades of effort to deter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public health problem in Canada.
Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all Canadians who
smoke daily for a long time. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit are
higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015 – 2017”. The report identifies the enormous
burden tobacco use places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use
to society was approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the
deadliest and most costly substance by far accounting for 47% of all attributable health care costs from
substance use and approximately 48,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per day or 17% of
all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Tobacco Cost Recovery/Levy
Requiring tobacco manufacturers to pay for the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco
control is a mandate letter commitment. Health Canada is working closely with other Government of
Canada partners to examine options and determine next steps.
ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
ISSUE
• Currently, 2SLGBTQI+ people, racialized Canadians, Indigenous populations, and women and
youth from underserved communities face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the
greatest barriers to accessing support, information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the
same quality of care, particularly if they are from marginalized communities.
KEY FACTS
• Canadians, especially those from underserved populations (including women, members of
2SLGBTQI+ communities, Indigenous and racialized people, women, and youth), continue to face barriers
to access abortion services which includes a lack of availability, a lack of financial and logistical resources
required to travel to access abortion care, and lack of culturally safe, stigma-free sexual and reproductive
health services. Health Canada’s Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund was created to advance mandate
commitments relating to sexual and reproductive health and to strengthen the healthcare system and
public health supports for vulnerable members of our communities, and those who have faced
discrimination by the very system that is meant to heal.
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We are funding community-based organizations to provide training and to increase knowledge
and capacity among sexual and reproductive health care providers, develop and implement best
practices, carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to access
abortion care.
• Budget 2021 committed $45 million to advancing sexual and reproductive health. To date, $35.3
million has been allocated. Fifteen projects, valued at $25.7 million, have been funded. Of these
projects, three address access to abortion, five address 2SLGBTQI+ communities, and three focus on
Indigenous communities, including Indigenous youth and Two Spirit people. Two projects focus on youth
from a range of populations, and two more address the needs of a range of underserved populations. In
addition, as the projects above are national in scope or focus on provinces and territories other than
Québec, per capita funding of $9.7M has been allocated to the Province of Québec to support
community-based organizations located in Québec. Further funding decisions will be completed before
the end of March 2023
IF PRESSED ON DATA…
• We are also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill
existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES…
• This Government is committed to upholding the fundamental right to choose and believes that
no one should be forced to carry an unwanted pregnancy.
• Health Canada has taken action under the Canada Health Act to combat patient charges for
access to insured surgical abortion services by levying deductions to Ontario and New Brunswick’s
Canada Health Transfers.
• Of the $45 Million committed in Budget 2021, the Government has invested $7.8M to date to
support access to abortion in Canada. In the first six months of funding, Action Canada served 208%
more people, and provided 234% more financial support, as compared to the same period in 2021.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING
ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY) …
• This fund is specifically designed to help women access abortion and it will not support
initiatives that discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or attempt to override the individual’s
right to make decisions about their own body.
IF PRESSED ON MISINFORMATION AND DISINFORMATION REGARDING THE CARE OF TRANS AND NON-
BINARY CHILDREN AND YOUTH …
• This government believes that trans and non-binary young people, and their families, should
have access to gender affirming, evidence based, and high-quality health care.
• Gender identity is an inherent characteristic that cannot be changed.
• This government is protecting trans and non-binary young people through strategic funding, as
well as through outlawing conversion therapy. The government is monitoring with concern the rise in
both misinformation and disinformation regarding trans and non-binary young people, as well as
harassment, intimidation, and threats against health care providers.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS ABOUT DESISTANCE OR TRANSITION REGRET …
• While stories of “desistance” or “transition regret” can receive significant media attention and
are used as part of misinformation and disinformation campaigns, in fact it is only rarely that youth stop
their gender transition and return to living as their gender assigned at birth. Evidence shows that a
number of young people who do stop their transition report it was because they did not have enough
support or were experiencing discrimination due to being trans; some of these youth go on to transition
again later in life.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist lens, and
realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive health
services remain. Members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities, racialized Canadians, Indigenous peoples, and
women and youth from underserved communities face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks
and the greatest barriers to accessing support, information, and services.
An initial targeted call for proposals inviting select organizations to submit applications for funding was
launched on July 29th, 2021 and closed October 4, 2021. Nine contribution agreements have been
signed. A second targeted Call for Proposals was launched on July 12, 2022 and closed on September
16th. Further funding decisions will be completed before the end of March 2023.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range of
indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based decision-
making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including prevalence
of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual knowledge and
behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services
Although access to abortion services in Canada has been improved by the approval and roll-out of
Mifegymiso for medical abortion, the availability of surgical abortion varies both between provinces and
territories and nationally. Health Canada is aware of coverage issues resulting in patient charges for
surgical abortion services in a limited number of private clinics in both New Brunswick (1) and Ontario
(5). Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under
the Canada Health Act.
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic (Clinic 554) where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for
abortion services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act
and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Since March 2020,
deductions totaling $334,766 have been levied against the NB’s Canada Health Transfer (CHT) payments
in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for abortions performed
in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution. Currently, Clinic
554 appears to be operating one day per week, offering only surgical abortion services for a fee of $700.
In summer 2019, media stories in Ontario revealed fees charged to individuals to access surgical abortion
services in some private clinics. Health Canada followed up on these reports by analyzing clinic websites,
and by making phone or email inquiries to clinics of concern. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan
provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only
covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF).
Evidence gathered confirmed that some private non-IHF abortion clinics charged fees for uninsured
services, while not consistently informing patients these fees were optional, with respect to accessing
insured surgical abortion services.
When the Ontario Health Ministry conducted further investigations the patient charges discovered were
reported to Health Canada. These charges formed the basis of Ontario’s March 2021, 2022, and 2023
deductions (totaling $53,265). In December 2021, Ontario submitted a Reimbursement Action Plan to
Health Canada, and has committed to revisit the current framework for the funding of insured surgical
abortion services in the province. Health Canada continues to engage with Ontario as they work to
implement their action plan to eliminate patient charges for access to abortion services.
Dobbs v Jackson Women’s Health Organization in the United States
The U.S. Supreme Court, in rendering their decision in the case Dobbs v. Jackson Women’s Health
Organization, held that the Constitution of the United States does not confer any right to abortion,
overruling the decisions in Roe v. Wade (1973) and Planned Parenthood v. Casey (1993) that prohibit U.S.
states from passing legislation criminalizing abortion. This decision will make it possible for states to
criminalize abortion at their discretion.
Because of differences between the American and Canadian legislative and judicial systems, the
Canadian legal context for abortion is distinct. In Canada, following the Supreme Court of Canada’s
decision in R. v. Morgentaler (1988), abortion was decriminalized in Canada. There is therefore no
regulation at the federal level regarding abortion. As with other health care, abortion service delivery is
managed at the provincial or territorial level. Similar to other health care services, Americans coming to
Canada would be able to obtain safe abortion care in Canada, but would have to pay for the service out-
of-pocket.
Barriers to care for trans and non-binary children and youth
Misinformation, disinformation and hate is emerging as a key barrier to care for transgender and non-
binary young people. Misinformation and disinformation campaigns are active across Canada, these
campaigns, in concert with high-profile legal cases and negative press, are impacting trans and non-
binary young people, their families, and their health care providers.
The focus of misinformation campaigns tends to be on pubertal suppression, hormone therapies, and
gender-affirming surgeries. These campaigns are designed to create fear about young peoples’ capacity
to know their gender, consent to care as well as raise mistrust about established clinical practices. Some
materials urge healthcare providers and parents/caregivers to question the validity of young people’s
gender health needs and delay or deny access to necessary health-care, placing trans and nonbinary
youth at increased risk of harm. Stories of rare occurrences of ‘transition regret’ and ‘detransition’ have
prompted challenges to evidence-based healthcare practices and resulted in harassment, intimidation,
and threats against healthcare providers working with trans and non-binary children and youth.
Evidence, including Canadian research, indicates that in the rare instances where young people stop or
reverse a transition, it is often due to lack of support from family and due to experiences of
discrimination. Some of these young people restart their transition later. Others who have stopped
transition do not express regret in relation to steps they took in transitioning, but instead considered
these steps as a necessary part of their development of their gender identity.
2SLGBTQI+ HEALTH
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to addressing stigma and discrimination against
2SLGBTQI+ populations and reducing the social and health inequities that they face.
• Our focus is on creating inclusive environments where everyone feels seen, safe, respected and
welcomed.
• This work is important because we know that intersecting systems of discrimination create
barriers to employment, housing, social support, health, and social services, and threaten the personal
safety and overall well-being of 2SLGBTQI+ individuals.
• To address the unique needs of these populations, we are investing in research, health
promotion and disease prevention programs, as well as initiatives to improve health care. This includes
programs to address mental health, gender-based violence and sexual and reproductive health.
BACKGROUND
2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations experience worse health outcomes across a range of
issues. These health inequities are the result of persistent, inequitable social and economic conditions
for these groups. These impacts are amplified for Indigenous and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations
affected by the intersecting impacts of colonialism and racism.
Mental health: Worse outcomes for 2SLGBTQI+ people have been reported across a range of indicators,
including (but not limited to) mental health. For example, the prevalence of low self-rated mental health
among bisexual adults is 3 times that of heterosexual adults; among gay/lesbian adults it is 1.7 times that
of heterosexual adults.
Suicide: 2SLGBTQI+ people in Canada are more likely to contemplate suicide in their lifetime
(approximately 40% of LGB Canadians vs 15% of heterosexual Canadians).
Substance use: 24% of gay, lesbian, bisexual, and other non-heterosexual respondents to the 2018
Survey of Safety in Public and Private Spaces reported having used drugs or alcohol to cope with
experiences of emotional abuse and physical violence, versus 10% of heterosexual respondents.
Chronic disease: Higher prevalence of cardiovascular diseases, some types of cancer and respiratory
diseases among 2SLGBTQI+ communities, with the onset of chronic diseases also happening earlier in
life.
Barriers accessing healthcare: Experiences of discrimination within the healthcare system sometimes
cause 2SLGBTQI+ people to avoid seeking healthcare in the first place. For example, 12% of respondents
to the Trans PULSE survey had avoided the emergency room in the previous year, despite needing care,
and 45% reported having unmet healthcare needs within the same period.
Historical and ongoing injustices endured by 2SLGBTQI+, Indigenous, racialized, immigrant, and disabled
populations, and women, have created persistent, inequitable social and economic conditions for these
groups. Consequently, 2SLGBTQI+ and other marginalized populations experience stigma, discrimination
and worse health outcomes across a range of issues. These health inequities are amplified for Indigenous
and racialized 2SLGBTQI+ populations affected by the intersecting impacts of colonialism and racism.
Gay, lesbian and bisexual Canadians experience substantial inequities in self-rated health and mental
health, household food insecurity, smoking, heavy drinking, asthma, arthritis, and HIV infection.
Canadian studies have also revealed significant socioeconomic inequities facing 2SLGBTQI+ populations,
including in income, employment and workplace stress, as well as experiences of violence, hate crimes,
and discrimination. Suicidal thoughts, plans and attempts are disproportionately prevalent among
2SLGBTQI+ youth compared to non-2SLGBTQI+ peers.
Recent Developments to Support 2SLGBTQI+
Blood Donor Deferral Period for Men who have sex with Men
There are two blood system operators in Canada – Canadian Blood Services (serving all provinces and
territories except Québec) and Héma-Québec (serving the province of Québec). Both are regulated by
Health Canada.
On September 11, 2022, Canadian Blood Services eliminated the three month blanket donor deferral
period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and instead began screening all donors,
regardless of gender or sexuality, for high risk sexual behaviour. Health Canada authorized this change
towards more inclusive screening on April 28, 2022. The Government of Canada provided $5.4M,
starting in 2016, to support the necessary research to effect this change.
In March 2022, Health Canada approved a submission from Héma-Québec to move to sexual-behaviour
based screening for all source plasma donors. On October 2, 2022, Héma-Québec replaced their plasma
donation questionnaire with a gender-neutral questionnaire, using the same questions as those
authorized for Canadian Blood Services for use in the rest of Canada.
On September 6, 2022, Health Canada authorized Héma-Québec’s submission to eliminate the three
month blanket donor deferral period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and others
impacted by this process, and to begin screening all blood, platelet, and plasma donors, regardless of
gender or sexuality for high risk sexual behaviour. Gender neutral, behaviour-based screening for blood
and platelets will take effect on December 4, 2022.
Moreover, non-binary and transgender donors must presently be evaluated by Héma-Québec medical
staff for donation eligibility prior to attending blood drives. As of December 4, 2022, anyone wishing to
donate blood products through Héma-Québec will answer the same questions regardless of sex or
gender identity, and an evaluation by a Héma-Québec medical staff member will no longer be required.
Monkeypox
Community-based organizations have been an important source of expertise regarding health
promotion, disease prevention, and culturally responsive communications for the Government’s
response to monkeypox. The virus continues to be an ongoing concern, and more work remains to be
done. As of August 12, 2022, Public Health Agency of Canada has invested $900,000 in new investments
through the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to the Community Based Research Centre
(CBRC), H.I.M. Health Initiative for Men Society in Vancouver, the Queer and Trans Health Collective in
Edmonton, The AIDS Committee of Toronto, RÉZO Montreal, and the Ottawa Gay Men’s Wellness
Initiative (MAX Ottawa) to increase the capacity of communities in the regions most impacted by the
monkeypox outbreak.
AIDS 2022
On August 1, 2022 at the AIDS 2022 conference hosted by Canada, the Government of Canada
announced a time-limited (September 2022 – March 2023) investment of $8 million to acquire HIV self-
test kits and support community-based organizations.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
The Health Portfolio currently supports the health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations through a range of both
targeted and inclusive initiatives, and will seek opportunities to strengthen these efforts as the
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan evolves over its 5-year timeline. Some of these initiatives include:
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC):
1) Data and surveillance initiatives, such as the Pan-Canadian Health Inequalities Reporting
Initiative and enhanced surveillance through funding support for the Sex Now Survey;
2) Education and training initiatives, such as the Agency’s involvement in updating the “Pride
Guide” resource for 2SLGBTQI+ youth in Canada;
3) Funding programs that have supported 2SLGBTQI+ projects, including the Mental Health
Promotion Innovation Fund (2 targeted projects), the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (23
targeted projects), the Preventing Gender-Based Violence initiative (5 targeted projects), the Mental
Health of Black Canadians Fund (3 targeted projects), the Dementia Community Investment (1 targeted
project), and the Harm Reduction Fund (3 targeted projects);
4) Research and knowledge translation initiatives, such as the Canadian Research and Knowledge
Translation Agenda on Suicide and its Prevention, which includes a focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; and
5) Emergency preparedness and response, such as the $900,000 investment from the HIV and
Hepatitis C Community Action Fund to increase capacity of 2SLGBTQI+ community organizations in the
regions most impacted by the monkeypox outbreak.
Health Canada:
1) Funding programs that have supported, or are anticipated to support projects focused on
2SLGBTQI+ populations. The Sexual and Reproductive Health Fund ($45 million over 3 years, starting in
2021/22) has a strong emphasis on initiatives focusing on 2SLGBTQI+ populations; of the first 9 projects
that were funded, 5 focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, for a total dollar value of $8.8 million. Additional
funding programs supporting 2SLGBTQI+ populations include the Substance Use and Addictions Program
($100 million over 3 years, starting in 2022/23); and the Addressing Racism and Discrimination in
Canada’s Health Systems Program ($14.9 million over three years, beginning in 2021/22); and
2) Broader initiatives to improve access to care, which do not focus on 2SLGBTQI+ populations, but
include the populations through an SGBA Plus lens, such as the Action Plan on Palliative Care, National
Standards for Mental Health Services, National Standards for Long Term Care, the Task Team on
Equitable Access to Virtual Care, and Wellness Together Canada.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR):
1) CIHR supports research and knowledge mobilization related to 2SLGBTQI+ health, including
through the following time-limited priority-driven research initiatives:
• Catalyst and support grants for Community-Led Research on LGBTQIA/2S Wellness;
• The Health Research Training Platform on Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness for
LGBTQ/2S Populations (co-funded with PHAC and Egale);
• The CIHR Sex and Gender Science Chair - LGBTQI2S Wellness and Resilience;
• The Transitions in Care initiative, which includes research that will inform how healthcare teams
can collaboratively work with intersex individuals across Canada in an effort to improve lifelong
wellbeing within this population across several transitions in care;
• The Indigenous Gender and Wellness Initiative, which includes research to improve wellness of
Indigenous Two-Spirit and LGBTQI+ individuals and communities;
• Catalyst Grants for Healthy Youth, which includes dedicated funding for 2SLGBTQI+ youth (Note:
this competition is currently underway with results expected in March 2023);
• Transforming Health with Integrated Care Implementation Science Team Grants, including
projects related to gender-affirming health (Note: this competition is currently underway with results
expected in April 2023);
• CIHR recently launched the National Women’s Health Research Initiative in partnership with the
Department of Women and Gender Equality (WAGE). This will invest $20 million over five years to
advance a coordinated research program that addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of
women's health. The initiative promotes an intersectional lens to research and care to tackle persistent
gaps for all women, including members of 2SLGBTQI+ communities.
2) CIHR also continues to advance measures to promote equity, diversity and inclusion within the
research ecosystem, including for/with 2SLGBTQI+ researchers and trainees, for example through
commitments to further gender equity in CIHR’s strategic plan and the Tri-Agency Equity, Diversity and
Inclusion Action Plan.
2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan
On August 28, 2022, the Government of Canada launched the first-ever federal 2SLGBTQI+ Action Plan,
which seeks to improve the social, economic and health outcomes of 2SLGBTQI+ populations in Canada
through a whole-of-government approach. WAGE is the federal lead on the Action Plan.
The historic $100 million Budget 2022 investment in the Action Plan, allocated entirely to WAGE, will
support activities such as community capacity, anti-stigma, awareness and research – all of which will
advance meaningful action on the social determinants of health and have a positive impact on the
health of 2SLGBTQI+ populations.
The Health Portfolio’s current initiatives to support 2SLGBTQI+ populations also contribute to the Action
Plan’s objectives, but more work remains to be done. The Health Portfolio will continue to work with
federal partners such as WAGE to advance the priorities of the Action Plan and related Government of
Canada equity initiatives, such as Canada’s Anti-Racism Strategy 2.0, Canada’s Action Plan on Combatting
Hate, and the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls 2SLGBTQIA+ National Action Plan.
CANCER RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Although significant progress has been made in treating many cancers, there is still much to be
done. To address gaps in pediatric cancer research in particular, Budget 2021 committed $30M over 2
years through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR).
KEY FACTS
• According to Canadian Cancer Statistics reports, cancer remains the leading cause of death in
Canada. An estimated 2 in 5 Canadians will be diagnosed with cancer in their lifetime and about 1 in 4
will die from cancer.
• It is also a leading cause of death for children and adolescents (World Health Organization).
While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it was estimated
that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019.
• The high number of new cases and rising prevalence of cancer add to the burden of disease on
patients, families and health care systems caused by the pandemic and viral infection surges in the past
three years.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government continues investing in cancer research as it leads to progress in the fight against
cancer.
• This includes over one billion dollars invested through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) in the last five years in research with potential to advance cancer therapies, prevention, and
detection.
• The Budget 2021 commitment of $30 million for pediatric cancer research is enabling CIHR
investments in promising research projects as well as the Pediatric Cancer Consortium, a national multi-
stakeholder network advancing pediatric cancer research and knowledge mobilization.
IF PRESSED ON PEDIATRIC CANCER CONSORTIUM…
• On January 18, our government announced the establishment of the Canadian Pediatric Cancer
Consortium.
• Researchers from the Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids) in Toronto will lead team members
from across Canada with a diversity of experience including research involving First Nations, Inuit and
Métis Peoples of Canada to support innovative research on pediatric cancer.
• This Consortium will cover the cancer control continuum from prevention, to diagnosis,
treatment, and survivorship. It will improve the research pipeline, advance equitable access to care and
IF PRESSED ON EXAMPLES OF CANCER RESEARCH INVESTMENTS…
• Through CIHR our government is investing in research with the potential to advance prevention
and treatment of cancer and improve the quality of life of cancer patients.
• In the last five years CIHR has invested over $430 million dollars in investigator-driven research
contributing to enhanced knowledge on all cancers.
• This includes the work of Dr. Brad Nelson’s team at the BC Cancer Agency studying the way
immune cells work together to respond to ovarian cancer to develop more effective treatments.
BACKGROUND
In recognition of the significant impact that cancer has on individuals, families and caregivers, continued
research support is needed to advance our understanding of cancer and reduce the burden of disease
through improved prevention strategies, diagnosis, treatments, and support systems. As cancers in
children act differently than in adults, additional support is needed for research in pediatric cancer.
Between 2017-18 and 2021-22, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over one
billion dollars in cancer research, including $430 million dollars to support investigator-driven cancer
research through the Project Grant Program. Examples of such research include the project of Dr. Tak
Wah Mak at University Health Network (Toronto) studying the role of T cells in fighting liver cancer, and
the study of immune cells by Dr. Brad Nelson’s team at the BC Cancer Agency to advance ovarian cancer
immunotherapy.
Of the $1 billion investment, CIHR invested $62 million over five years specifically on pediatric cancer
research. For example, this funding supports the work of Dr. Marco Gallo’s team at the University of
Calgary using genomic approaches and functional studies to understand how DNA structures influence
the growth of PFA ependymoma childhood brain cancer cells.
CIHR provided $2.5 million over five years to the Canadian Collaboration for Child Health: Efficiency and
Excellence in the Ethics Review of Research (CHEER), led by Clinical Trials Ontario and the Maternal
Infant Child & Youth Research Network. CHEER is building a web-based system that researchers and
Research Ethics Boards (REB) across the country can use to manage a single REB review to streamline
ethics review for multi-site clinical trials.
With the investment provided in Budget 2021, CIHR has launched a research initiative on pediatric
cancer, leveraging its Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and the creation
of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium.
The Consortium will advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform
policy and practice predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve lives
of pediatric cancer patients and their families and caregivers. An interconnected Consortium will bring
together the ecosystem of pediatric cancer research platforms, networks, research teams, policy makers
and people with lived/living experience, Indigenous communities and organizations, healthcare
providers and other entities. The Consortium’s work extends to interprovincial, territorial, and
international collaborations in clinical trials and enhancing access to drugs for pediatric cancer patients.
The Consortium will work to establish core research platforms and projects that will advance priority
areas such as:
• Personalized genomic medicine;
• Cell-based therapies;
• Quality of life for pediatric oncology patients throughout the life course, including the prevention
of longer adverse effects (or late effects) of pediatric and adolescent cancer treatments;
Research on equitable and rapid access to medicines.
Dr. David Malkin and Dr. James Whitlock from The Hospital for Sick Children (SickKids) in Toronto will
lead team members from across Canada who have a diversity of experience, including research involving
First Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples of Canada.
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
generate evidence to inform how decisions are made to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and its long-
term impacts and return to a more normal life.
KEY FACTS
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, CIHR and partners have invested over $470 million on 971
research projects through 45 competitions.
• Funds have been allocated towards the initial Rapid Research response to develop COVID-19
tests and vaccines, as well as to the study of the mental health impacts and long-term health impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic on Canadians.
• Budget 2022 committed $20 million over 5 years to support additional research on the long-term
effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians and the wider impacts of COVID-19.
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic and its long-
term health consequences.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will continue to contribute to the evidence
we need to help Canada address this public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THESE INVESTMENTS…
• Since March 2020, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $470
million in 971 research projects, which focus not only on vaccines, but also on other therapeutics,
testing, and transmission dynamics, and other COVID-19 related priority areas . This includes addressing
mental health and substance use needs.
• Building on the Budget 2022 commitment to understanding the long-term effects of COVID-19
infections, CIHR is funding a research network - called Long COVID Web – that will create a national
platform to undertake, consolidate, and coordinate research on the impacts of the Post COVID-19
Condition.
• These investments support research that will increase our understanding of persistent and
emerging gaps and priority areas – including variants of concern and Long-COVID – that continue to
provide decision makers with rapid evidence from which guidance can be developed and evaluated.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
Since March 2020, CIHR has invested approximately $470 million in 971 COVID-19 research projects.
These projects span everything from diagnostics and potential treatments to public health responses and
communication strategies.
CIHR has also worked with partners to invest in Canadian COVID-19 research with dedicated funding for
specific topics such as:
• Indigenous communities’ experiences with COVID-19;
• addressing the mental health and substance use challenges facing Canadians during the
pandemic;
• how to keep residents and staff of long-term care homes safe from COVID-19;
• developing guidelines related to prescribing and dispending opioids during the pandemic; and
• accelerating research and leading the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align
efforts in this field.
CIHR also has engaged with international partners to ensure the alignment and coordination of Canada’s
research with the international response.
CIHR, in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, has invested $10
million to create a pan-Canadian platform to advance research into the effectiveness and clinical
challenges of new COVID-19 treatments in non-hospitalized patients. The Canadian Adaptive Platform
Trial of COVID-19 Therapeutics in Community Settings (CanTreatCOVID) will evaluate the clinical and cost
effectiveness of COVID-19 treatments, such as outpatient medications for COVID-19 and whether they
prevent hospitalization and post COVID-19 condition.
CIHR has also provided $6.7M over 2 years to establish the Pediatric Outcomes Improvement through
Coordination of Research (POPCORN), which is a research structure that is able to comprehensively
answer important child health questions on COVID-19 including the acute and long-term outcomes
following COVID-19 infection and to understand vaccinations in children. In collaboration with the COVID
Immunity Task Force, a $3M supplement has been provided to support the supplement of the POPCORN
to rapidly initiate this serosurvey study on children and youth.
Further, the Government of Canada, under the leadership of CIHR, has established a Centre for Research
on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies (CRPPHE). The Research Centre will allow CIHR to
support real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the research community
and decision-makers alike, as well as to invest $15 million per year to build capacity and fund research
into emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
Most recently, the Centre has been leveraged to implement an investment of $20 million over 5 years in
a Canadian Post COVID-19 Condition Research Network, called Long COVID Web, and led by Dr. Angela
Cheung, a clinician and researcher at University Health Network and the University of Toronto. The
Network will provide a national platform to strengthen Canada’s capacity to coordinate, consolidate, and
undertake ongoing research on the biological, clinical, mental health, health systems, and population
health impacts of Post Covid Condition. Through stakeholder engagement, the Network will provide
timely evidence to inform communities and decision makers.
HEALTH CANADA’S 2023-24 DEPARTMENTAL PLAN
ISSUE
• The 2023-24 Health Canada Departmental Plan (DP) was tabled in the House of Commons on
March 9, 2023 by the President of Treasury Board, along with DPs of all federal departments and
agencies.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada will work with provinces and territories to modernize Canadian healthcare
systems by delivering on the following five priorities: supporting health care workers and reducing wait
times; improving Canadians' access to family health services; working towards a modern and connected
world-class health system; improving access to mental health and substance use services; and helping
Canadians age with dignity, closer to home.
• The Government of Canada committed $5.3 billion over five years, with $1.7 billion ongoing, to
provide dental care for Canadians with family incomes below $90,000.
• Budget 2022 provided $100 million over three years, starting in 2022-23, to Health Canada for
the Substance Use and Addictions Program which supports harm reduction, treatment, and prevention
at the community level.
• Health Canada will continue to invest $3 billion over five years to help provinces, territories and
health care organizations make permanent improvements in the standard of care in their long-term care
facilities.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada will continue to work with provinces and territories to support health care
workers, improve Canadians’ access to family health, mental health and substance use services,
modernize health systems and develop national dental care and pharmacare programs.
• The Department will ensure that mental health is treated equal to physical health and increase
access to culturally appropriate supports that reduce stigma.
• Health Canada will continue to work with stakeholders to protect human health including the
health risks associated with using pesticides.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S RESPONSE TO SUPPORTING THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM AND DRUG
SHORTAGES
• Health Canada will support the transformation of healthcare systems by ensuring Canadians can
access the services they need when and where they need them and by supporting health care workers
and efforts to reduce backlogs for health services such as surgeries and diagnostics.
• The Department will coordinate Canada's response to growing supply challenges related to
drugs, medical devices, and other health products. The Department will also implement new regulations
established during the pandemic to help track, prevent and mitigate shortages.
BACKGROUND
SUPPORTING THE HEALTHCARE SYSTEM
• Health Canada will prioritize increased access to family health care services with a focus on a
range of different professionals supporting patients, as well as enabling health care providers to work in
underserved rural and remote communities.
• The Department will increase effective health data and digital systems through improving how
health data is collected and used to better inform the care that patients receive. This will allow
Canadians to access their own health information in a timely manner.
HUMAN HEALTH RESOURCE CRISIS
• COVID-19 pressures highlighted challenges faced by health care workers. Vacancy rates and
staffing shortages continue to grow at significant rates as increasing numbers of health workers choose
to leave their jobs due to difficult working conditions, workplace stress, and challenges in maintaining a
healthy work-life balance.
• Health Canada will support the transformation of healthcare systems by ensuring Canadians can
access the services they need, support health care workers as well as the efforts in reducing backlogs for
health services such as surgeries and diagnostics. The Department is committed to advancing
collaborative approaches to education, training, licensing, credential recognition and regulation of health
professionals.
DENTAL CARE
• The Government of Canada’s commitment for the new interim Canada Dental Benefit includes
$5.3 billion over five years, with $1.7 billion ongoing, to provide financial support for dental care to
eligible families that have children under the age of 12.
• Communication and outreach activities will continue to ensure eligible families are aware of and
know how to access the interim Benefit. It is the first step to establish a long-term Canada-wide Dental
Care Program for uninsured individuals within the targeted income range.
MENTAL HEALTH
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed to ensure that Canada’s universal healthcare
system treats mental health equal to physical health and to improve access to quality and timely mental
health and substance use supports.
• Health Canada will work with partners and stakeholders to develop and implement a
comprehensive mental health plan aimed at improving access to virtual, quality, and timely services such
as with the Wellness Together Canada portal and its companion app PocketWell. The Department will
also continue expanding access to community-based mental health and substance use services for
children and youth.
SUBSTANCE USE
• Through Budget 2022, $100 million will be provided over three years, starting in 2022-23, to
Health Canada for the Substance Use and Addictions Program to support harm reduction, treatment,
and prevention at the community level as well as continuing to invest in public education, raising
awareness of substance use harms and the importance of reducing the stigma towards people who use
drugs.
• The Department will continue working with partners to develop a comprehensive strategy to
address the substance use and overdose crisis, including monitoring national trends in the use of
alcohol, psychoactive pharmaceuticals and illegal drugs as well as support approaches that divert people
who use drugs away from the criminal justice system and toward appropriate health service and social
supports.
DRUG SHORTAGES
• Health Canada will work to safeguard supplies of drugs, medical devices, and other health
products to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines and devices they need. The Department
will also make use of new regulatory tools established during the pandemic to prevent and mitigate
shortages and will increase its use of data and analytics to monitor and identify shortages.
PESTICIDE REGULATIONS
• Health Canada will modernize the Pest Control Products Act to ensure it is more transparent,
increases the use of independent data and stakeholder advice, and modernizes business processes for
the decision-making process.
• The Department will continue to transform Canada’s pesticide regulatory system to strengthen
its oversight and protection of human health and the environment.
PHARMACARE
• The Department will use information from past engagement to help inform the priorities and
direction of a Canadian Drug Agency. As well, the Government of Canada supports establishing a
universal national pharmacare program as outlined in Budget 2022.
• Health Canada will continue to engage with provinces and territories to implement a National
Strategy on Drugs for Rare Diseases so Canadians with rare diseases can have access to the drugs they
need. The Strategy will also aim to broaden treatments and services for rare diseases and build national
governance and data infrastructure for drugs for rare diseases.
CANNABIS
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the public health and safety impacts of the Cannabis Act
to help Canadians make informed decisions about cannabis use, and support the implementation of the
cannabis legislative and regulatory framework.
PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA 2023–24 DEPARTMENTAL PLAN
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) 2023–24 Departmental Plan was tabled on March 9, 2023.
Key Facts
• The Agency is seeking $4.216B, and a total of 3,338 planned full-time equivalents in 2023-24.
• Planned spending has decreased from 2021-22 and 2022-23 when the Agency was in the peak of
its pandemic response and reflects the current post-crisis phase of the pandemic.
• PHAC has and will continue to leverage lessons learned and apply best practices from the
pandemic to further enable science excellence, meaningful collaborations, strategic policy-making, and
integration for the long-term.
Key Messages
• As we move past the crisis phase of the pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada continues
to play an important role in protecting Canadians’ public health.
• Building enhanced resilience and strengthening Canada’s ability to predict, monitor and respond
to public health threats and events are priorities for the Agency.
• The Agency is committed to providing trusted public health leadership, building on strategic
partnerships, and ensuring timely access to evidence-based information to support Canadians in
protecting their health and the health of their families.
If pressed
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s has ambitious plans for 2023-24 as it strives to fulfill its
mandate to promote and protect the health of Canadians.
• For example, the Agency will work with its partners to launch a renewal process for the National
Immunization Strategy to guide the appropriate, effective, and efficient management of immunization
programs in Canada.
• The Agency will embed Public Health Officers in key organizations across Canada to provide on-
site expertise and advice, increase capacity for monitoring and responding to outbreaks, and gather
evidence on important public health issues.
Background
Budgetary planning summary for core responsibilities and internal services (in millions of dollars)
2021–22 actual expenditures 2022–23 forecast spending 2023–24 Main Estimates 2023–
24 planned spending 2024–25
planned spending 2025–26 planned spending
$8,705 $12,049 $4,216 $4,216 $1,444 $1,269
Planned spending is lower in 2024-25 primarily due to the reduction of the Agency’s investments for its
COVID-19 response for the procurement of vaccines and for the management of medical supplies and
equipment, including personal protective equipment.
Planned spending is lower in 2025-26 primarily due to the expiration of budget authorities for the
surveillance and risk assessment initiative in 2023-24, and a decrease in funding to support the domestic
supply chain of N95 respirators.
Human resources planning summary for core responsibilities and internal services
2021–22 actual full time equivalents 2022–23 forecast full time equivalents 2023–24 planned full
time equivalents 2024–25 planned full time equivalents 2025–26 planned fulltime equivalents
4,368 4,845 3, 338 3,175 2,526
The decrease in planned full-time equivalents in 2025-26 is primarily due to the expiration of budget
authorities for the surveillance and risk assessment initiative and the Immigration Levels Plan in 2024-25.
CFIA’S 2023-24 DEPARTMENTAL PLAN
ISSUE
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s (CFIA) 2023-24 Departmental Plan (DP) provides
information on the Agency’s annual spending plan. The DP describes CFIA’s priorities, planned results
and associated requirements over a three-year period.
KEY FACTS
• The President of Treasury Board tabled Departmental Plans in Parliament on behalf of all federal
organizations on March 9, 2023.
• The Departmental Plan is framed around the Departmental Results Framework (DRF) and CFIA’s
core responsibility: Protecting Canadians by safeguarding Canada’s food system and the plant and animal
resources on which we depend, and supporting the Canadian economy through the trade of Canadian
goods.
• The Departmental Plan focuses on planned initiatives and planned resources (spending and
FTEs) that support achieving our departmental results and broader government priorities and
commitments.
KEY MESSAGES
• The CFIA is the regulatory body responsible for overseeing the safety of Canada’s food supply
and protecting animal health and the plant resource base.
• The Agency continues to meet increasingly complex challenges and will contribute to the health,
safety, and prosperity of all Canadians.
• This Government is making important investments in priority areas to maintain Canada’s strong
food safety system, as well as protect the plant and animal resource base.
• Amongst its many important initiatives in 2023-24, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency will
continue to:
o Address the highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) outbreak and prepare for other potential
significant threats, including African swine fever (ASF);
o tackle food fraud; and,
o facilitate international market access for Canadian food, plants, and animals.
IF PRESSED ON SPENDING
• The increase in spending in 2022–23 is primarily due to statutory compensation payments
related to the avian influenza outbreak.
• The decrease in planned spending for future fiscal years reflects the sunsetting of time-limited,
targeted funding. Renewals for this funding are being sought by CFIA.
BACKGROUND
The CFIA is a science-based regulator of food safety and the health of plants and animals. The Agency is
mandated to:
• implement the requirements of Canada’s food safety system to enhance people’s health and
well-being;
• protect Canada’s plant and animal resources from pests and diseases; and,
• facilitate market access of food, plants, animals and related products at home and abroad to
support the economy.
The CFIA’s Departmental Plan describes the Agency’s results and performance expectations for 2023-
2024. Under the Departmental Results Framework, CFIA has one Core Responsibility — Safe Food and
Healthy Plants and Animals — and three Departmental Results:
• Food sold in Canada is safe and accurately represented to Canadians;
• Plant and animal resources are protected from diseases and pests and are safe for Canadians
and the environment; and
• Canadian food, plants and animals and their associated products can be traded internationally
CIHR’S 2023-24 DEPARTMENTAL PLAN
ISSUE
• The federal government tabled the 2023-24 Departmental Plan (DP) on March 9, 2023.
KEY MESSAGES
• CIHR has made significant investments in research focused on COVID-19 and will continue to do
so as our government addresses the ongoing impact of the pandemic on Canadians and the health
system in Canada.
• In the third year of implementation in its 2021-2031 Strategic Plan, the Agency will also focus on
a more inclusive concept of research excellence, Indigenous engagement, equity, diversity and inclusion,
anti-racism, and accessibility.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is Canada's federal funding agency for health research.
CIHR’s mandate is to “excel, according to internationally accepted standards of scientific excellence, in
the creation of new knowledge and its translation into improved health for Canadians, more effective
health services and products and a strengthened Canadian health care system.”
CIHR will continue to advance its 2021-2031 Strategic Plan, which establishes the context that will allow
Canadian health research to be internationally recognized as inclusive, collaborative, transparent,
culturally safe, and focused on real world impact. The plan envisions a future where Canadian
researchers are global leaders in the development of ground-breaking discoveries that improve lives, and
where Indigenous communities will lead health research that focuses on resilience, wellness, and
Indigenous Ways of Knowing, resulting in equitable health outcomes.
CIHR will also continue to work with agencies and departments on the Canada Research Coordinating
Committee to advance federal priorities and create an inclusive internationally competitive research
ecosystem in Canada. Work will focus on strengthening research excellence by creating a more equitable,
diverse, and inclusive research environment across all disciplines; increasing Canadian engagement in
interdisciplinary, international, high-risk/high-reward, rapid-response research; and positioning Canada
as a valued partner in global research.
The Departmental Plan describes the CIHR’s results and performance expectations for 2023-2024. Under
the Departmental Results Framework, CIHR has one Core Responsibility: Funding Health Research and
Training, measured against three Departmental Results:
- Canada’s health research is internationally competitive,
- Canada’s health research capacity is strengthened,
- Canada’s health research is used.
