Created: 2024-02-23T15:02:40.167591
Name: HESA_Appearance_on_Mandate_Letters-_Saks_Binder
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/74321fd1-d2b1-4b70-8fe0-6f2c168dc687/resource/49f7be28-6938-4a1a-85ef-5da26ba34706/download/saks-hesa-mandate-commitments-nov-1-proactive-disclosure-eng.pdf
Package ID: 74321fd1-d2b1-4b70-8fe0-6f2c168dc687
Keywords: ['Health Canada', 'Health', 'House committee', 'Standing committee on health', 'Minister appearance']
Notes: Minister of Mental Health and Addiction's Binder for the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) to discuss mandate commitments.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Minister Saks
Mandate Letters
November 1st, 2023
HESA APPEARANCE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
NOVEMBER 1st, 2023
TABLE OF CONTENTS
MINISTER OF MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS
PART A: STATUS OF MANDATE PRIORITIES
1. Scenario Note
PART B: QUICK STATS
3. Supervised Consumption Sites Data
4. SUAP Projects by P/T
5. Overview of SUAP Funding and Projects
6. Key Stats: Illegal Drug Use, Safer Supply Projects, SCSs, Naloxone Training and Distribution,
Alcohol-Induced Deaths, Cannabis, Overdose Deaths, Safer Supply Projects, Supervised Consumption
Sites, Naloxone Training and Distribution, Smoking and Vaping Rates, Smoking Deaths, Suicide Rates
PART C: HOT ISSUES
7. Key Messages
8. Safer Supply
9. Supervised Consumption Sites (South Riverdale,)
10. BC Decriminalization
11. Opioids Litigation
12. 3-digit
13. Mental health transfer
14. MAID (Mental Disorder as the Sole Underlying Condition)
15. BLANK
16. BLANK
17. BLANK
PART D: MANDATE PRIORITIES
SUBSTANCE USE
18. Federal Policy on Substance Use and Opioid Overdose Crisis
ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
19. Mental Health Tools
20. Actions Taken to Improve Access to MHAS
21. Rural Mental Health
22. Perinatal Mental Health
23. Mental Health of Black Canadians
24. Federal Approach to Complex Needs
SUICIDE PREVENTION
25. Suicide Prevention
26. National Action Plan
NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH
27. National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
28. Mental Health Supports for Children and Youth
29. Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder
30. Supporting the Mental Health of Post-Secondary Students
DISTINCTIONS-BASED MENTAL HEALTH AND WELLNESS STRATEGY
31. Distinctions Based Mental Wellness Strategies
SMOKING AND TOBACCO
32. Smoking and Tobacco
SUPPORT FOR MENTAL HEALTH OF FIRST RESPONDERS AND VETERANS/CAF MEMBERS
33. Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries
34. Mental Health Benefits for Veterans
PART E: SUPPLEMENTAL
35. Mindmap (Committee Members)
36. HC’s Fourth Annual Report on MAID
37. OPQs
(1) 1554 - Safer Supply
(2) 1610 -Addiction Treatment Facilities
(3) 1708- Safer Supply
(4) 1422- Legislative Review of the Cannabis Act
(5) 1493- Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
(6) 1754- Convention on Tobacco Control
SCENARIO NOTE
MINISTER SAKS
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (HESA) – MANDATE COMMITMENTS
November 1, 2023
MEETING SCENARIO
You will be supported by the following officials who will appear with you at the meeting:
Health Canada
Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister
Eric Costen, Associate Deputy Minister
Jennifer Saxe, Associate Assistant Deputy Minister, Cannabis and Controlled Substances Branch
Michelle Boudreau, Associate Assistant Deputy Minister, Strategic Policy Branch
PHAC
Heather Jeffrey, President
Dr. Theresa Tam, Chief Public Health Officer
Nancy Hamzawi, Executive Vice President
CIHR (virtual)
Tammy Clifford, Acting President
The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will have 5 minutes to deliver.
You will then take questions from Committee members for the remainder of the hour.
The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows: Conservative
Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5 minutes),
Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
The Committee is conducting the following four studies concurrently:
1. Children’s Health (drafting a report)
2. Oversight of Medical Devices (Breast Implants) (drafting a report)
3. Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (drafting a report)
4. Natural Health Products
There are three studies which the Committee has adopted motions to undertake, that have not become
active yet:
1. National Three-Digit Suicide Prevention Hotline (9-8-8)
2. Women’s Health
3. Opioid Epidemic and Toxic Drug Crisis
The Committee’s most recent meetings have been dedicated to finishing the three reports that were
begun before the House of Commons adjourned for the summer recess. Two meetings have also been
held to study new regulations being introduced for Natural Health Products. Officials from the Health
Products and Food Branch and the Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch appeared before the
Committee on September 27 to discuss issues that emerged in media reports over the summer. The
main issues raised at the September 27 appearance included adverse reactions reporting, the economic
impact of proposed regulations, and the intersection of the new regulations and Vanessa’s Law.
The most recent ministerial appearance at the Health Committee was in April 2023, when the previous
Minister of Health appeared with Departmental officials pursuant to the Committee’s study on the
Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB). The last appearance with both Ministers was on
March 23, when the former Minister appeared with the former Minister of Health to discuss the
Supplementary Estimates (C), Main Estimates, and Departmental Plans. The main issues raised at that
time included pharmaceuticals, federal health transfers, the Canada Health Act, alcohol (as a carcinogen
and with regards to labelling), safer supply, drug shortages, dental care, vaccines, healthy lifestyles
(eating, physical activity), children’s health, rare diseases, mental health funding and services, and
substance use.
The Opposition role at the Committee is led by the Conservative Party, who have placed several key
critics (i.e., “shadow ministers”) on the Committee. Dr. Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health,
and Todd Doherty is the Shadow Minister for Mental Health and Suicide Prevention. More recently, they
have raised concerns about supervised consumption sites and the provision of safer supply of controlled
substances, linking it to generalized concerns about decriminalization and overdose related deaths. The
Shadow Minister for Addictions, MP Laila Goodridge, was present at the former Minister’s appearance at
HESA in March for the Supplementary Estimates (C), Main Estimates and Departmental Plans. During the
meeting, Ms. Goodridge commented critically about safer supply and the review of the Cannabis Act.
Ms. Goodridge asked about funding for the Substance Use and Addictions Program and media reports
alleging diversion of controlled substances in safer supply environments. In recent meetings, members
have expressed concerns about proposed regulations for natural health products. Conservative members
have characterized cost-recovery measures as an added tax and expressed skepticism about adverse
reactions reporting.
The New Democratic Party (NDP) presence is led by Don Davies, the Party’s Health Critic and long-
standing member of the Committee, but NDP Mental Health and Harms Reduction critic, Gord Johns, has
often attended meetings when the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions appears. When the former
Minister went in March to discuss the Supplementary Estimates (C), Main Estimates, and Departmental
Plans, Mr. Johns commented critically about government progress on decriminalization and criticized the
amount spent on the Substance Use and Addictions Program. Mr. Johns also asked several questions
about mental health funding, services for substance users, and safer supply. Generally, NDP led the push
for the Committee to study the PMPRB, with Mr. Davies being the originator of the motion and asking
repeated follow-up questions about the matter in the House of Commons during Question Period. Mr.
Davies also supported the Interim Canada Dental Benefit at the Committee and has raised the issue of
dental care in conjunction with the NDP’s support of the Government’s forthcoming Pharmacare
legislation. Mr. Davies has been the leading proponent of the Committee’s upcoming study on Women’s
Health, noting the importance of the issue in several statements in the House of Commons and
identifying breast implants and cancers related to women as issues important to him.
The Bloc Québécois (BQ) presence is led by BQ Health Critic, Luc Thériault. In general, the BQ advocate
for strong protection of matters under provincial jurisdiction and increased federal health transfers. BQ
MPs have repeatedly emphasized a general skepticism about the ability of the Federal Government to
deliver programs that may be similar to those already existing in Quebec. For example, during the debate
on the interim Canada Dental Benefit, BQ members argued that the money being spent on the federal
benefit should be provided to Québec in the form of an additional transfer. Mr. Theriault’s concerns
about federal health transfers have been reflected in other venues. In briefings earlier this year regarding
the Canada Health Act, Mr. Thériault raised concerns about the methodology used estimate deductions
to the Canada Health Transfer for diagnostic services and repeated earlier statements criticizing
conditional health funding for Québec. Mr. Theriault has also been deeply involved in the Committee’s
ongoing study into medical devices (breast implants). He has expressed his interest in establishing a
national breast implant registry, noting past attempts, saying, “since there’s no registry, the women who
are dealing with the problems or who are unaware of any potential problems can’t verify what was
implanted in them.”
NEXT STEPS
The Department endeavours to respond to any follow-up commitments made at the meeting within 2-3
weeks of the appearance.
The Committee’s study on Women’s Health is expected to begin on November 6. Departmental officials
have been invited to appear. The Committee is also projected to begin a study on the Opioid Epidemic
and Toxic Drug Crisis. The study is expected to begin in early 2024.
The Supplementary Estimates (B) 2023-2024 is expected to be referred to the Committee later in
November. It is possible that you and Minister Holland will be invited to appear.
Supervised Consumption Sites (SCS) Data
October 2017 to June 2023
Number of SCSs currently offering services in Canada
As of September 14, 2023, there are 39 sites offering SCS services in Canada
Province/City Number of SCS
Alberta 5
Calgary 1
Edmonton 3
Grande Prairie 1
British Columbia 5
Vancouver 3
Victoria 1
Surrey 1
Ontario 24
Greater Sudbury 1
Guelph 1
Hamilton 1
Kingston 1
Kitchener 1
London 1
Ottawa 4
Peterborough 1
St. Catharines 1
Thunder Bay 1
Toronto 11
Quebec 4
Montreal 4
Saskatchewan 1
Saskatoon 1
CANADA TOTAL 39
Number of overdoses attended to, number of clients and number of visits
Numbers reflecting the period between October 2017 and June 2023
Province Number of overdoses attended to Number of unique clients Number of visits
Ontario 20,975 179,395 1,151,436
British Columbia 5,226 101,454 839,207
Alberta 12,272 60,415 775,301
Quebec 1,325 16,655 90,979
Saskatchewan 34 4,048 11,684
Unknown PT 9,841 - 1,441,767
TOTAL 49,673 361,967 4,310,374
Note: Most of the data received during the period of October 2017 to February 2020 cannot be broken
down by province. This data is captured under “Unknown PT” in the above table. The number of unique
clients is not available prior to March 2020. As such, the number of unique clients reported is from the
period of March 2020 to June 2023.
Q. 4 SCS offering services in Canada by province and city
SUAP PROJECTS BY PROVINCE/TERRIROTY
Number of SUAP projects, broken down by PTs
The total number of active projects as of September 18, 2023, is 253. Of these, 51 are national in scope.
The breakdown by PT and city is as follows:
Province/City SUAP Projects
Alberta 18
Atikameg 1
Calgary 8
Eden Valley 1
Edmonton 4
Fort McMurray 1
Grand Prairie 1
Standoff 1
Stony Plain 1
British Columbia 68
Agassiz 1
Burnaby 3
Campbell River 1
Chilliwack 1
Comox 1
Delta 1
Houston 1
Kelowna 2
Mission 1
Nanaimo 1
Nelson 1
New Westminster 2
Pender Island 1
Penticton 1
Port Alberni 1
Powell River 1
Quesnel 1
Squamish 2
Surrey 5
Vancouver 32
Victoria 8
Manitoba 17
Brandon 1
Pine Falls 1
Selkirk 1
Steinbach 1
Winnipeg 13
New Brunswick 4
Eel Ground 1
Fredericton 1
Moncton 1
St. John 1
Newfoundland 8
Bell Island 1
Clarenville and Bonavista 1
Goose Bay 1
Mount Pearl 1
St. John's 4
Nova Scotia 12
Cape Breton 1
Halifax 8
Kentville 2
Sydney 1
Northwest Territories 2
Fort McPherson 1
Yellowknife 1
Nunavut 1
Hamlet of Pangnirtung 1
Ontario 107
Aurora 1
Belleville 1
Bothwell 1
Brantford 2
Chatham 1
Concord 1
Garden Village 1
Guelph 4
Hamilton 6
Kingston 1
Kitchener 1
Lindsay 1
London 5
M’Chigeeng 1
Markdale 1
Midland 2
North York 1
Ohsweken 1
Ottawa 19
Owen Sound 1
Peterborough 5
Scarborough 3
Sioux Lookout 3
St. Catharines 1
Sudbury 2
Thunder Bay 1
Toronto 36
Waterloo 3
Wikwemikong 1
Prince Edward Island 2
Charlottetown 2
Quebec 2
Quebec City 1
Gatineau 1
Saskatchewan 6
Regina 2
Saskatoon 4
Yukon 4
Pelly Crossing 1
Whitehorse 3
About SUAP
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides grants and contributions (G&Cs)
funding in support of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), as well as the Cannabis
Program and Canada’s Tobacco Strategy.
Through SUAP, Health Canada provides time-limited funding that supports the development and
evaluation of a range of innovative approaches to harm reduction, treatment, and prevention projects,
and meets the needs of disproportionately impacted populations at the community level.
Since 2017, over $500M has been committed for more than 380 projects through SUAP to address the
overdose crisis and other substance use issues.
On September 29, 2023, a new Call for Proposals was launched to solicit new applications. The deadline
for submissions is November 22, 2023.
Active Projects – Breakdown (as of October 2023)
There are currently 248 active SUAP projects across the country, representing $339M in federal funding.
The breakdown of active projects by PT is as follows:
AB: 18 BC: 67 MB: 17 NB: 4 NL: 9 NS: 11
NT: 2 NU: 1 ON: 105 PEI: 2 QC: 2* SK: 6
YK: 4
The Province of Quebec receives SUAP funding on a per-capita basis (approximately 22.5% of SUAP
contribution funding). Funding is administered through contribution agreements with the Ministère de la
Santé et des Services sociaux.
The active SUAP projects focus on the following pillars:
Harm reduction: 144
Treatment: 41
Prevention: 31
Multiple: 32
The active SUAP projects target the following substances:
Opioids: 83
Alcohol: 5
Tobacco: 4
Cannabis: 6
Methamphetamine: 11
Polysubstance: 139
The active SUAP projects focus on the following priority populations:
Indigenous led and/or focused: 50
Youth: 18
2SLGBTQIA+: 3
Impacts of SUAP investments
Cumulatively, as of March 31, 2023, SUAP-funded projects have created a total of:
6,619 knowledge products, including pamphlets, publications, knowledge hubs, training curriculums,
guidelines, apps, and toolkits;
64,437 learning opportunities including training sessions, conferences, webinars, and communities of
practice; and,
2,860 new services including harm reduction, counselling, treatment, safer supply, and drug checking.
Prevention
Areas of focus:
Youth substance use and harms prevention, including building the capacity of teachers to engage
students on substance use related issues, and increasing youth resiliency.
Pain-related projects that address a range of recommendations from the Canadian Pain Task Force,
recognizing the relationship between unmanaged pain and substance use.
Example of results:
As of March 2022, SUAP-funded cannabis public education projects have created 1,404
awareness/education products and delivered 2,133 learning opportunities, which were accessed
approximately 92 million times by Canadians/stakeholders.
Current project example:
Dalhousie University, Halifax NS: Opioids and Our Youth ($613,062) – This project provides additional
resources to youth, parents, caregivers, healthcare professionals and decision-makers related to safe and
effective use of opioids to help manage acute and chronic pain in children and adolescents.
Harm reduction
Areas of focus: naloxone awareness, education, and distribution, as well as safer supply pilot projects,
drug checking and peer capacity building.
Example of results:
As of Spring 2023, investments through SUAP have resulted in the training of nearly 1.5 million
Canadians on how to respond to an overdose, including over 150,000 trained on how to administer
naloxone, and the distribution of more than 69,000 nasal naloxone kits.
Over 4300 clients have accessed services provided by federally funded safer supply initiatives.
Spurred innovation in drug checking technology, and piloted projects to check for toxic and unexpected
substances in the drug supply and communicate this information quickly to both practitioners and
clients.
Current project example:
Kilala Lelum Health Centre, Vancouver BC: Overdose Response Expansion Project - Providing Cultural
Safety and Safer Prescription Medicine Alternatives ($4,734,941) – This project expands existing services
at the Urban Indigenous Health and Healing Cooperative health centre in Vancouver's Downtown East
side to include safer supply and Indigenous Elder-led cultural healing programs.
Treatment and recovery
Areas of focus: broad range of projects, including development of evidence-based guidelines,
implementation or expansion of programs such as rapid access addiction medicine clinics and smoking
cessation supports.
Example of results:
Training for primary care addictions specialists has contributed to increasing health care system capacity
to address substance use.
Development and update of guidelines, such as:
Use of Opioids for the management of chronic non cancer pain: Update of the 2017 Canadian guideline
for safe and effective use of opioids for chronic non cancer pain
Clinical Management of High-risk Drinking and Alcohol Use Disorder
Current project example:
Possibilities Recovery Centre Inc., Saskatoon SK: Indigenous Women's Intensive Outpatient Addiction
support ($696,441) – This project seeks to improve continuity of care by delivering a 16-week intensive
outpatient addiction treatment program for indigenous women with substance use disorders that are
completing prison sentences and beginning to reintegrate into society.
Further SUAP project highlights
Drug Overdose Prevention and Education
Somerset West Community Health Centre (Ottawa ON): This project trains harm reduction peer workers
who provide proactive outreach in non-traditional environments to identify, engage and build capacity
for safer practices with the most isolated members of the substance using community who use alone
and in unsafe conditions.
Since 2019, this program has:
Had 28,875 individual engagements (not unique due to the anonymous nature of the program)
Since April 2022, had 1,796 engagements with African, Caribbean, Black or Indigenous
individuals
Produced 140 educational and training materials and provided 40 presentations and workshops
to a variety of audiences, 819 participants in total
94% of attendees stated they gained knowledge and skills from the workshop.
Conducted 441 injectable and 401 nasal Naloxone training sessions
Provided 1296 injectable and 1789 nasal Naloxone kits
Administered Naloxone to community members 75 times
Funding: $2,070,132
Project duration: June 6, 2019 to March 31, 2024
Service delivery and Capacity Building
St. John’s Ambulance, Canadian Red Cross, Advanced Coronary Treatment Foundation (ACT): These
project were funded to improve access to naloxone.
As of May 2023, these projects:
contributed to more than 1.5M Canadians being trained on how to respond to an overdose,
including 153,730 on how to administer naloxone, and more than 69,000 nasal naloxone kits being
distributed across the country.
A St John Ambulance post-training evaluation found the following:
89% of respondents felt better equipped to advocate for harm reduction practices in their
community or organization
85% of respondents reported an increased comfort administering naloxone, (an increase from
27% pre-training)
Safer Supply
River Stone Recovery Centre (Fredericton NB): This project is implementing a full spectrum recovery
clinic that incorporates individualized care pathways, flexible medical appointments, group therapy
sessions, peer support, social support services, oral opioid agonist therapy, supervised injectable opioid
agonist treatment (iOAT) , and stimulant replacement therapy in a safe, clean and supportive health care
environment.
This project reports that:
89% of patients in iOAT had housing after 24 months.
83% are no longer stealing to support their substance use after 12 months of iOAT.
Funding: $5,247,344
Project duration: March 20, 2020 to March 31, 2024
Wrap-around care
Eastside Movement for Business and Economic Renewal Society (Vancouver BC): This project provides
rapid access, long-term addictions care to people who have gained employment through the EMBERS
Eastside Works program in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside.
4 new services offered: Peer-run SMART Recovery Sessions, Group Counselling Session, Individual
Counselling sessions, and Clinical appointment accompaniments, and 117 clients have used these
services.
100% of clients interviewed reported practicing safer use, increased attachment to healthcare services,
and increased substance use management including abstinence.
Evaluations of this project have found that achieving employment goals was positively correlated with
reduced risk of substance use related harms and improvements in physical and mental health.
Funding: $576,615
Project duration: April 19, 2021 to March 31, 2024
Best Practices and Service Delivery
Unity Health Toronto (Toronto ON): This project is piloting an emerging drug checking technology device
called DoseCheck, with the goal of expanding access to overdose prevention technology in underserved
settings and among structurally vulnerable populations.
The project reports that:
DoseCheck and a smartphone-based portable drug checking device is being pilot tested at 3 harm
reduction sites in Canada.
Funding: $438,038
Project duration: March 29, 2022 to March 31, 2023
Drug Checking
University of Western Ontario (London ON): This project operates a drug checking laboratory at Western
University and a novel drug checking system (“Scatr”) to 8-10 supervised consumption sites. The project
supports people who use drugs and people who inject drugs, as well as support workers.
Scatr was the winner of the 2018 Drug Checking Technology Challenge and was awarded the $1 million
grand prize to further develop and build their technology that is rapid, accurate, has quantification
ability, and is easy to use in a front-line environment.
The project reports that:
Scatr is available at 11 harm reduction sites across Canada
Funding: $1,995,775
Project duration: January 20, 2023 to March 31, 2024
Public Education and Research
Governing Council of the University of Toronto (Toronto ON) : This project develops video case studies
that collect, through interviews, the experiences of people who use drugs and have received emergency
room care in hospitals in Ontario. Led by people who use drugs, the conversations enable the
organization to identify existing barriers to health care for people who use drugs.
Funding: $470,027
Project duration: March 7, 2023 to March 31, 2025
Public Education and Capacity Building
Community Addiction Peer Support Association (Ottawa ON): Through this initiative, the organization
works with trained peer leaders who help influence decision makers of organizations that serve people
who use substances. These efforts influence system-level changes to reduce substance-related stigma
within their respective organizations.
The project reports that:
85% of respondents who took Community Addiction Peer Support Association’s training are now
confident using person-first language (person-first language emphasizes the person before the disability)
among family and friends.
Funding: $3,277,567
Project duration: March 1, 2021 to March 31, 2025
Project started in March of 2023 and as such, projects results are not available.
KEY STATISTICS OF INTEREST
Prevalence of illegal drug use:
Past-year use of at least one of six illegal drugs in the general population aged 15+ was 3% and use of
pharmaceuticals for non-therapeutic reasons was 2%
Past 12-month use of one or more illegal drugs in youth grades 7-12 was 7% and use of pharmaceuticals
for non-therapeutic reasons was 6.6%
Opioid overdose deaths:
There was a total of 38,514apparent opioid toxicity deaths between January 2016 and March 2023
Year Number of total apparent opioid toxicity deaths Average number of opioid toxicity deaths per day
2016 2,831 8
2017 3,925 11
2018 4,219 12
2019 3,716 10
2020 6,421 18
2021 8,015 22
2022 7,483 21
2023 (Jan to Mar)1,904 21
So far in 2023 (January to March):
73% of the total deaths occurred among men and 88% of the total deaths occurred among people aged
20 to 59
48% of accidental opioid toxicity deaths also involved a stimulant
79% of accidental stimulant toxicity deaths also involved an opioid
Among those who died that were employed, most were concentrated in the trades and other physically
demanding occupations: approximately 30% of opioid-related deaths in ON and 23% in BC occurred
among people working in the construction industry
Opioid overdose deaths – regional variations :
So far in 2023 (January to March), 90% of the total apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred in Ontario,
British Columbia, and Alberta (1,715 deaths)
Elevated mortality rates have also been observed in other areas with smaller population sizes, including
Saskatchewan and Yukon (13.1 and 27.4 deaths per 100,000, respectively)
Safer supply projects:
As of October 2023:
There are 29 projects currently active serving approximately 4,300 clients.
Health Canada has supported a total of 31 safer supply pilot projects across Canada through the
Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), representing total funding of over $102 million.
Supervised consumption sites (SCS):
There are currently 39 SCS offering services in Canada
From October 2017 to June 2023 at SCS in Canada:
There were over 4.3 million visits
There were at least 361,000 unique clients
Almost 50,000 overdoses were attended to
Staff made over 257,000 referrals to health and social services
Note: Additional PT overdose prevention sites/urgent public health need sites are authorized through a
HC exemption for PTs
Naloxone training and distribution:
SUAP-funded naloxone projects have resulted in the training of nearly 1.5 million Canadians on how to
respond to an overdose, over 153,000 trained to administer naloxone, and more than 69,000 nasal
naloxone kits distributed across Canada (as of spring 2023).
Alcohol-induced Deaths
Year # of alcohol-related deaths
2019 3,200
2020 3,790
2021 3,870
Cannabis Use Rate
Among the overall population, past-year cannabis use has increased slightly since legalization, continuing
a pre-existing trend
The proportion of past-year cannabis consumers who use daily/almost daily (high risk behavior) has not
changed since legalization
Prevalence of past-year use among youth has not followed the upward trend observed in the general
population and has remained relatively stable
Frequency of use has remained relatively stable among youth
Age of first use has remained relatively stable with an average age of initiation of 14 years
Smoking remains the most common method of consuming cannabis, but is declining steadily
Smoking is the most common method for frequent use (daily or near daily)
Consumers are shifting to ingesting (eating or drinking) or vaping cannabis
Smoking & Vaping Rates
Age Current daily cigarette smoking Past-30-day vaping
General pop 15+ 8% 6%
15-19 (youth) 1% 14%
20-24 (young adults) 3% 20%
25+ (adults) 9% 4%
Smoking deaths (per year)
Smoking is the leading preventable cause of premature death in Canada and kills more than 46,000
Canadians every year; that is about one Canadian every 11 minutes (data as of 2020).
Suicide Rates
Approximately 12 people die by suicide each day
Approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year
In 2019, suicide was the ninth leading cause of death among all Canadians.
In 2019, suicide was the second leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries.
In 2021, there were 3,769 deaths by suicide reported (according to preliminary data).
The 2020 and 2021 data is provisional and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the next year.
While mortality data during the pandemic is not readily available, data on the prevalence of suicidal
ideation among adults shows that thoughts of suicide did not increase in fall 2020 and was similar to the
pre-pandemic level of 2019 (2.7%); however, prevalence of suicidal ideation (suicidal thoughts or ideas)
significantly increased to 4.2% in spring/winter 2021.
Key Messages
Since becoming Minister of Mental Health and Addictions this summer, I have heard from Canadians
across the country.
They’ve told me about their substance use and mental health challenges and how these are shaping
their lives. I’ve heard from parents and from youth, from experts and frontline workers.
We are living through turbulent and challenging times and in a world that is changing rapidly.
Canadians have told me that governments need to use every tool at our disposal to address this
unprecedented and unrelenting public health crisis. And that’s exactly what we’re doing.
Our Government’s approach to mental health and substance use puts Canadians at the centre of
everything we do.
Guided by experts and by evidence, we are taking a public health approach, with the understanding that
we must be compassionate and bold in our efforts (1) to address the deadly overdose crisis and toxic
drug supply, and (2) to improve access to high quality mental health supports, as a vital part of the
health care system.
The Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy is balanced, comprehensive and evidence-based. It is about
reducing harms, saving lives, promoting well-being, and keeping families and communities safe.
We have made historic investments across the entire continuum of care. From prevention, education and
early intervention, to harm reduction, treatment and wrap around supports.
We have invested over $500 million in more than 380 community-based projects from coast to coast to
coast. And we are investing in health system change to ensure our health care system provides timely
access to mental health services whenever and wherever they need them.
That is why we made mental health a central priority as part of the Working Together to Improve Health
Care for Canadians plan. I believe unequivocally: health care must include mental health care.
We are also focused on helping the most vulnerable. Suicide prevention is a top priority and we will soon
launch the 9-8-8 Suicide Crisis Helpline. As of November 30, people in Canada will have easier access to
24/7/365 bilingual, trauma-informed, culturally appropriate suicide prevention and emotional distress
support.
Helping the most vulnerable people in our society requires compassion and conviction. Our government
has been unflinching in our effort to boldly support crisis interventions, to scale up evidence base
services that are proven to save lives, and to be vigilant in working with our partners in addressing these
challenging and complex realities.
Every one of our investments is an investment in health care. Its an investment in people to promote
mental health and wellbeing and in keeping our loved ones and neighbours safe.
Harm Reduction – Safer Supply
Harm reduction is health care. Harm reduction is the door to the system.
Safe consumption sites have responded to almost 50,000 overdoses since 2017.
Our Government has invested over 100 million dollars to expand access to a safer supply and other
substitution treatment programs.
Common sense without science means lives lost. Raising stigma and fear is killing people.
Our Government will use every tool at our disposal to end this national public health crisis.
PHARMACEUTICAL ALTERNATIVES TO THE TOXIC DRUG SUPPLY
KEY MESSAGES
Canada’s high rates of overdose death are being driven by an illegal drug supply of lethally potent and
adulterated drugs where a single dose can kill. That is why our government is committed to using every
tool at our disposal to save lives as first step to supporting recovery and health, keep communities safe,
and dismantle criminal drug trafficking and organizations.
These programs are being evaluated by experts across Canada. We are seeing some promising early
outcomes, including reports of reductions in hospitalizations and emergency department visits. Clients
and providers are also reporting a reduction in overdoses, illegal drug use, and criminal activity.
The concerns expressed by some physicians about the diversion of Hydromorphone are deeply
concerning. In response I have directed the department to look into the situation on urgent basis and I
am prepared to take action if needed.
The primary goal of these programs is to save lives and reach people at risk of overdose whose current
care options have not been effective. It can keep them alive, and help connect them to other health and
social services.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE AROUND PROGRAMS PROVIDING PHARMACEUTICAL ALTERNATIVES
Providing pharmaceutical alternatives to the toxic drug supply is an emerging practice, focused on saving
lives.
These programs are being evaluated by experts across Canada. We are seeing some promising early
outcomes, including reports of reductions in hospitalizations and emergency department visits. Clients
and providers are also reporting a reduction in overdoses, illegal drug use, and criminal activity.
We are also aware of some concerns, such as diversion, and are committed to taking action where
necessary.
Health Canada will continue to evaluate all available and emerging evidence in regard to programs
providing pharmaceutical alternatives to understand the potential benefits and risks.
IF PRESSED ON DIVERSION FROM PROVIDING PHARMACEUTICAL ALTERNATIVES
Health Canada takes the issue of diversion of controlled substances very seriously. We are aware that
there are reports of diversion of some forms of drugs from programs that provide pharmaceutical
alternatives.
The concerns expressed by some physicians about the diversion of Hydromorphone are deeply
concerning. In response I have directed the department to look into the situation on urgent basis and I
am prepared to take action if needed.
The diversion of controlled substances is illegal, regardless of where it takes place. This includes giving
away, trading or selling these drugs to other people.
Provinces, territories, healthcare providers and patients, all have a role to play in ensuring that drugs
used in these programs are only consumed by the people to whom they were prescribed.
IF PRESSED ON SPECIFIC ACTIVITIES TO ADDRESS DIVERSION
The concerns expressed by some physicians about the diversion of Hydromorphone are deeply
concerning. In response I have directed the department to look into the situation on urgent basis and I
am prepared to take action if needed.
Current projects have implemented a range of measures to help prevent diversion, which may include:
patient screening
physician oversight of prescribing (dosage and scheduling)
follow up consultations/monitoring with patients
urine drugs screening tests to monitor consumed substances
health care practitioners may crush hydromorphone tablets before providing them to patients
for fentanyl patches, can be covered and signed by physician to prevent removal
participants being made aware that diversion can result in removal from the program
some projects are expanding the range of drugs offered to better meet client tolerances, including
compounding their own drug formulations
IF PRESSED ON MEDICATION-ASSISTED TREATMENT
Programs that provide pharmaceutical alternatives sit within a continuum of services where medications
are prescribed in the context of a therapeutic relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient.
Programs that provide pharmaceutical alternatives are informed by well-established domestic and
international evidence from medication-assisted treatment services, which are considered the gold
standard of treatment for substance use disorder.
Unlike medication-assisted treatment, the goal of programs that provide pharmaceutical alternatives is
not treatment, but preventing overdose deaths. As such, they have different features and approaches
compared to medication-assisted treatment, and need to be assessed on their own merits.
IF PRESSED ON UNSUPERVISED DOSES
Prescriber models include those in which medications are consumed in front of the health care provider,
or those where patients are provided with take-home doses.
Observed dosing requires an individual to visit a site several times a day, which may impede ones daily
life. For those who are employed, this can affect their income.
Some qualitative evaluations of safer supply have described the benefit of greater control over drug use
due to take-home dosing. For example, some clients have described how take-home dosing has allowed
them to address withdrawal symptoms during hours when the clinic was closed, so they did not have to
resort to the illegal drug market.
BACKGROUND
Safer supply sits within a continuum of services where medications are prescribed in the context of a
therapeutic relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient. Safer supply services are informed
by well-established domestic and international evidence from medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
services, which are considered the gold standard of treatment for substance use disorder. Unlike these
services, the goal of safer supply is not treatment, but preventing overdose deaths. As such, they have
different features and approaches compared to MAT, and need to be assessed on their own merits. The
evidence base specific to safer supply services is still developing, but is growing. Existing studies and
evaluations of safer supply programs are showing some promising early outcomes, including strong
evidence of reduced emergency department visits and hospitalizations among safer supply clients. Other
studies have been conducted by researchers across the country that include client and provider reports
of a range of benefits, including:
reductions in overdoses;
reductions in illegal drug use;
reduced engagement in criminalized activities;
improved access to health and social services;
improved relationships with and trust in primary care providers among clients who face barriers to care;
and
other quality of life improvements including improved physical and mental health, the time and stability
needed to pursue personal goals, and better relationships with children and family members.
Health Canada recognizes that additional high-quality evidence is needed that address potential benefits
and risks of safer supply. To help build this evidence, Health Canada is supporting assessment and
evaluation projects related to Substance Use and Addictions Program-funded pilot projects. This includes
a preliminary assessment of 10 safer supply pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New
Brunswick. The federal government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), is also
supporting a study being conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse. This four-year evaluation research project focuses on program implementation and
the short-term health outcomes of eleven of the government funded safer supply pilot projects. The
final results of this study are expected in 2025. Additionally, CIHR has awarded $2 million to the
University of Victoria to support a four-year study evaluating the safer supply initiatives in British
Columbia in partnership with Indigenous leaders, Elders and system partners.
It is important to understand that safer supply services exist in a limited number of locations in Canada,
and currently serve a relatively small number of clients compared to the total number of people who use
drugs and who are at risk of overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada. The focus of
federally funded projects has been on building the evidence around this new practice. Because of the
relatively small scale of these pilot projects (i.e. 29 projects nationally, serving approximately 4300
clients), they are unlikely to have a significant measurable impact on the overall rates of overdose within
the broader population of Canada. As noted above, several studies to date report that safer supply
services are working well for clients in these programs, including client reports of reductions in
hospitalizations, overdoses, illegal drug use, and criminal activity.
Report on Riverdale
We offer our deepest condolences to the family and friends of Karolina Huebner-Makurat individual who
lost her life.
We are deeply committed to providing evidence-based services and supports to people who use drugs,
and, in doing so, we take the health and safety of those using these services, and their surrounding
communities, very seriously.
Health Canada is in constant communication with the site and worked with them to improve community
engagement, reduce loitering and improve security around the centre.
We will continue to work with them to protect both public health and public safety.
.SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES / SITE DE CONSUMMATION SUPERVISÉE
KEY MESSAGES
Supervised Consumption Sites are essential to keeping people who consume drugs alive by providing
them access to a range of support services in a sanitary and supervised environment, staffed by trained
professionals and peers.
The Supreme Court of Canada, experts, service providers, parents and people with lived experience
agree that supervised consumption sites save lives and often are the first step along the path to a
healthier life.
There are currently 39 sites in Canada. They have seen over 4.3 million visits and responded to 50,000
overdoses. Importantly, SCS are responsible for over 256,000 referrals to health and social services.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEATH OUTSIDE OF SOUTH RIVERDALE COMMUNITY HEALTH CENTRE (TORONTO)
I offer my deepest condolences to the family and friends of the individual who lost their life in July in
Leslieville. This is a tragic situation that concerns us all.
The South Riverdale Community Health Centre is a non-profit organization that provides social and
community outreach services to the people of East Toronto. Over the last 45 years, they have provided
services to more than 14,000 unique clients and has reversed at least 1,097 overdoses since the
supervised consumption site opened in November 2017.
The Government of Canada is deeply committed to providing evidence-based services and supports to
people who use drugs, and, in doing so, takes the health and safety of those using these services, and
their surrounding communities, very seriously.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL AND PROVINCIAL RESPONSIBILITIES
The oversight of the operations of SCS is a shared responsibility.
All levels of government must work together to ensure access to these life-saving services in a manner
which also respects the security of the surrounding community.
In terms of Health Canada’s responsibilities, we predominantly ensure compliance with rules for internal
operations, policies and procedures of the site.
The Provinces also plays an important role, often as a funder. For example, some sites in Ontario receive
funding from the Government of Ontario to operate as a Consumption and Treatment Services site. As
such, they are subject to the Ontario provincial Consumption and Treatment Services Application Guide.
Other local matters, such as zoning or noise and other bylaws, are within the purview of municipal
governments.
Finally, matters pertaining to illegal activity outside the site remain within the full discretion of the
police.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT THE GOVERNMENT IS DOING REGARDING THE COMMUNITY CONCERNS AROUND
SOUTH RIVERDALE
On September 19, 2023, the Government of Canada conducted a compliance verification at the South
Riverdale Community Health Centre. The verification assessed, and confirmed, that the site is following
the rules in their current exemption.
We understand there continues to be strong community concerns, and are working with the Ontario
Ministry of Health to strengthen ongoing community engagement.
The Government of Canada is fully exercising our authority, and is currently exploring additional terms
and conditions to ensure enhanced community engagement and community safety activities and
reinforce what must be undertaken by the site.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR SITES IN SUDBURY AND TIMMINS
Sites offering supervised consumption in Sudbury and Timmins are currently operating on temporary
funding due to expire at the end of December 2023.
The Government of Canada confirmed that both sites are awaiting funding decisions from the Ontario
Ministry of Health Consumption and Treatment Services program, in order to continue operating.
IF PRESSED ON THE MINIMUM DISTANCE THAT AN SCS CAN BE FROM SCHOOLS
Supervised consumption sites provide life saving services and connect people suffering from substance
use harms with the help they need.
These sites must comply with federal, provincial and municipal laws.
While there is no set minimum distance from schools, supervised consumption sites must specify how
community concerns, such as proximity to schools, will be mitigated.
All levels of government must work together to ensure access to these life-saving services in a manner
which also respects the security of the surrounding community.
BACKGROUND
Supervised consumption services save lives and benefit communities. Supervised consumption sites
provide a safe, clean space for people to bring their own drugs to use, in the presence of trained staff.
This prevents accidental overdoses and reduces the spread of infectious diseases, such as HIV.
Supervised consumption sites may offer a range of evidence-based harm reduction services, such as
drug checking. The sites also provide access to important health and social services, including substance
use treatment for those who are ready.
Health Canada has supported the rapid expansion of supervised consumption services across Canada.
Since January 2016, the number of federally approved supervised consumption sites offering services
has grown from 1 to 39. Health Canada also proactively issued exemptions that allows provinces and
territories to establish new temporary Urgent Public Health Need Sites – also known as overdose
prevention sites – within existing supervised consumption sites, shelters or other temporary sites, as
needed. Urgent Public Health Need Sites, unlike supervised consumption sites, are temporary locations
that can be set up rapidly to address the overdose crisis. Both share the goal of reducing overdose
deaths.
BC Decrim
BC asked for this 3 year time-limited exemption that began in January 2023.
We take the safety of all Canadians seriously, that’s why from the beginning we have approached this
from both a public health and a public safety perspective.
This exemption will be continuously monitored, assessed and adjusted if needed.
Local governments do have tools and by laws they can amend to address any unintended consequences
or concerns, of which we have always maintained we would be closely monitoring BC.
Local Bylaws on Public Use
The exemption granted to BC does not change the ability of local governments to pass or amend their
bylaws as they know the best needs of their community and how to respond to it.
Stigma has led people to die alone.
We continue to work relentlessly to reduce substance use related harms.
Our government recognizes the tremendous work B.C. has been doing across the full continuum of care
to address the overdose crisis and we will continue to work with them to save lives.
Threshold for BC
This crisis has taken a tragic toll on families, loved ones and communities across Canada.
In granting this cumulative threshold, several sources of data were carefully considered, including
purchasing and use patterns, public health data, and law enforcement data.
The 2.5 gram cumulative threshold that was approved by Health Canada is supported by the Canadian
Association of Chiefs of Police
The implementation of this exemption, will be closely monitored and evaluated to meet public health
and public safety objectives
If Pressed – Threshold for BC
The amount of any specific drug a person may possess does not necessarily equate to the amount they
will use at one time.
The composition of the drug supply is changing and now it’s often a combination of substances
frequently unknown even to those who use substances.
Peddling ignorance, anecdotes, raising fear and stigma won’t solve this crisis. I invite my colleagues to
look at the evidences, listen to the families and peoples directly impacted by this crisis and take the time
to understand what is needed on the ground
BC Implementation
We are moving forward on decriminalization through a responsible framework and in partnership with a
jurisdiction that continues to experience high rates of overdose deaths.
We have set out requirements and expectations for implementation, and we look forward to regular
updates from the BC government as they go through this process.
Our government will partner with BC on any further implementation needs including monitoring,
oversight and support to address the overdose crisis in the province
Diversion of Safer Supply
Diversion is an issue of concern that applies to any prescribed medications and not just to the
medications prescribed by safer supply programs
All Healthcare professionals, must follow rules around the secure handling of controlled substances,
including measures to help prevent diversion.
Provinces and territories also have professional standards and mandated obligations that must be
adhered to.
Selling and buying drugs is and will remain illegal
We will continue to monitor this issue and take appropriate action where necessary.
If Pressed on Reports of Diversion from Safer Supply Programs
Systematic evaluations have shown that safer supply programs, when administered appropriately, save
lives, keep communities safe, and dismantle criminal drug trafficking and organizations.
We are aware of concerns that some have raised with potential diversion. I take these concerns very
seriously.
We are looking into these allegations urgently and we are prepared to take action where necessary.
Diversion of drugs from safer supply programs is illegal.
Health Canada supports law enforcement actions to address drug trafficking and support community
safety. This involves working with both local law enforcement officials, and the RCMP.
BC Decrim – Rigourous Monitoring and Evaluation
We have put in place controls to monitor this exemption.
An arm’s length evaluation framework led by the Ontario Node of the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse (CRISM) is in place as a monitoring mechanism.
The framework was developed by CRISM in collaboration with other national and international experts.
They meet on a regular basis with an advisory board of experts from fields including health, policy, and
economy.
SUBSECTION 56(1) REQUESTS FOR PERSONAL POSSESSION
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
In January 2023, a three year exemption came into effect in BC so that adults will not be subject to
criminal charges for the personal possession of small amounts of certain illegal drugs.
This exemption is one part of our comprehensive response and will help reduce stigma that leads people
to use drugs alone and not seek the help they need.
As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, Health Canada is working closely with BC to monitor and
evaluate the exemption and make any adjustments needed.
ISSUE
The overdose crisis is one of the most significant public health challenges Canada has faced in decades.
This crisis has led to increased calls from various stakeholders, including chiefs of police, medical officers
of health, health organizations, and municipalities, to advocate for decriminalizing the personal
possession of small amounts of controlled substances a component of a comprehensive response to this
issue. That comprehensive response also includes increasing access to pharmaceutical-grade alternatives
(safer supply) to the toxic illegal drug supply, prevention and destigmatization activities, and investing in
a robust system of treatment, care and wrap-around support for people with substance use disorders.
The federal government, in partnership with provinces and other stakeholders, is continually monitoring
and evaluating all of these measures to strengthen the evidence base and identify best practices.
In May 2022, in response to a request of the province of British Columbia (B.C.) and as one part of the
province’s comprehensive response to addressing the crisis, the former federal Minister of Mental
Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health, Dr. Carolyn Bennett, granted a three-year
exemption under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). This exemption ensures that adults
18 years of age and older in the province will not face criminal charges for personal possession of small
amounts of certain illegal drugs, with a few exceptions applying to certain locations including schools,
child care facilities, and in motor vehicles (as well as playgrounds, splash pads, wading pools, skateparks
as of September 2023). This means that between January 31, 2023 and January 31, 2026, adults in B.C.
found in possession of up to a cumulative 2.5 grams of certain illegal drugs for personal use, will not be
arrested or charged with possession, or have their drugs seized. Instead, individuals will be provided with
information on available services and, if requested, support in connecting with services. A similar
request is under review from Toronto Public Health.
KEY FACTS
Since 2016, more than 38,500 people have died of an overdose in Canada.
In B.C., reports that examined illicit drug toxicity deaths in the province from August 2017 to July 2021
found that 52% of people who died were using drugs alone. However, in April 2020, following the
introduction of COVID-19 restrictions, 61% of those who died were using alone.
Indigenous and racialized communities in B.C. have been, and continue to be, disproportionately
impacted by the overdose crisis and are overrepresented in the criminal justice system.
Canada is treating substance use as a health issue, not a criminal one. Stakeholders have reported that
stigma and fear of criminalization cause some people to hide their drug use, use alone, or use in other
ways that increase risk of harm to the person who is using drugs and their community. Stakeholders have
also reported that stigma and fear act as barriers to many in accessing important health and social
services, including treatment, and that reducing stigma can help save lives.
Since B.C.’s CDSA exemption came into effect in January 2023, some B.C. municipalities, law
enforcement, and community members have raised concerns that the exemption increases risk of public
drug use without providing law enforcement with the necessary tools to manage this risk. Public drug
use is a longstanding issue that pre-dates the granting of the exemption. To date, there is no data that
indicates that the exemption has led to an increase in public drug consumption.
At the request of BC, the exemption was amended on September 7, 2023 to prohibit possession in
additional spaces designed for children: playgrounds, splash pads, wading pools, and skateparks. On
October 5, 2023, BC tabled legislation to regulate public drug use in certain locations including those
listed in the amendment as well as broader locations such as sports fields, beaches, parks, outdoor
community recreation areas, near business and residential entrances and public bus stops.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to working with its partners across the country and using all
available tools that address substance use harms in a compassionate and human-centred way.
That’s why we approved B.C.’s exemption request, which will help to divert people who use drugs away
from the criminal justice system and towards supportive relationships in health and social services.
These services are key to reducing immediate harms, and helping people find their way to appropriate
treatment.
The federal government continues to work closely with B.C. to support the successful implementation of
this exemption.
As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, all levels of government, partners and stakeholders are
working together to closely monitor impacts and learn from the implementation.
IF PRESSED ON A NATIONAL APPROACH TO ALTERNATIVES TO CRIMINAL PENALTIES FOR PERSONAL
DRUG POSSESSION (DECRIMINALIZATION)
We recognize that, for people who drugs, having a criminal record can exacerbate many of the drivers of
substance use and act as a barrier to accessing the services and supports they need to achieve
wellbeing.
Our Government supports policies and approaches that divert people who use drugs away from the
criminal justice system and toward appropriate health and social supports.
We continue to work with our partners to support life-saving services for those struggling with substance
use, while safeguarding the safety and security of the community.
Should other jurisdictions come forward with similar exemption requests, the Government of Canada
will carefully and thoroughly review them on a case-by-case basis, taking into account all relevant
considerations, including evidence of potential benefits and risks or harms to the health and safety of
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FROM LAW ENFORCEMENT
A broad range of stakeholders, including the Canadian Association of Chiefs of Police and several
municipalities, have called for decriminalization of the personal possession of illegal drugs in Canada as
one part of a comprehensive response, especially in the context of the worsening drug overdose crisis.
This position has been echoed by a number of police chiefs and local mayors across the country.
When BC’s exemption was granted, the CACP released a statement applauding the decision.
IF PRESSED ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF AN EXEMPTION LIKE THIS (115 WORDS) …
This exemption is part of a broader strategy B.C. and this Government are taking to help save lives, and
people who use drugs access supports and services, rather than face criminal charges.
B.C. is investing in the rapid scale-up of life-saving initiatives including take-home naloxone, medication-
assisted treatments, expanded harm reduction services, and improvements to their treatment and
recovery systems.
These investments are starting to make a difference, with B.C.’s data snapshot showing more people
accessing life-saving services, including treatment, in the past year.
The Federal Government will continue to work with law and border enforcement partners across the
country to address the role of organized crime in the production, diversion and trafficking of illegal
substances.
IF PRESSED ON A COMPREHENSIVE RESPONSE
A comprehensive approach that involves a range of actions is needed to save lives, improve health and
maintain safety in our communities.
Our government supports a comprehensive drug strategy with investments in prevention, treatment,
harm reduction and enforcement.
To respond to substance use and mental health needs for British Columbians, this government has
provided over $587.69 million to B.C. since 2017.
B.C.’s data snapshot, released this September, provides a picture of what these types of investments can
do to support people in accessing a range of life-saving services.
IF PRESSED ON B.C’s DATA SNAPSHOT
We are pleased to see that the report evaluates concrete actions, including access to primary care,
treatment, housing, among other criteria. These are critical to a comprehensive response to this crisis
and the successful implementation of this exemption.
It is promising to see that in the past year, fewer people are being criminalized for personal possession
and more people are accessing lifesaving services, including treatment.
We are reviewing the report thoroughly to inform our ongoing discussions with B.C. to monitor this
novel exemption.
IF PRESSED ON DATA MONITORING AND EVALUATION OUTCOMES
The exemption is subject to monitoring and third-party evaluation to gather evidence and data so that
we can be sure the exemption continues to be the right decision for the people of B.C.
We are looking at a range of indicators related to health, criminal justice, stigma related to substance
use, and social/community wellbeing.
Data was published by B.C. this September through a dashboard, which Health Canada is thoroughly
reviewing.
We are working with the province to analyze the data and evidence, assess impact, and inform
implementation, including effective mitigation measures for any unintended consequences.
IF PRESSED ON OPEN DRUG USE
This government is committed to taking a public health and compassionate approach to people who use
drugs, while also making sure people feel safe in their communities.
B.C. worked with local governments to develop its exemption request.
Based on feedback from stakeholders BC decided to propose legislation to regulate public use and
request an amendment to the exemption to prohibit drug use in public areas where children are present.
This Government acted quickly to grant the amendment to maintain public safety while the Bill moves
through the legislative process.
We will continue to support B.C. to address this long-standing public health and safety challenge,
including monitoring the impacts of the exemption and make any adjustments as needed to help protect
public health and maintain public safety.
IF PRESSED ON THE DIFFERENCE BETWEEN BC’S PROPOSED LEGISLATION ON PUBLIC DRUG USE AND THE
AMENDMENTS TO THE EXEMPTION
BC requested an amendment to the exemption to prohibit possession in playgrounds, splash pads,
wading pools and skateparks.
These narrow amendments will help maintain safe community spaces for children without increasing
stigma that can drive people to use drugs alone.
BC’s proposed legislation is expected to compliment the objectives of the exemption by giving law
enforcement the tools they need to maintain safety without re-criminalizing personal possession.
BACKGROUND
The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) is one of Canada's federal drug control laws. It provides
the legislative framework for the control of drugs (e.g. heroin, fentanyl, cocaine, methamphetamines,
etc.) that can result in harm when misused or diverted to an illegal market. Under the Act, activities with
controlled substances are generally prohibited, unless specifically authorized through the Act’s
regulations or an exemption granted under the Act. Section 4(1) of the CDSA makes it a criminal offence
to possess most controlled substances.
Given the urgency of the of the overdose crisis, some stakeholders are seeking an exemption from the
CDSA as the fastest mechanism to remove criminal penalties for the personal possession of small
amounts of controlled substances, which is intended to reduce stigma and increase the likelihood that
individuals will seek help without fear of a criminal penalty.
Subsection 56(1) of the CDSA provides the Minister with the authority to exempt persons or substances
from the application of any provision of the CDSA or its regulations, if, in the opinion of the Minister, the
exemption is necessary for a medical or scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest. Each
exemption request received is considered on a case-by-case basis, based on the dual public health and
public safety objectives of the CDSA.
Factors considered in assessing requests include:
Scope of the exemption, including definition of personal possession and possession by minors
Consultations with key populations, including Indigenous communities, people who use drugs, partners,
law enforcement and stakeholders
Measures to redirect people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system and towards health
and social services
Readiness and capacity of health and social systems
Public education and communications plan
Law enforcement readiness, including the development of training and guidelines
Operational considerations, such as how key risks will be mitigated
Monitoring and evaluation plan, including a focus on the impact on populations at increased risks of
substance use harms
On May 31, 2022, the Federal Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
granted the province of B.C.’s request for a three-year subsection 56(1) exemption under the CDSA,
effective from January 31 2023 to January 31 2026. The exemption was amended in September 2023 to
prohibit possession in additional locations designed for children: playgrounds, splash pads, wading pools,
and skateparks. The exemption is being monitored and evaluated closely. While an exemption request
was also received from the City of Vancouver in 2021, the request was put on hold following the
approval of the B.C.-wide exemption. Health Canada is also in receipt of a similar exemption request
from Toronto Public Health, which remains under review.
Litigations against Pharmaceutical Companies
The opposition is behind the times and is offering nothing new on this critical issue. We invite them to
work with us to save lives rather than promoting fear.
We’ve been working with BC since 2018 on litigation against big pharma and those who enabled them,
and were part of the Purdue Settlement in June 2022.
At our request, BC also amended their legislation to reinforce the federal government’s participation in
these Class Actions.
Canada has also addressed pharma’s predatory practices by further restricting the marketing of opioids
and increasing maximum financial penalties.
PHARMACEUTICAL LITIGATION
ISSUE
British Columbia’s proposed class actions against opioid manufacturers, distributors and consultants seek
damages for opioid-related health care costs on behalf of the provincial, territorial and federal
governments.
KEY FACTS
Canada is part of BC’s proposed class action against 50 opioid manufacturers and distributors for
allegedly acting inappropriately in the sale and distribution of opioids in Canada.
Canada is also part of BC’s proposed class action against McKinsey & Company for allegedly acting
inappropriately in the course of providing consulting and advisory services to opioid manufacturers and
distributors in Canada.
Since the inception of this litigation, Canada has been working with all governments to advance the
litigation as we work together to address the opioid crisis.
Canada is part of the largest settlement of a government health care costs claim in Canadian history with
the BC Supreme Court approving the $150M settlement with Purdue in December 2022.
Canada was added to BC’s Opioids Cost Recovery legislation in 2022. N.S. and QC have introduced similar
legislation which also includes Canada. Such legislative amendments reinforce Canada’s participation in
BC’s class actions.
KEY MESSAGES
We support provinces and territories in their efforts to recover health care costs from any company that
acted inappropriately in the marketing and distribution of opioids.
It is BC’s decision on how to engage in litigation to obtain redress for its losses. BC has chosen to proceed
by way of class proceedings, and include all federal, provincial and territorial governments in its
proposed class.
This litigation, legislative initiatives and settlement with Purdue are examples of the significant
cooperation that exists with provinces and territories as we work together to address the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON MCKINSEY
We support provinces and territories in their efforts to recover health care costs from any companies
that acted inappropriately in the marketing and distribution of opioids.
It is BC’s decision on how to engage in litigation to obtain redress for its losses. BC has chosen to proceed
by way of a class proceeding against McKinsey & Company, and include all federal, provincial and
territorial governments in its proposed class.
This litigation against McKinsey & Company remains at an early stage and the allegations contained in
BC’s claim have not yet been proven in a Canadian Court of law.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCIAL OPIOIDS RECOVERY LEGISLATION
Canada is pleased with the provinces’ addition of Canada to their opioids recovery legislation.
These legislative provisions will give Canada a statutory basis for claiming damages from the
pharmaceutical industry with respect to the opioid crisis in those jurisdictions.
These amendments are an example of the significant cooperation that exists between provinces and
territories and the Government of Canada as we work together to address the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT ACTION THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS TAKING?
In collaboration with all orders of government, partners, stakeholders, people with lived and living
experience of drug use, and organizations in communities across the country, our government is
committed to addressing substance use and addiction.
There is significant cooperation in this litigation between all Canadian governments, as we work together
to address the overdose crisis. Three provinces to date have amended or tabled legislation to include a
cause of action for Canada which reinforces the federal government’s participation in BC’s Class Actions.
We want all governments to recover health care costs from any companies that acted inappropriately in
the marketing and distribution of opioids.
Canada has also taken action on the broader issue of predatory practices of pharmaceutical companies,
including significantly increasing the maximum financial penalties and further restricting the marketing
of opioids. We will continue to explore all options to ensure that companies are held accountable for
their role in the overdose crisis if they acted inappropriately in the marketing and distribution of opioids.
IF PRESSED ON INAPPROPRIATE MARKETING
The health and safety of Canadians is our Government’s top priority.
The Food and Drugs Act has been amended in recent years to dramatically strengthen the penalties
upon conviction for non-compliance with the new regulatory requirements. The amendments also
enabled the Minister of Health to put in place additional restrictions that apply to all prescription opioid-
related advertising materials since June 2019.
Health Canada will not hesitate to address advertising and marketing abuses using the new powers at its
disposal.
BACKGROUND
LEGAL STANDPOINT
The current overdose crisis in Canada continues to be one of the most serious public health crises in
recent history.
In collaboration with all levels of government, partners, stakeholders, people with lived and living
experience with substance use, and organizations in communities across the country, the Government of
Canada is addressing substance use and addiction.
Provinces and territories, which primarily deliver healthcare in Canada, are best placed to bring civil
actions against the pharmaceutical industry due to the costs they have incurred.
In August 2018, BC commenced a proposed class action lawsuit against 50 opioid manufacturers and
distributors for allegedly acting inappropriately in the sale and distribution of opioids in Canada. One of
those defendants is the Canadian entity of Purdue Pharma.
BC’s Notice of Claim indicates that the action is brought on behalf of all federal, provincial and territorial
governments.
In October 2018, BC passed the Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs Recovery Act to support its legal
action. This legislation creates a statutory cause of action and right for BC to recover from opioid
manufacturers and distributors opioid related health care costs incurred by the BC government.
On October 17, 2022, BC announced proposed amendments to its Opioid Damages and Health Care
Costs Recovery Act. One of the proposed amendments was to add Canada to that legislation. Those
amendments received Royal Assent on November 4, 2022. In October 2023, Quebec (QC) and Nova
Scotia (NS) introduced opioids recovery legislation that also included a cause of action for Canada.
The inclusion of Canada in BC, NS and QC’s opioid recovery legislation is an example of the significant
cooperation that exists between the provinces and territories and the Government of Canada as they
work together to address the overdose crisis.
In December 2022, the BC Court approved an out of court settlement BC had negotiated earlier that year
with one of the defendants, Purdue Pharma. Under that settlement, Purdue agreed to pay $150 million
for the Canadian governments’ claims.
Participating in this settlement is another example of the significant cooperation that exists in this
litigation between all Canadian governments and the Government of Canada, as they work together to
address the overdose crisis.
In December 2022, the BC Court also confirmed that BC’s Opioid Damages and Health Care Costs
Recovery Act is constitutional and thus this matter may continue to proceed as a proposed class action
on behalf of all Governments. The decision of December 8 was appealed. On July 28, 2023, the Court of
Appeal for British Columbia upheld the constitutionality of BC’s legislation. Since then, however, certain
defendants have filed an application for leave to appeal this decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
BC’s legal action against the remaining opioid manufacturer and distributor defendants is ongoing with
multiple court hearings currently scheduled. The next major step will be BC’s application to certify this
proposed class action lawsuit in the BC Supreme Court which has been scheduled for the Fall of 2023.
In December 2021, BC also commenced a proposed class action against McKinsey & Company on behalf
of all Canadian governments. In this action, BC alleges in its Notice of Claim that McKinsey & Company
acted inappropriately in the course of providing consulting and advisory services to opioid
manufacturers and distributors in Canada.
BC’s legal action against McKinsey is still at a very early stage and is ongoing. The next major step will be
BC’s application to certify this proposed class action lawsuit in the BC Supreme Court which has been
scheduled for February 2024.
REGULATORY STANDPOINT
The Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (also known as Vanessa’s Law), received Royal Assent
on November 6, 2014. This legislation, which amended the Food and Drugs Act, strengthened Health
Canada’s safety oversight of therapeutic products by giving the regulator increased authorities to collect
post-market safety information and take appropriate action when a serious health risk is identified.
These amendments also introduce important new transparency measures which will ensure that
Canadians have timely access to drug safety information. Together, these amendments will lead to
improved patient safety and better health outcomes for Canadians.
The Food and Drugs Act was amended in 2014 to increase the penalties available upon conviction for a
contravention in advertising occurs, including when any person makes false and misleading statements.
The maximum penalty is now up to $5 million per offence.
These amendments also introduced a new power for the Minister of Health to impose and amend terms
and conditions (T&Cs) on authorizations for drugs and medical devices. Since 2019, the Minister of
Health imposed T&Cs on prescription opioid products in Part B of the List of Opioids.
These T&Cs include the requirements that manufacturers must seek review from an independent
advertising preclearance agency (APA) recognized by Health Canada for all materials directed to
healthcare professionals. This APA review determines whether the materials are promotional, and if so,
whether they respect the terms of market authorization. Additionally, all advertising materials of
prescription opioids provided to health care professionals must only include verbatim statements
contained in the Canadian Product Monograph and must fairly balance statements about benefits and
risks. The T&Cs also require manufacturers to develop and implement Risk Management Plans for
prescription opioids with proactive activities to monitor and mitigate opioid harms in Canada.
In addition to T&Cs, the Food and Drug Regulations were amended in 2018 to strengthen information
provided to patients by using patient information handouts and warning stickers and require
manufacturers to monitor and manage risks related to opioids.
Overview of Authorities and when they came into force
Certain authorities contained in the amendments came into force immediately at Royal Assent in 2014,
namely:
the Minister of Health’s ability to:
require a person to provide them with information;
disclose confidential business information in certain circumstances;
order a label change/package modification; and,
order a recall.
Other Vanessa’s Law authorities required the making of regulations before being given effect. These
regulations came into force as follows:
2018
the Minister’s ability to:
require a manufacturer to conduct tests and studies;
require a manufacturer to assess a therapeutic product’s safety and effectiveness; and,
a requirement for an authorization or license holder to report information concerning the safety of a
therapeutic product issued by a foreign regulator;
Minister’s authority to impose terms and conditions on authorizations for opioids.
2019
mandatory reporting of serious adverse drug reactions and medical device incidents by healthcare
institutions;
making clinical information in drug submissions and medical devices publicly available after Health
Canada makes a final regulatory decision
In addition, Health Canada is currently working on regulatory proposals to:
Extend the Minister’s authority to impose and amend terms and conditions on authorizations at any
time for all drugs and medical devices. The draft regulations were prepublished in the Canada Gazette
Part 1 on December 17, 2022.
3-Digit
We’re committed to being there for people when they need it most, by providing access to greater
mental health services.
We’ve provided over $156 million to CAMH to support the implementation of 988.
It will be available for people in crisis to call, 24/7, as of November 30.
988 is meant to be a crisis line, it’s not a proactive measure.
Mental health and the ongoing supports are needed beyond that moment of crisis.
9-8-8: 3-DIGIT NUMBER FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION
ISSUE
Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over 3 years to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8,
a three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress. Of these funds, $156 million over
three years is being provided to the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and
operate 9-8-8, and the remaining $2.4 million over three years (approximately $800,000 per year) is
allocated to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to cover the oversight, administration, reporting
and evaluation activities associated with 9-8-8, including the management of the funding agreement
with CAMH. The federal government is undertaking a review to establish a long-term funding mechanism
for this service in 2025-26.
KEY FACTS
As highlighted in the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission’s (CRTC) August
2022 determination, on November 30, 2023, 9-8-8 will be available across Canada. The number has been
designated for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate suicide prevention and emotional
distress support.
KEY MESSAGES
Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over 3 years to launch and implement 9-8-8, a three-digit
number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health is coordinating service delivery of 9-8-8. The Public Health
Agency of Canada is working with the Centre and engaging with partners to coordinate implementation
and raise awareness of 9-8-8.
As of November 30, 2023, 9-8-8 will be available in Canada. This easy-to-remember, three-digit number
will make it easier for people to access the help they need, when they need it most.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING FOR IMPLEMENTATION
As highlighted in the CRTC’s decision, telecommunication service providers needed up to 15 months to
implement 9-8-8 dialing across Canada as the work involves:
Introducing ten-digit local dialing in areas where seven-digit dialing is still the default.
Making the necessary changes to networks to enable callers to dial or text 9 8 8.
The Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health as it leads
the implementation and operation of 9-8-8 with partners.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING
Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over 3 years to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8,
a three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
Of this investment, the Public Health Agency of Canada is providing $156 million over three years to the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health to support the implementation and operation of 9-8-8.
The remaining $2.4 million over three years is allocated to the Public Health Agency of Canada to cover
the oversight, administration, reporting, and evaluation activities associated with 9-8-8.
IF PRESSED ON POLICE SERVICES
9-8-8 Network Partners have protocols in place to handle emergency situations where there is imminent
risk. This said, CAMH is engaging with emergency services and law enforcement stakeholders on
improvements to crisis response coordination and protocols in preparation for the implementation of 9-
8-8.
IF PRESSED ON HOW 9-8-8 WILL FUNCTION IN THE PROVINCE OF QUEBEC?
Discussions are currently underway between the Public Health Agency of Canada, the Centre for
Addiction and Mental Health, and the Quebec government to determine how 9-8-8 will work in the
province, including how it will work with the existing provincial service: 1-866-APPELLE.
As of November 30, 2023, anyone across Canada who calls 9-8-8 will receive access to suicide prevention
support regardless of where they live.
BACKGROUND
On August 31, 2022, PHAC announced that the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was
selected to lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery, building on its experience delivering Talk
Suicide Canada. Further to this announcement, on July 24, 2023, the Minister of Mental Health and
Addictions announced that PHAC is investing $156 million over three years to CAMH, as referenced
above.
PHAC is engaging stakeholders from a range of sectors, including Provinces and Territories, Indigenous
partners, public safety officials, and People with Lived Experience on 9-8-8 implementation while also
closely following experience from the United States, who launched their 9-8-8 service on July 16, 2022,
after over 4 years of preparation.
In a La Presse article from October 22, 2023, the Quebec government indicated that it does not plan to
promote 9-8-8 within the province. However, in the article, the province confirmed that it is working
with federal authorities to ensure that 9-8-8 interactions are appropriately transferred to Quebec's
service, 1-866-APPELLE (1-866-277-3553), and PHAC can confirm that discussions between CAMH and
provincial services are underway.
PHAC contracted PricewaterhouseCoopers to understand anticipated service volume and demand for 9-
8-8. This analysis factored in anticipated demand for Talk Suicide Canada over time, the impact of
diverted calls from other services, including 911 and local crisis lines, as well as new growth associated
with introducing an easy-to-remember number. This analysis forecasts a four to six-fold increase from
the existing Talk Suicide Canada service volume by 2027. This exercise builds on forecasting analysis
undertaken by the U.S. which estimated a four- to tenfold growth in service volumes within the first five
years of launching 9-8-8. In the initial months following the launch of 9-8-8, the U.S. experienced a
higher volume of calls and texts than initially forecasted. PHAC will work with CAMH to closely monitor
demand for the service to inform the review to establish a long-term funding mechanism for 9-8-8 after
the three-year funding period cited in Budget 2023.
This initiative builds upon the Government’s current support of a pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service. PHAC is currently investing $21 million over 5 years ($4.2 million per year) for CAMH, with their
partners, to implement and sustain Talk Suicide Canada. PHAC has also provided CAMH with more than
$28 million in supplementary funding over 2.5 years, primarily to sustain and grow the service’s capacity
to meet increasing demand, as well as to prepare for 9-8-8.
Talk Suicide Canada currently provides people across Canada with suicide crisis support from trained
responders via phone (1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by
text (45645) in the evenings.
Mental Health Transfer
We know our response to mental health is stronger when provided as part of integrated care.
We are transferring billions of dollars to provinces and territories to support health care, including
mental health care, over the coming years through both an increase of the Canada Health Transfer, and
the new ten-year bilateral agreements – that’s an additional $25 billion.
Mental health is one of the four shared priorities in the new bilateral agreements and integrated into the
other three.
CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
In 2021, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions was mandated to ‘work with the Minister of
Health, and with the support of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, to establish a
permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high-quality,
accessible and free mental health services, including for prevention and treatment.
Recognizing the importance of an integrated approach, Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of
Canada’s commitment of historic federal transfers to provinces and territories to improve health care in
Canada. Mental health and substance use services is one of four shared health priorities, supported by
$25B over ten years in targeted funding through bilateral agreements with provinces and territories.
These bilateral agreements will support progress on the four shared priorities (family health teams,
health workforce and backlogs, mental health and substance use, modernized health system) to improve
access to health care, with mental health addressed by or included within all four priorities.
ISSUE
Federal support to improve access to mental health and substance use services.
KEY FACTS
Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in Canada
through additional investments in health care of close to $200 billion over ten years, of which $25B will
flow to provinces and territories through tailored bilateral agreements. These bilateral agreements will
support progress on four shared priorities to improve access to health care, with mental health
addressed by or included within all four priorities.
This investment builds on previous federal commitments for mental health and substance use, including
an investment of $5 billion over ten years in Budget 2017 to provinces and territories to improve access
to mental health and substance use services, coupled with agreement by federal, provincial and
territorial Health Ministers on the importance of promoting mental wellness and addressing gaps in
mental health and substance use services and supports, including for children and youth.
The government has also invested more than $1 billion to directly address the overdose crisis and toxic
illegal drug supply. Budget 2023 provided a total of $359.2 million over five years to support a renewed
Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy. The renewed strategy will continue to address both public
health and public safety and guide the Government's work to save lives and protect the health of
Canadians.
In addition, the government is taking a number of complementary measures to enhance access to
needed mental health and substance use supports, including launching 9-8-8, the new suicide
prevention crisis line.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government recognizes that mental health services need to be integrated as a full and equal part of
our health care system.
That is why our Government is making historic investments of close to $200 billion over ten years to
improve health care.
This includes $25 billion over ten years to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements for four
shared priorities, including mental health and substance use.
We are also working with provinces and territories to advance key initiatives, such as launching 9-8-8 –
the suicide prevention crisis line and to address the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON LACK OF DEDICATED TRANSFER
Our government is committed to a comprehensive, compassionate and patient- centered approach, so
that Canadians have access the services they need, whether physical or mental health care.
That is why our government is taking an integrated, inclusive approach to its investments, focused on
four complementary shared priorities: expanding family health teams, supporting the health workforce,
modernizing health systems and increasing access to mental health and substance use.
Together, these investments are supporting integration of mental health and substance use services
within the health system, enabling access to the comprehensive care Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS
As part of the historic federal investments, provinces and territories will collect and report on three
headline indicators for mental health and substance use services:
Median wait times for community mental health and substance use services;
Percentage of youth aged 12-25 with access to integrated youth services for mental health and
substance use; and,
Percentage of Canadians with a mental disorder who have unmet mental health care needs.
These indicators will allow better measurement of progress in increasing access to mental health and
substance use services.
BACKGROUND
The 2021 Liberal platform indicated a commitment to establish a new federal transfer to provinces and
territories—the Canada Mental Health Transfer—to assist jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-
quality, accessible, and free mental health services with an initial investment of $4.5 billion over 5 years.
In 2021, the federal Minister of Mental Health and Addictions was mandated to ‘work with the Minister
of Health, and with the support of the Deputy Prime Minister and Minister of Finance, to establish a
permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high-quality,
accessible and free mental health services, including for prevention and treatment.’
The Government’s intention to engage provinces and territories on the development of a federal transfer
for mental health was reaffirmed through language in Budget 2022.
Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in Canada
through additional health care transfers of close to $200 billion over ten years.
Recognizing that mental health needed to be integrated within health systems, the government is
providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories for shared health priorities, with mental health
addressed by or embedded within all four priorities. These shared priorities -- family health services,
health workers and backlogs, mental health and substance use, and a modernized health system --- will
together result in improved access to services, including for mental health. Provinces and territories are
also being asked to report on results, with three headline indicators identified to track progress on
improved access to mental health and substance use services.
BC was the first province to sign its bilateral agreement in October 10, 2023, with initiatives to support:
Enhancing access to mental health and addictions services by building on existing efforts in areas of
integrated youth services, treatment and recovery, and innovative approaches to respond to the ongoing
overdose crisis. British Columbia plans to expand the number of Foundry centers from 16 to 35 across
the province, and reduce 30-day re-admissions for mental illness or substance use; and
Supporting efforts led by the First Nations Health Authority to increase the number of individuals and
communities with access to culturally safer, trauma-informed, and culturally appropriate healing and
treatment services, and mental health and substance use care;
Additionally, to reflect the Government of Canada’s comprehensive approach to addressing the overdose
crisis, targeted funding of over $1B has been allocated across federal departments and agencies to
address key, interrelated priorities.
MAID
Medical assistance in dying (MAID) is a complex and deeply personal issue. Every individual’s journey is
different and presenting a request for MAID is a serious decision.
Every person’s situation is considered and carefully assessed by medical/nurse practitioners, informed by
their practice knowledge, expertise and experience, in a compassionate manner.
The MAID system is carefully designed with safeguards to protect vulnerable people.
Our government remains committed to supporting individuals who meet the eligibility criteria to have
their MAID request considered in a fair, safe and consistent manner, while supporting the safeguards to
respect and protect vulnerable people.
EXPANSION OF MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – MENTAL ILLNESS
ISSUE
Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause excluding
persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID until March 17,
2023.
On February 2, 2023, the Government of Canada introduced legislation, Bill C-39, to extend – by a year –
the exclusion of eligibility for MAID where a person's sole underlying medical condition is a mental
illness, until March 17, 2024. Bill C-39 received Royal Assent on March 9, 2023. This has allowed time for
the dissemination of key resources by clinicians, including the release of a Model Practice Standard for
regulating bodies in provinces and territories, an accompanying Advice to the Profession guidance
document, and a national accredited MAID curriculum for clinicians.
Despite the work done to support health system preparedness, views by health care stakeholders and
the public remain divisive about expanding MAID eligibility in March 2024 for persons whose sole
underlying condition is a mental illness.
On October 18, 2023, Bill C-314 was voted down in the House of Commons. The bill proposed
permanent exclusion of MAID for persons whose sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness.
KEY FACTS
In preparing for the repeal of the exclusion clause in March 2024, the Government of Canada, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, has supported a range of initiatives towards preparedness,
guided by recommendations from the Expert Panel, that include:
Development of a model MAID Practice Standard designed for use by regulatory bodies and clinicians in
addressing complex requests for MAID, including where mental illness is involved (completed March
2023).
Development and launch (August 2023) of a nationally accredited MAID Training Curriculum.
Funding a Knowledge Exchange Workshop (June 2023) that included over 40 MAID practitioners, as well
as psychiatrists, from across Canada to discuss roles and contributions to the proper assessment and
management of MAID where mental disorders are involved, and support local training related to MAID
for mental disorders.
Regulatory amendments to the federal MAID Monitoring System to enhance data collection and enrich
research and analysis and reporting back to Canadians (enacted January 1, 2023 with new data to be
reported in 2024).
Early activities on engagement with Indigenous Peoples (online tool launched August 17, 2023, with
other Health Canada-led and Indigenous-led activities planned for 2024).
KEY MESSAGES
The Government recognizes that MAID is a deeply personal choice and remains committed to supporting
eligible individuals in having their MAID request considered in a fair, safe and consistent manner, while
supporting efforts to protect those who may be vulnerable.
The Government extended the temporary exclusion of eligibility for MAID for persons suffering solely
from a mental illness to March 2024.
This has allowed time for the development and release of clinician resources supported by our
Government such as a model MAID Practice Standard and an accredited MAID curriculum .
The Government continues to work closely with the provinces and territories and health stakeholders to
support the development and uptake of resources for safe access to MAID for people who suffer solely
from a mental illness.
IF PRESSED ON THE WORK UNDERTAKEN TO SUPPORT PREPAREDNESS
Our Government is collaborating with provinces and territories, medical and mental health communities
to support system preparedness for the repeal of the mental illness exclusion.
This year, we supported important initiatives including development of a model Practice Standard and
Advice to the Profession, and the launch of an accredited bilingual curriculum for MAID clinicians. We
also funded two Knowledge Exchange Workshops for MAID assessors and providers and launched
ongoing engagement with Indigenous Peoples to understand their diverse views and perspectives on
MAID.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AS THE SOLE UNDERLYING
CONDITION
The Government recognizes that mental disorders can cause suffering on par with that of physical
illnesses.
The Government also recognizes that there are diverse views on MAID and mental illness within the
psychiatric community.
Resources such as the Model MAID Practice Standard, Advice to the Profession, and the MAID training
curriculum, and additional resources developed by provinces and territories will support the medical and
psychiatric communities in being prepared for the upcoming changes to the law.
IF PRESSED ON THE MAID FOR MENTAL ILLNESS AND SUBSTANCE USE
MAID is an option that is available only for eligible Canadians, and the legislation sets a high bar with
stringent eligibility criteria and robust procedural safeguards. The MAID provisions in the Criminal Code
are carefully designed to protect vulnerable people, including those suffering from mental disorders
including substance use disorder.
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability; be in
an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and intolerable
suffering. The person seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable and available
means to relieve the person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously considered those means.
The Government has provided significant funding to support mental health and substance use supports
and to develop national standards for substance use services.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLY THOSE
WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS
The legislation sets a high bar for access. Only individuals with severe, long-standing and treatment-
resistant mental illnesses will be considered for MAID.
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability; be in
an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and intolerable
suffering.
The person seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable and available means to
relieve the person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously considered those means. These
safeguards for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help practitioners identify and potentially
address the sources of suffering and vulnerability that could lead the person to ask for MAID.
The Model MAID Practice Standard indicates that assessors and providers should ensure that a person’s
request is consistent, unambiguous and rationally considered during a prolonged period of stability, and
not during a time of crisis or suicide ideation.
The Government has provided significant funding to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8, a
three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
MAID assessors in Canada are required by their regulating bodies to consider the totality of
circumstances of any individual requesting MAID. Safeguards include a minimum assessment period for
persons not at imminent risk of dying and a requirement to consult providers with expertise in the
requester’s condition.
These safeguards for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help practitioners identify and
potentially address the sources of suffering and vulnerability that could lead the person to ask for MAID.
No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports, such as housing and mental
health services.
Improving access to social and health services remains a priority and governments are working to
address disparities.
On June 22, 2023, the Government passed the Canada Disability Benefit Act to reduce poverty and
support financial security of persons with disabilities.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC’S RECENTLY PASSED AMENDMENTS TO ITS PROVINCIAL LEGISLATION (ACT
RESPECTING END OF LIFE CARE)
On June 7, 2023, the Quebec National Assembly passed Bill 11, An Act to amend the Act respecting end-
of-life care, which amends the MAID-related provisions in Quebec’s existing end-of-life legislation.
It is too early to comment on that legislation. However, the federal government is interested in
continued collaboration on this important file with the Quebec government.
BACKGROUND
MAID LEGISLATION AND MENTAL ILLNESS
In the original 2016 legislation (former Bill C-14), which legalized MAID for persons whose natural death
was reasonably foreseeable, the Act required the Ministers of Health and Justice to initiate independent
reviews on three particularly complex issues, including requests where the sole underlying medical
condition was mental illness.
In 2016, the Government asked the Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) to conduct these independent
studies. Following a comprehensive study of this matter, experts in this field could not come to a
consensus on this very complicated issue.
Four years later, the Government introduced former Bill C-7, which proposed to expand MAID eligibility
to persons whose death was not reasonably foreseeable. As introduced, former Bill C-7 contained a
provision stating that mental illness was not considered to be a disease, illness or disability. In other
words, requests for MAID based solely on mental illness would not be permitted. As such, no provision
for a temporary exclusion was included in the former Bill.
During its study of former Bill C-7, the Senate concluded that MAID requests based solely on mental
illness should be permitted, and amended the former Bill to include a temporary, 18 month exclusion of
eligibility.
In March 2023, Bill C-39 extended by - one year - the temporary exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons
suffering solely from a mental illness.
MAID AND SUBSTANCE USE DISORDER
To be eligible for MAID, a person must: have a serious and incurable illness, disease, or disability; be in
an advanced state of irreversible decline in capability; and, experience enduring and intolerable
suffering. All three of these criteria must be met for a person to be deemed eligible. Furthermore, the
legislation includes enhanced safeguards, which make it a responsibility of the medical practitioner to
ensure that an individual seeking MAID is made aware of the supports available to them. The person
seeking MAID and the practitioners must have discussed reasonable and available means to relieve the
person’s suffering, and agree that the person has seriously considered those means. These safeguards
for persons not nearing a natural death aim to help practitioners identify and potentially address the
sources of suffering and vulnerability that could lead the person to ask for MAID.
Clinician resources, such as a MAID practice standard and a training curriculum, have been developed to
assist clinicians in their assessments of complex MAID requests, such as those that involve a mental
disorder. These resources point to the need to assess the person over a period of time and not during a
time of crisis to ascertain the durability of the condition and proper capacity to consent. The MAID
curriculum includes a module on MAID and mental illness which includes information on substance use
disorder.
No one can receive MAID solely on the basis of lack of social supports such as housing and mental health
services. All jurisdictions in Canada have a broad range of policies, programs and initiatives aimed at
providing health and social service supports to individuals.
Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing $45 million to develop national standards for mental
health and substance use services, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations,
and key stakeholders. National standards will help to ensure that Canadians receive high quality, (e.g.,
safe, effective, patient-centred, equitable, and culturally sensitive) evidence-based mental health and
substance use services. The Government of Canada is also currently investing $5 billion over ten years to
improve Canadians’ access to mental health and substance use services. The investment is being
provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand
access to community-based mental health and addiction services.
THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
As a requirement of former Bill C-7, an Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to
conduct an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental
Illness was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. It included 19 recommendations that provide guidance
on the interpretation of the MAID eligibility criteria, application of the legislated safeguards, and the
assessment process, as well as advice on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime
more broadly.
The Expert Panel found that the challenges people tend to associate with MAID eligibility for persons
with mental disorder (e.g., irremediability, decision-making capacity, suicidality and structural
vulnerability) are neither unique to requests for MAID from persons with a mental disorder, nor
applicable to every requester who has a mental disorder.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that new legal safeguards are not required to ensure that requests for
MAID from individuals with a mental disorder are handled safely and appropriately. They noted that the
legal framework for MAID already sets a very high bar for eligibility – that existing MAID eligibility criteria
and safeguards, when interpreted appropriately and buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices
in related areas of healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex
(track two) MAID requests, including where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition.
The key consideration for the Panel was ensuring that practitioners have additional guidance on how to
operationalize the existing eligibility criteria and safeguards in the context of mental disorder and other
complex MAID requests.
The central recommendation of the Panel was for federal, provincial and territorial governments to
facilitate collaboration among regulatory bodies on the development of MAID practice standards. This
process was completed in March 2023.
In addition to the collaborative work towards the development of MAID practice standards, provinces
and territories, in collaboration with healthcare regulators and MAID communities, have also been
working towards preparedness – some creating specific teams, adding resources, updating their practice
standards and encouraging training to help clinicians in addressing requests for those more complex
MAID cases, and where mental illness is a sole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations to help prepare the
MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress included: developing
a practice standard for MAID; developing a nationally fully accredited MAID curriculum; enhancements
to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID; plans for Indigenous
engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The 2021 legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following its
Royal Assent. It stipulated that the Parliamentary Review must address (but not necessarily be limited to)
the topics of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and
the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) held three meetings before dissolution. The committee
reconvened in April 2022 and, on June 23, 2022, submitted an interim report, specifically focused on
MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The interim report made no
formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the timely implementation of the
recommendations of the Expert Panel.
AMAD’s final report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics under its remit, was tabled on
February 15, 2023. On June 15, 2023, the Government tabled its Response to AMAD’s report and
recommendations in the House of Commons.
It is anticipated that AMAD will reconvene in 2023 for further study.
.
BLANK TAB
BLANK TAB
BLANK TAB
OVERDOSE CRISIS
KEY MESSAGES
Since 2017, our Government has invested more than $1 billion to directly address the overdose crisis and
toxic illegal drug supply, including for prevention and education, treatment, life saving harm reduction
services and enforcement.
We have focused on raising awareness of substance use harms, ways to reduce them, and the
importance of reducing stigma.
We have expanded harm reduction initiatives to save lives and reach key groups, including Indigenous
peoples.
We have made significant Investments to help meet the demand for substance use treatment. Through
Budget 2023, the Government of Canada is providing close to $200-billion to provinces and territories
over the next 10 years to support health system transformation, including greater to access to quality
mental health and substance use services.
We have made significant investments in distinctions based, culturally grounded mental health and
wellness strategies, supporting Indigenous peoples in assuming control of the delivery of services.
And we continue to invest in law enforcement actions to address drug trafficking so that our
communities remain safe.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF INVESTMENTS
Actions under the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy have made a difference in our response to
the overdose crisis.
The federal government has significantly expanded access to life saving harm reduction services,
including Supervised Consumption Sites which have reversed close to 50,000 overdoses.
It has also invested funding to expanding Naloxone awareness, training and distribution across Canada
that have trained nearly 1.5 million Canadians on how to respond to an overdose.
It has funded youth awareness tours like Know More Opioids that has interacted with over 175,000
young people in Canada
The federal government has also provided funding to provinces and territories to increase access to
treatment services, including increasing the number of beds and access to Rapid Addiction Access
Medicine (RAAM) clinics.
The government has and will continue to invest in evidence based actions that will reduce harms and
save the lives of people in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE CDSS
We need to leverage every available tool to save lives and protect the health and safety of Canadians,
and prevent needless harms and deaths caused by substance use.
In response to the overdose crisis, the government is expanding the access and quality to a full
continuum of evidence based services to support individuals and communities across Canada.
The federal government's actions are guided by the renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy,
which takes a public health and public safety approach to the overdose crisis and substance use.
The strategy is informed by the advice of experts, including health professionals, Chiefs of Police, and the
experience of communities across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON CDSS INVESTMENTS IN BUDGET 2023
Budget 2023 provided a total of $359.2 million over five years to support a renewed Canadian Drugs and
Substances Strategy.
This includes investments :
For community-based supports and other evidence-based health interventions;
For a new community-based program to provide practical tools and resources to help prevent, reduce
and delay substance use among young people;
To reduce barriers to access lifesaving harm reduction and treatment services;
To support collection of vital data on substance use-related harms;
To develop an overdose monitoring application for paramedics and other first responders; and,
To take further action to work with our international and law enforcement partners to address illegal
drug production and trafficking and disrupt the global flow of these devastating substances.
The renewed strategy will continue to address both public health and public safety, and guide the
Government's work to save lives and protect the health of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON INVOLUNTARY TREATMENT FOR SUBSTANCE USE
A full continuum of supports is necessary to meet people who use drugs where they are.
Seeking treatment for substance use is an individual choice, and for people who use drugs, involuntary
treatment may exacerbate stigmatization and be a barrier to accessing life-saving care.
To ensure compassionate, comprehensive and collaborative care, our Government supports evidence-
based, person-centred, trauma-informed, and culturally safe treatment options.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S COOPERATION WITH THE UNITED STATES
Canada stands with the United States in supporting work to address the toxic illegal drug supply that is
driving the overdose crisis.
Our Government recognizes the importance of working with a global coalition of countries to address
the crisis and protect the health and safety of the people living in our respective jurisdictions.
Canada will work closely with the United States to lead this important work and continue our close
collaboration through the Canada-US Joint Action Plan on opioids and the North American Drug
Dialogue.
IF PRESSED ON THE PRECURSOR SANCTIONS ISSUE
The Government of Canada recognizes that synthetic opioids, particularly fentanyl, are the foremost
drug threat in North America.
The United States announced a series of indictments and sanctions against Chinese companies regarding
the international proliferation of illegal drugs. A Canadian manufacturing company, Valerian Labs Inc.,
was named in the sanctions.
Health Canada has revoked Valerian Labs Inc.’s precursor authorization to protect public health and
safety.
Canada will continue to work with the United States to disrupt the transfer and supply of illegal fentanyl,
as well as the precursor chemicals used in its production.
BACKGROUND
The majority of Canadians use substances and for many different reasons. Substance use looks different
for everyone and exists across a spectrum, from no-use at one end, to addiction, or substance use
disorder, at the other end.
In 2016, overdose deaths suddenly and steeply increased in BC, as well as in other jurisdictions, including
Alberta and Ontario. The sudden and rapid rise in overdose deaths and harms was a result of an
evolution from the supply of pharmaceutical opioids to a toxic illegal drug supply, often contaminated
with fentanyl and other substances such as benzodiazepines.
Since January 2016, more than 38,500 people in Canada have died from an apparent accidental drug
overdose. So far in 2023 (January-March), most (90%) of the deaths have occurred in BC, Alberta, and
Ontario; high rates have also been observed within other regions, including Saskatchewan and Yukon.
People who experience low levels of employment, homelessness, poor mental health, those relying on
social assistance, people who are incarcerated, Black Canadians and racial minorities, and Indigenous
Peoples, are disproportionately at risk and impacted. Furthermore, men, particularly those employed in
the trades, people experiencing pain, and young-and middled-aged adults are at increased risk of harms.
The factors that converge to result in increased risk are complex but include socio-economic conditions,
experiences of trauma, and multi-generational impacts of colonization.
The Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS) is the federal government’s comprehensive
response to the overdose crisis and broader substance use-related harms in Canada. The CDSS is an all-
substances, public health strategy that covers a broad range of legal and illegal substances, including
tobacco, cannabis, alcohol, and opioids, among others. The goal of the CDSS is to improve the health and
safety of all Canadians by minimizing substance-related harms for individuals, families, and communities.
Budget 2023 provided $359.2 million over five years to support the renewal of the CDSS, which includes:
improving access to community-based substance use services and supports; amending legislation and
creating new regulations to streamline approvals for harm reduction services; supporting data collection
and analysis; and targeting enforcement efforts to disrupt the toxic illegal drug supply.
MENTAL HEALTH TOOLS
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
In 2020, in response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create the Wellness Together
Canada (WTC) online portal, providing 24/7 access to free mental health and substance use supports and
services in both official languages to adults, children and youth.
The PocketWell companion app to WTC was launched in 2022.
WTC has also helped when there is a surge in mental health need during national emergencies/crises
(e.g., residential schools crisis response, floods, wildfires).
WTC augments existing provincial/territorial services and does not replace them.
ISSUE
The Government remains committed to supporting Canadians with their mental health and substance
use challenges as well as increasing access to services so that Canadians can get the help they need,
when they need it.
KEY FACTS
Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, the mental health of Canadians was in decline and needs were
increasing. In 2021, only 60% of adults and 54% of children and youth reported excellent or very good
mental health. In fall 2020, nearly one in five Canadians reported a need for mental health care in the
past year. Of those, 44% reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met (8.1% of the
population 12+).
Priority populations, including youth (aged 12-25), Indigenous peoples and those identifying as
LGBTQIA2+ report greater need for mental health care than adults, non-Indigenous peoples and those
not identifying as LGBTQIA2+. Of those who need care, these groups are also more likely to report that
their needs are unmet or partially met.
Persistent barriers to care remain and have worsened during this time. Some of these barriers include
variability in service availability, fragmented care (i.e., lack of integration between mental health
care/primary care/other services), lack of equitable access to care, including virtual care options, lack of
culturally sensitive/appropriate services, lack of capacity and stigma.
These barriers have put increased strain on the healthcare system, for example by leading to increases in
the number of individuals in mental health crisis going to Emergency Departments for care.
In April 2020, in response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government began funding the Wellness
Together Canada (WTC) portal, which offers free, 24/7 supports for mild to moderate mental health and
substance use issues to anyone in Canada. A companion app, PocketWell, was launched in 2022. As of
September 25, 2023, over 3.9 million individuals across Canada have accessed WTC in over 10.8 million
web sessions, and the PocketWell app has been downloaded more than 55,000 times.
KEY MESSAGES
There is no health without mental health. Increasing access to mental health and substance use health
supports, including at the community level, is central to the health care plan we will be advancing with
provinces and territories.
This collaborative work will support a multi-disciplinary system of care that will integrate mental health
and substance use health across shared priorities, including integration with primary care and the
healthcare system as a whole.
IF PRESSED ON RECENT FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT AND MENTAL HEALTH TOOLS
In support of a patient-centered multi-disciplinary system of care that integrates mental health and
substance use health across shared priorities the government will provide $25B over 10 years to
provinces and territories through tailored bilateral agreements.
Provinces and territories will have the flexibility to allocate this funding based on need and circumstance
to the following shared priorities including family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental
health and substance use, and a modernized health system.
This funding could be leveraged by provinces and territories to support existing mental health tools or
develop new ones.
IF PRESSED ON POCKETWELL
In January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched a companion app called PocketWell to help
increase accessibility of available mental health and substance use resources.
Through PocketWell, individuals can link to the portal to access resources ranging from self-assessment
to customized support based on their assessment results. Via the app, individuals can connect
seamlessly to Wellness Together Canada for free and confidential virtual sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES (75 words)
The Wellness Together Canada portal provides information on, and links to, the Hope for Wellness Help
Line and online chat for Indigenous Peoples.
Wellness Together Canada also has an Indian Residential Schools Crisis Support page, provided by the
Indian Residential School Survivors Society and Hope for Wellness.
Modifications to the structure and content of the portal have been made as a result of ongoing
consultation and engagement activities with First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities.
BACKGROUND
Ongoing Government Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health and Substance Use Health
Services
The Government will provide $25 billion over 10 years to support shared health priorities through
tailored bilateral agreements with the view of supporting individual provincial and territorial needs and
circumstances in four priority areas including family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental
health and substance use, and a modernized health system.
This builds on the previous Budget 2017 investment of $5 billion over ten years, starting in 2017-18, to
improve and increase the availability of mental health and addiction services.
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TAKEN TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICES
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Increasing access to the full continuum of mental health and substance use services through evidence-
based, person-centred, trauma-informed, and culturally safe approaches is key to the Government of
Canada’s health care plan.
The Government of Canada is working with provincial and territorial governments on shared areas of
priority, including increasing access to needed services integrated within Canada’s health systems,
increasing access to integrated youth service hubs, leading the National Suicide Action Plan and
supporting the launch of the 9-8-8 suicide crisis prevention line.
ISSUE
In collaboration with provincial and territorial partners, the Government of Canada is working to
increase access to the full continuum of mental health and substance use services to better support the
needs of Canadians.
Key federal actions include increasing investments to provinces and territories to improve access to
mental health and substance use services, as well as on targeted initiatives on key priorities, such as
integrated services for children and youth, suicide prevention, and addressing the overdose crisis and
toxic drug supply.
KEY FACTS
Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in Canada
through additional investments in health care of close to $200 billion over ten years, of which $25B will
flow to provinces and territories through tailored bilateral agreements. These bilateral agreements will
support progress on four shared priorities to improve access to health care, with mental health
addressed by or included within all four priorities.
This investment builds on previous federal commitments for mental health and substance use, including
an investment of $5 billion over ten years in Budget 2017 to provinces and territories to improve access
to mental health and substance use services, coupled with agreement by federal, provincial and
territorial Health Ministers on the importance of promoting mental wellness and addressing gaps in
mental health and substance use services and supports, including for children and youth.
Since then, the federal government has been working with provinces/territories, Indigenous
communities, and stakeholders to help develop and expand Integrated Youth Services, which provide a
“one-stop shop” of supports in the community for youth. In addition, a “network of networks” as well as
a national data framework and infrastructure are being developed.
The federal government launched Wellness Together Canada (WTC) portal in 2020 in response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, and the companion app, PocketWell, in 2022. WTC has provided free, 24/7
supports to Canadians for mild to moderate mental health and substance use issues.
Through engagement with partners including provinces and territories, the federal government is
leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan which builds on the existing
Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. The Plan will strengthen a collective approach and identify
key areas for action that will have the greatest impact in reducing suicide rates in Canada.
A key pan-Canadian initiative aimed at improved access to effective suicide prevention services is the
launch of 9-8-8 in November 2023, an easy to remember, three-digit number for suicide prevention and
emotional distress. Stakeholders from a range of sectors, including provinces and territories, Indigenous
partners, public safety officials, and people with lived experience have been and continue to be engaged
as implementation progresses.
The government has also invested more than $1 billion to directly address the overdose crisis and toxic
illegal drug supply.
Budget 2023 provided a total of $359.2 million over five years to support a renewed Canadian Drugs and
Substances Strategy. The renewed strategy will continue to address both public health and public safety
and guide the Government's work to save lives and protect the health of Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
Increasing access to the continuum of mental health and substance use services through a
compassionate and person-centered approach is central to our health care plan.
The significant federal investments committed in Budget 2023 will help better integrate mental health
and substance use services within health systems, enabling Canadians to access the care they need.
We are also working with provinces and territories to advance key initiatives, such as the
implementation of integrated youth services hubs, development of a National Suicide Action Plan,
launching 9-8-8 – the suicide prevention crisis line and to address the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON HOW FEDERAL FUNDS ARE USED TO SUPPORT MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE
SERVICES
Our government is providing $25B over 10 years through tailored bilateral agreements to provinces and
territories for four shared health priorities, with mental health and substance use supports addressed by
or integrated within them.
Provinces and territories are free to allocate the funding according to their local needs and
circumstances.
he goal is to promote a compassionate and patient- centered approach so that Canadians can access the
full continuum of mental health and substance use supports they need for their health care.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THESE INVESTMENTS WILL ACHIEVE CHANGE
As part of the historic federal investments in health care in 2023, provinces and territories will collect
and report on three headline indicators for mental health and substance use services:
Median wait times for community mental health and substance use;
Percentage of youth aged 12-25 with access to integrated youth services for mental health and
substance use; and,
Percentage of Canadians with a mental disorder who have unmet mental health care needs.
These indicators will allow better measurement of progress in increasing access to needed services.
BACKGROUND
The government will provide $25B over 10 years to support shared health priorities through tailored
bilateral agreements with the view of supporting individual provincial and territorial needs and
circumstances in four priority areas including family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental
health and substance use, and a modernized health system.
Additionally, to reflect the Government of Canada’s comprehensive approach to addressing the overdose
crisis, targeted funding of over $1B has been allocated across federal departments and agencies to
address key, interrelated priorities.
An example of a shared priority for federal, provincial and territorial governments is the development
and expansion of integrated youth services (IYS) models. IYS models of care provide locally relevant,
effective, youth-focused, and integrated services for mental health/substance use within the community.
All thirteen provinces and territories have developed or are developing an IYS network with a pan-
Canadian Indigenous IYS network in progress. CIHR is leading the IYS Network of Networks initiative
allowing for research and evaluation to inform continuous innovation and learning, as well as
responsivity to emerging challenges.
While the federal government is leading the development of the National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
(aligned with the existing 2016 Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention), broad stakeholder
engagement is informing the development and implementation. The Action Plan is being developed
using a phased approach. Phase I (target release of December 2023), will lay the foundation, with the
aim of setting the vision and identifying early areas for action. Phase II will build on engagement efforts
to inform future priorities and the co-development of concrete actions as well as monitoring progress.
The Government of Canada has a statutory obligation to report bi-annually under the Federal
Framework for Suicide Prevention Act.
Other key initiatives related to suicide prevention benefiting Canadians include Talk Suicide Canada with
24/7 support (operated by the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health) as well as implementation of 9-
8-8, a three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress. Talk Suicide Canada will
transition to 9-8-8 on November 30, 2023. The Centre for Addiction and Mental Health was selected to
lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery.
SUPPORT FOR VIRTUAL AND RURAL MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
The Government is committed to working with provinces, territories and other partners to promote
access to quality mental health and substance use services for Canadians.
In 2020, our Government created Wellness Together Canada (WTC) an online portal, which provides
rural communities free access to 24/7 mental health and substance use supports and services in both
official languages. The PocketWell companion app to WTC was launched in 2022.
WTC has supported Canadians when there is a surge in mental health need during national
emergencies/crises (e.g., residential schools crisis response, floods, wildfires).
ISSUE
Rural and remote communities in Canada face unique challenges in accessing quality mental health
services due to factors such as having to travel longer distances, workforce shortages, high turnover
rates, and poor communication infrastructure.
KEY FACTS
Mental Health Research Canada (2021-2022) data shows that rural survey respondents were less likely to
report accessing mental health support (17% of rural compared to 23% of urban respondents in
February 2022).
Higher rates of suicide and substance use have been reported in remote Indigenous communities due to
intergenerational trauma arising from residential schools, historical policies, and discrimination.
These issues have been exacerbated further by the recent increase in extreme weather phenomena and
environmental degradation in Canada. Rural farming families that are particularly reliant on climate-
dependent resources are more vulnerable to these effects.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government recognizes rural and remote communities’ mental health challenges and has allocated
$25 billion over a decade through tailored bilateral agreements that target four shared priority areas,
including health mental and substance use.
Wellness Together Canada (WTC) offers free culturally-appropriate mental health and substance use
resources available 24/7by phone and text, in both official languages.
On November 30, the Government will be supporting the introduction of the 9-8-8 Suicide Crisis
Helpline, a national three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress across Canada,
accessible 24/7 by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON WTC/POCKETWELL
In April 2020,in response to the pandemic, the Government of Canada launched Wellness Together
Canada (WTC), an online mental health and substance use support portal, which provides Canadians
with a broad range of free psycho-social supports. In January 2022, PocketWell launched, a free
companion app that links seamlessly to WTC.
WTC and PocketWell are tailored to meet the needs of diverse populations, providing access to free,
credible information and supports, including confidential counselling sessions, available 24/7 to all
individuals living in Canada regardless of their location.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS FOR INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
The Wellness Together Canada portal provides information on, and links to, the Hope for Wellness Help
Line and online chat for Indigenous Peoples.
Wellness Together Canada also has an Indian Residential Schools Crisis Support page, provided by the
Indian Residential School Survivors Society and Hope for Wellness.
Modifications to the structure and content of the portal have been made as a result of ongoing
consultation and engagement activities with First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities.
BACKGROUND
Between 2019 and 2021, 12% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care provider.
These disparities are felt more acutely by rural Canadians, with the distribution of family physicians to
rural communities decreasing over time (13.2% in 2017; 12.8% in 2021), while it increases slightly in
urban environments (86.8% in 2017; 87.1% in 2021).
Mental health issues can impact any population. Two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before
the age of 25, and nearly half do before 18. For example, the percentage of youth aged 12 to 17 years
reporting “excellent” or “very good” mental health fell from 72% in 2019 to 69% in 2020 and was even
lower in 2021 (62%). Moreover, rural populations are in a particularly vulnerable position due to the
lack of availability and accessibility of mental health services and supports, and primary care within their
communities. In 2017, there were 3 psychiatrists per 100,000 population in rural areas, compared to 17
in urban areas. In rural areas, there were 37 nurses practicing in mental health and addiction per
100,000 population, compared to 76 in urban areas. More recent data from Mental Health Research
Canada (2021-2022) show that rural survey respondents were less likely to report accessing mental
health support (17% of rural compared to 23% of urban respondents in February 2022).
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $25 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to
mental health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread
proven models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to
primary health services.
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, Wellness Together Canada provides free and confidential online mental health and substance
use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official languages. Through
consultations with Indigenous partners, WTC has developed culturally-appropriate content that
addresses the need of Indigenous people experiencing mental health and substance use issues.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting initiatives that will help to prevent suicide and
provide support to those affected by suicide. For example, the Government of Canada is supporting the
introduction of the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline, a national three-digit number for suicide prevention
and emotional distress in Canada, on November 30, 2023. Budget 2023 announced $158.4 million over
three years to support the implementation and operation of 9-8-8 which will be available for Canadians
to call or text when in need of immediate support for suicide prevention and emotional distress. The
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) is coordinating service delivery of 9-8-8, as announced
on August 31, 2022, building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada. The Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC) is working with CAMH and engaging with partners, including provinces and territories,
to coordinate implementation and raise awareness of 9-8-8.
PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
• In addition to ongoing investments that support the mental health of pregnant and postpartum
individuals, Health Canada is funding Women’s College Hospital to develop a National Clinical Practice
Guideline for Perinatal Mental Illness and corresponding guide for patients and families.
• These guidelines will inform practice and standardize the way patient care is delivered to ensure
timely access to perinatal mental health services.
• This work is anticipated to be completed by Fall 2024.
ISSUE
Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are important public health issues, increasing the risk of poor
mental and physical health outcomes for mothers along with potential impacts for children and families.
KEY FACTS
The 2018/2019 Survey on Maternal Health provided a snapshot of the mental health of new mothers (5
to 13 months after giving birth) in Canada. The survey found that almost one-quarter (23%) of new
mothers reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety disorder.
A higher proportion (30%) of mothers under the age of 25 reported feelings consistent with depression
or an anxiety disorder compared to mothers aged 25 and older (23%).
The survey also found that nearly one-third (31%) of mothers who reported feelings consistent with
either post-partum depression or an anxiety disorder had previously been told by a health professional
that they had depression or a mood disorder prior to being pregnant.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government recognizes that maternal stress, anxiety and depression are important public health
issues.
The Government has made ongoing investments that support the mental health of pregnant and
postpartum individuals, including in health promotion resources, community-based supports, and the
Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program.
The Government is also funding Women’s College Hospital to develop a National Clinical Practice
Guideline for Perinatal Mental Illness.
These investments demonstrate our commitment to improving access to quality and equitable perinatal
mental health supports.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE ON PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH
On March 9, 2022, a ministerial roundtable was held with key stakeholder groups, including experts,
practitioners, and people with lived and living experience, to examine access to perinatal mental health
care.
In support of the roundtable advice, the Government is funding Women’s College Hospital to develop a
National Clinical Practice Guideline for Perinatal Mental Illness, to support providers in delivering quality
care.
This Clinical Practice Guideline will be evidence-based and informed by community experts, providers,
and people with lived and living experience.
BACKGROUND
Perinatal mental illness refers to mental health conditions experienced during pregnancy or the
postpartum period. If untreated, consequences include prolonged maternal depression, paternal
depression, partner relationship dissatisfaction and conflict, impaired parent-infant interactions and
attachment, risk for impaired cognitive or psychosocial development for the child (and increased risk of
later child psychopathology) and, in extreme situations, maternal suicide or infanticide. Maternal deaths
with a mental health component, by suicide or drug toxicity, are increasingly recognized as making up a
significant proportion of all maternal deaths.
Health Canada is providing $372,000 over 19 months, starting in April 2023, to Women’s College Hospital
to develop a Canadian National Clinical Practice Guideline for the Treatment of Perinatal Mental Illness,
with a corresponding Patient and Family Guide. The guideline will focus on the identification and
treatment of mood, anxiety and related disorders in pregnancy and postpartum period. It will follow best
practices around treatment guideline development, with a key focus on Canadian contexts and themes,
including those identified during the Ministerial roundtable on perinatal mental health on March 9,
2022.
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System monitors and
reports on maternal, fetal and infant health outcomes while conducting targeted epidemiological
research to address emerging issues. This program has focused largely on indicators of physical health,
some of which can be associated with maternal mental health (e.g., fetal/infant mortality, maternal
chronic diseases, smoking).
PHAC supports perinatal mental health through programs aimed at improving community-level access to
supports for prenatal and recently postpartum people, new parents and young children facing barriers to
health equity. In particular, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program provides $26.5 million annually to
improve the health of pregnant people in vulnerable situations and their infants. Through approximately
240 funded projects, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program serves approximately 45,000 participants
across Canada each year. CPNP participation is associated with higher rates of breastfeeding, improved
prenatal vitamin supplement intake, reduced smoking and alcohol consumption, and improved maternal
physical and mental health.
PHAC also supports the development of several resources promoting the positive mental health of
pregnant/postpartum individuals. These resources provide guidance and advice for both healthcare
professionals and individuals that may face poor mental health during the perinatal period, including the
“Family-Centred Maternity and Newborn Care: National Guidelines”; the Mothers’ Mental Health Toolkit;
“Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy”; and “Your Guide to Postpartum Health and Caring for your Baby”.
MENTAL HEALTH OF BLACK CANADIANS
Black Canadians experience multiple vulnerabilities related to their mental and physical health, largely
due to underlying socio-economic conditions, including experiences of anti-Black racism.
KEY FACTS
In 2021, more than 1.5 million people in Canada reported being Black. The Black population now
accounts for 4.3% of Canada’s total population and 16.1% of the population defined as a visible minority.
Black Canadians remain one of the most disadvantaged populations due to a broad range of
socioeconomic inequities which contribute to differences in health outcomes.
27.9% of Black Canadians reported fair or poor mental health in the early months of the pandemic,
compared to 22.9% of White Canadians.32% of Black Canadians reported symptoms consistent with
moderate/severe generalized anxiety disorder, compared to 24.2% of White Canadians, also during the
early months of the pandemic.
37.5% of Black Canadians reported a moderate or severe impact of COVID-19 on their ability to meet
financial obligations or essential needs, compared to 22.1% of White Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
We recognize the significant and unique challenges faced by Black Canadians, including anti-Black racism
and its significant impacts on mental health.
In 2018, the Public Health Agency of Canada launched the Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of
Black Canadians Fund. With a budget of $10 million, the fund supports 23 community-based projects
across Canada to generate culturally focused knowledge and evidence.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-RELATED INVESTMENTS
Budget 2021 committed further investments in mental health promotion and mental illness prevention
for those most affected by COVID-19.
With these investments, the Public Health Agency of Canada launched directed and targeted Calls for
Proposals in August 2021 to previous applicants who did not receive funding from the over-subscribed
Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund. Nine additional community-based projects are being supported
through this funding.
BACKGROUND
Experiences of racial discrimination throughout a lifetime can lead to chronic stress and trauma.
Increased anxiety and social exclusion resulting from the health, economic and social effects of the
COVID-19 pandemic have impacted people’s health and wellbeing, including the worsening of mental
health outcomes, especially among racialized populations.
Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund
Budget 2018 earmarked $42 million to strengthen multiculturalism and address the challenges faced by
Black Canadians, including $10 million over five years for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC),
and $9 million over three years for Canadian Heritage. These funds are targeted to enhancing local
community supports for youth at risk, and to developing research in support of more culturally-focused
mental health programs in the Black Canadian community.
In September 2018, PHAC launched the Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund
to deliver on the Budget 2018 funding for eight short-term capacity-building projects and fifteen longer-
term implementation projects all led by Black Canadian experts or organizations. These projects are
expected to be completed by the end of this fiscal year (2023-24).
It is critical to share the findings and best practices generated from these projects. As part of this work,
PHAC is supporting a knowledge mobilization network to help disseminate the learnings generated from
these projects more broadly. This project is led by TAIBU (pronounced “Tie-boo”), a community health
centre in the Greater Toronto Area that aims to deliver programs in a culturally affirming environment.
PHAC has also established the Mental Health of Black Canadians Working Group, comprised of 11 multi-
disciplinary experts in research, practice and policy from diverse Black communities across Canada. This
Working Group played an integral role in the selection of projects for funding and provides essential
guidance on capacity-building and strengthening evidence on the key determinants of health impacting
Black Communities. PHAC provided secretariat support to this Working Group, whose mandate ended in
June 2023.
Health Inequities in Black communities in Canada
PHAC, Health Canada, and Statistics Canada are exploring opportunities to increase understanding of the
intersection of health and social determinants in the context of the pandemic. In September 2020, PHAC
released a new resource entitled “Social determinants and inequities in health for Black Canadians: A
Snapshot”. The Snapshot reports national data on inequalities in health outcomes and determinants of
health for Black Canadians, and highlights how anti-Black racism and systemic discrimination are key
drivers of health and social inequities faced by diverse Black Canadian communities.
.
FEDERAL APPROACH FOR COMPLEX NEEDS: INTERSECTIONS OF MENTAL ILLNESS, SUBSTANCE USE AND
HOMELESSNESS
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Through Budget 2023, the Government is providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories for
four shared health priorities, including mental health and substance use. In addition to funding for
community-based supports via the renewed Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, these investments
will provide critical services for individuals with complex needs.
As wrap-around services tied to housing improve outcomes for individuals with complex needs, the
federal government is also continuing to provide significant supports related to housing and social
services.
ISSUE
Municipalities and communities across Canada are struggling to respond to the needs of individuals with
complex needs tied to mental health, substance use and precarious housing or homelessness. A lack of
appropriate, wrap-around health and social services tied to housing results in increased economic costs
for these communities, and poor outcomes for individuals with complex needs. Collaboration between
all levels of government and with stakeholders is required for better cross-sectoral integrated services.
KEY FACTS
Individuals with complex needs are a relatively small but highly vulnerable and high-needs population
and are often being frequent users of costly emergency, public safety and hospital services. Individuals
with complex needs face many individual, systemic and structural barriers to accessing appropriate
housing, mental health and substance use supports.
Evidence points to comprehensive and integrated models that pair stable housing with wrap-around
health and social services (e.g., mental health and substance use, dental, primary care; employment,
food security, rent supplements) and other supports (e.g., legal services) as having best outcomes for
individuals and their families, communities, and as being more cost-effective for health systems. .
KEY MESSAGES
People with complex needs face systemic and structural barriers to accessing the services and supports
they require.
Our government is committed to a compassionate and human-centred approach, focused on providing
supports across the full continuum of mental health, substance use, housing and social services.
Through Budget 2023, the Government is providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories for
four shared health priorities, including mental health and substance use.
The federal government also provides significant supports to address needs related to housing and social
services.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS NEEDED TO ADDRESS COMPLEX NEEDS
Increasing numbers of individuals experiencing mental health, substance use, and homelessness are
realities for many communities across Canada.
Evidence points to integrated models that pair wrap-around mental health and substance use services
along with health, social services, and stable housing as having the best outcomes for individuals and
communities.
Holistic approaches that are compassionate, human-centered and involve a full continuum of measures
must be part of our responses to this pressing issue. This includes harm reduction, prevention, treatment
and recovery and enforcement and public safety.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING AGREEMENTS
Our Government is providing nearly $200 billion to provinces and territories over 10 years to address
shared health priorities, including:
Access to family health services,
Supported health workers and reduced backlogs,
Access to mental health and substance use services, and
Modernizing health systems.
This includes $25 billion over ten years to support provinces and territories through bilateral
agreements, which may support mental health and substance use activities related to complex needs,
integrated youth services, suicide prevention and addressing the opioid toxicity crisis.
BACKGROUND
Individuals with complex needs (those with mental health and substance use needs who are homeless or
precariously housed) are a small but highly vulnerable and high-needs group, who often chronically need
costly emergency, hospital, social and public safety services. Limited access to appropriate mental health
and substance use supports, along with social and other services, is a major challenge as is accessing
appropriate housing. Waitlists for supportive and subsidized housing are often long, and the scarcity of
affordable housing exacerbates the problem. Rural and remote areas face additional barriers, due to
limited health and social services. These challenges contribute to high rates of morbidity and mortality
among this population.
Linking mental health and substance use investments to housing and other supports is critical for
achieving progress. This requires systematic approaches where municipal, provincial, territorial and
federal governments work together across silos and with stakeholders and community organizations to
put in place integrated supports. The federal government is committed to working with provinces and
territories and municipal and Indigenous leaders to break down silos so that Canadians can have access
to the integrated supports they need.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
ISSUE
Suicide is a significant, complex public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across
Canada.
KEY FACTS
Between 2017 and 2020, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which is
equivalent to 12 people dying by suicide every day. In 2019, suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries.
According to preliminary data, there were 3,769 deaths by suicide reported in 2021. The 2020 and 2021
data is provisional and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the next year. The delay is due to the
length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes require to complete their investigations.
At this time, caution should be used in drawing any conclusions regarding suicide trends during the
pandemic. While mortality data during the pandemic is not readily available, data on the prevalence of
suicidal ideation among adults shows that thoughts of suicide did not increase in fall 2020 and was
similar to the pre-pandemic level of 2019 (2.7%); however, prevalence of suicidal ideation significantly
increased to 4.2% in spring/winter 2021.
KEY MESSAGES
We recognize the importance of Canadians having timely access to effective suicide prevention services,
particularly in regions with higher suicide rates.
9-8-8, a three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress, will be available across Canada
on November 30, 2023.
The federal government is leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan which
builds on the existing Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. The Plan will strengthen a collective
approach and identify key areas for action that will have the greatest impact in reducing suicide rates in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON TALK SUICIDE CANADA
While work is underway to implement the 9-8-8: Suicide Crisis Helpline, people in Canada continue to
have access to Talk Suicide Canada, which offers bilingual crisis and suicide prevention support, 24 hours
a day, seven days a week. Talk Suicide can be reached at 1-833-456-4566 by phone, and by text (in the
evenings) at 45645. Residents of Quebec can call 1-866-277-3553, text 535353, or visit suicide.ca for
support by online chat. People in Canada can also find support from their local distress centres.
IF PRESSED ON HILL TIMES ARTICLE RE: EVIDENCE-BASED SOLUTIONS
The Government of Canada welcomes the findings of the Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science
and Technology (SOCI), and its recommendations on how to improve the Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention and reduce suicide rates in Canada (June 8, 2023). The recommendations will help inform our
activities in the development of the new National Suicide Prevention Action Plan.
We know that certain populations and communities are disproportionality represented in suicide
mortality rates and that tailored evidence-based approaches are needed.
We are committed to collaboration and ongoing engagement with all partners, including Indigenous
partners, to enable the co-development of actions that will have the greatest impact within
communities.
BACKGROUND
There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a combination of factors are associated
with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal issues and loss, childhood abuse and
neglect, and exposure to trauma.
Three-Digit Number for Suicide Prevention and Emotional Distress: Budget 2023 announced $158.4
million over 3 years to support the launch and implementation of 9 8 8, a three-digit number for suicide
prevention and emotional distress. The federal government is undertaking a review to establish a long-
term funding mechanism for this service in 2025-26.
As highlighted in the Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission’s (CRTC) August
2022 determination, on November 30, 2023, 9-8-8 will be available across Canada. The number has been
designated for Canadians to call or text when in need of immediate suicide prevention crisis support.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been preparing for the implementation of the three-
digit number from a service delivery perspective. On August 31, 2022, PHAC announced that the Centre
for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH) was selected to lead the coordination of 9-8-8 service delivery,
building on its experience delivering Talk Suicide Canada.
Talk Suicide Canada: The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in CAMH to
implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with its partners. Talk
Suicide Canada currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support via phone (1-833-456-4566) in English and
French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week and by text (45645) in English and French in the evenings to
people in Canada. This service will transition to 9-8-8 on November 30th, 2023. Because 9-8-8 will link to
the Talk Suicide Canada number, those who continue calling the 10-digit number will be directly
connected to 9-8-8.
Distress Line Equity Fund: On September 8, 2023, PHAC launched the Distress Line Equity Fund, which
will support eligible distress lines and centres in addressing gaps in equity, diversity, and inclusion to
ensure the sector is responsive to the needs and experiences of those who call. This new funding
opportunity will complement 9-8-8, but is distinct. Distress lines do not need to be part of the 9-8-8
network to apply. Funds can be used to support staffing, training in equity, diversity, and inclusion, and
enhancing an organizations ability to provide services in multiple languages to serve diverse populations.
National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour
of motion M-174, sponsored by MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay), calling for the Government
to establish a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan. The proposed actions in M-174 are aligned with
the existing 2016 Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention, as well as with Government of Canada
activities already in progress. The Government of Canada has a statutory obligation to report bi-annually
under the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention Act. An update to the development of the Action
Plan was included in the December 2022 Progress Report. Progress Reports are available on Canada.ca.
The Action Plan will be developed using a phased approach. Phase I will lay the foundation, with the aim
of setting the vision and identifying early areas for action. Engagement will continue with federal
departments, provinces and territories, Indigenous partners, and key stakeholders to inform the future
phases, including the co-development of future action areas. This phased approach is in recognition that
suicide prevention is a complex issue that involves many partners and stakeholders, all of which have a
role to play and many of which are at the forefront of suicide prevention initiatives already underway.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health: PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the
impact of COVID-19 on suicide and mental health. The Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health showed
that 2.4% of adults in Canada reported suicidal ideation since the pandemic began in 2020, which is not
significantly different from the 2.7% before the pandemic in 2019; however, the percentage increased
significantly in spring 2021 to 4.2%. Risk factors of reporting suicide ideation during the pandemic
included being under 65, Canadian-born, a frontline worker, reporting pandemic-related income/job loss
or loneliness/isolation, experiencing a highly stressful/traumatic event during one's lifetime, and having
lower household income and educational attainment. Continued surveillance of suicide and
risk/protective factors is needed to inform suicide prevention efforts.
NATIONAL SUICIDE PREVENTION ACTION PLAN
ISSUE
Suicide is a significant, complex public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across
Canada. An effective response requires concerted efforts and coordinated action.
KEY FACTS
Between 2017 and 2020, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which is
equivalent to 12 people dying by suicide every day. In 2019, suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries.
According to preliminary data, there were 3,769 deaths by suicide reported in 2021. The 2020 and 2021
data is provisional and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the next year. The delay is due to the
length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes require to complete their investigations.
At this time, caution should be used in drawing any conclusions regarding suicide trends during the
pandemic. While mortality data during the pandemic is not readily available, data on the prevalence of
suicidal ideation among adults shows that thoughts of suicide did not increase in fall 2020 and was
similar to the pre-pandemic level of 2019 (2.7%); however, prevalence of suicidal ideation (suicidal
thoughts or ideas) significantly increased to 4.2% in spring/winter 2021.
KEY MESSAGES
Suicide is a significant public health issue that can affect people of all ages and backgrounds across the
country.
We recognize the complex nature of suicide and suicide prevention which involves multiple actors and
sectors for an effective response.
The federal government is leading the development of a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan which
builds on the existing Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. The Plan will identify key areas for
action and expected impacts on suicide prevention and reducing suicide rates.
IF PRESSED ON THE SOCI REPORT ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF THE FEDERAL FRAMEWORK FOR SUICIDE
PREVENTION
The Government of Canada welcomes the findings of the Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science
and Technology (SOCI), and its recommendations on how to improve the Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention and reduce suicide rates in Canada (June 8, 2023). The recommendations will help inform our
activities in the development of the new National Suicide Prevention Action Plan.
We know that certain populations and communities are disproportionality represented in suicide
mortality rates and that tailored evidence-based approaches are needed.
We are committed to collaboration and ongoing engagement with all partners, including Indigenous
partners, to enable the co-development of actions that will have the greatest impact within
communities.
IF PRESSED ON TIMELINE FOR RELEASE
The Government of Canada is committed to developing a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan that
will pave the way forward for collective action on suicide prevention.
The Government is taking a phased approach to allow for meaningful engagement and collaboration.
Phase I will establish the vision, strategic objectives and identify early areas for action based on current
evidence and will be released in the coming months for consultation.
Phase II will include broader engagement with federal departments, provinces and territories,
Indigenous partners and other key stakeholders in the co-development of further actions and a collective
approach to monitoring progress.
BACKGROUND
There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a combination of factors are associated
with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal issues and loss, childhood abuse and
neglect, and exposure to trauma.
National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour
of motion M-174, sponsored by MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay), calling for the Government
to establish a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan. The proposed actions in M-174 are aligned with
the existing 2016 Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention, as well as with Government of Canada
activities already in progress. The Government of Canada has a statutory obligation to report bi-annually
under the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention Act. An update to the development of the Action
Plan was included in the December 2022 Progress Report. Progress Reports are available on Canada.ca.
Engagement to date includes the Ministerial Roundtable (March 2022), the National Suicide Prevention
Centre Conferences (May 2022; May 2023), as well as collaboration with other federal government
departments via the Federal Coordinating Committee for Suicide Prevention and early discussions about
the need for a National Suicide Prevention Action Plan with provinces and territories.
In June 2023, the Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology released a report that
assessed the effectiveness of Canada’s Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention and included 11
recommendations for strengthening Canada’s response to suicide. Among these recommendations was
the need to update the Framework with evidence-based interventions, including measurable outcomes
to support evaluation.
Building on the Federal Framework, the National Suicide Prevention Action Plan will address the Senate
Committee’s recommendations by including concrete, measurable actions, informed by engagement
efforts.
A request for a Government Response has not yet been adopted in the Senate. When this is adopted, a
Government of Canada response will be required within 150 days of the request.
The Action Plan will be developed using a phased approach. Phase I will lay the foundation, with the aim
of setting the vision and identifying early areas for action. Engagement will continue with federal
departments, provinces and territories, Indigenous partners, and key stakeholders to inform the future
phases, including the co-development of future action areas. This phased approach is in recognition that
suicide prevention is a complex issue that involves many partners and stakeholders, all of which have a
role to play and many of which are at the forefront of suicide prevention initiatives already underway.
NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE HEALTH
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Standards are part of the suite of tools used to ensure services are evidence-based and meet an
established level of quality and accessibility.
Health Canada has partnered with Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of
standards/guidelines for mental health and substance use health services in six priority areas, with a
focus on health equity.
This work is expected to be completed by March 31, 2024.
ISSUE
The quality and accessibility of mental health and substance use health services varies across the
country. Furthermore, inequities in access to quality services are greater for populations that face
barriers to care, including Indigenous peoples.
KEY FACTS
In fall 2020, one in five Canadians reported a need for mental health care in the past year. Of those, 45%
reported that their needs were either unmet or only partially met. A delay in quality mental health
support is linked to decreased positive health outcomes.
Among other priority populations, such as youth, Indigenous peoples and those identifying as
LGBTQIA2+, these groups are more likely to report that their needs are unmet or partially met,
highlighting the need to reduce barriers to care.
Standards are part of the suite of tools used to ensure services are evidence-based and meet an
established level of quality and accessibility. This includes promoting health equity principles that
support the needs of diverse populations.
Standards will be available for voluntary implementation in provinces and territories, including to
support the implementation of their action plans within their bilateral agreements with the federal
government (i.e., Budget 2017 and Budget 2023 investments).
KEY MESSAGES
The Government is taking a compassionate and human-centred approach to ensure that individuals in
Canada have timely access to quality mental health and substance use health services, regardless of
where they live.
Health Canada has partnered with Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of
standards/guidelines for mental health and substance use health services in key areas, such as
Integrated Youth Services, with a focus on health equity.
The development of standards is being informed by evidence and engagement with diverse stakeholders,
including people with lived and living experience.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE BY STANDARDS COUNCIL OF CANADA
The Standards Council of Canada has been advancing standards work for mental health and substance
use health services in collaboration with key stakeholders and partners.
The development of standards is guided by a broad range of experts, including people with lived and
living experience, to ensure inclusion of diverse perspectives on complex issues.
Due to the high level of stakeholder interest, this work is expected to be completed by March 31, 2024.
BACKGROUND
On March 14, 2022, the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions announced a partnership between
Health Canada and Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of standards in priority
areas for mental health and substance use health services, as part of investments made through Budget
2021. Health Canada is providing Standards Council of Canada $6.3 million from November 2021 to
March 2024 to complete this work.
The six priority areas for standards development include: 1) Integrated Youth Services; 2) Mental Health
and Substance Use Health Integration in Primary Care; 3) Digital Mental Health and Substance Use
Health Apps; 4) Substance Use Treatment Centres; 5) Substance Use Workforce; and 6) Integrated
Mental Health and Substance Use Health Services for People with Complex Health Needs. These priority
areas were identified in alignment with the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities
developed with provinces and territories in 2017, to build on progress and investments made by
provinces and territories in these areas.
Standards Council of Canada has established a National Mental Health and Substance Use Health
Standardization Collaborative to provide a forum for over 300 stakeholders, including people with lived
and living experience, to inform standards work through a Steering Committee and various working
groups.
SUPPORTING THE MENTAL HEALTH OF CHILDREN AND YOUTH
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
We are working with partners to support the mental health of children and youth, including advancing
Integrated Youth Services (IYS). IYS are “one-stop shops” of integrated supports in the community,
including mental health supports.
In 2022, we announced $18M to fund IYS projects and develop a “network of networks” as well as a
national data framework and infrastructure.
In 2023, federal and provincial/territorial officials, service providers, and IYS leaders came together at a
workshop to share lessons learned and actionable insights on establishing/expanding IYS.
ISSUE
Many mental health issues manifest before adulthood, and contribute to a disproportionately large
percentage of hospitalizations due to these disorders, among children and youth.
The mental health of youth was in decline before the COVID-19 pandemic, which further exacerbated
this trend. Through the pandemic, symptoms of depression and anxiety have also increased among this
age group.
There is an opportunity to better address the mental health needs of children and youth by focusing on
early intervention in community based settings.
KEY FACTS
Almost two thirds of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25, and nearly half do before 18.
In 2020, over 35,000 children and youth were hospitalized for mental health disorders – almost 1 in 4 of
all hospitalizations for children and youth. Younger Canadians are among the highest users of Emergency
Departments (ED) for mental health and substance use services, where half of those who visit the ED
frequently for mental health and substance use services are under the age of 35.
The prevalence of self-reported diagnosed mood and/or anxiety disorders had doubled in youth aged 15
to 25 years over ten years. In 2021, this prevalence was 16%, up from 8% in 2011.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of youth. The percentage of
youth aged 12 to 17 years reporting “excellent” or “very good” mental health fell from 72% in 2019 to
69% in 2020 and was even lower in 2021 (62%).
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government recognizes the significant mental health challenges being faced by children and youth.
We are working with partners, provinces, and territories to ensure children and youth have access to
mental health supports as they recover from the pandemic and in the long-term where and when they
need them so that they can flourish in society.
For example, we are making significant investments to expand the availability of Integrated Youth
Services hubs across Canada, which are “one-stop shops” of integrated supports in the community,
including mental health and substance use supports.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR INTEGRATED YOUTH SERVICES
Our government understands the need to intervene early in ways that are easily accessible and meet
young people where they are.
We continue to work with provinces/territories, Indigenous communities, and stakeholders to help
develop and expand Integrated Youth Services (IYS), which provide a “one-stop shop” of supports in the
community for youth.
In 2022, we announced $18M to fund IYS projects and develop a “network of networks” as well as a
national data framework and infrastructure.
This is in addition to $6.4M for research to examine existing standards, best practices and guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTHCARE FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT AND INTEGRATED YOUTH SERVICES
We will provide $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories (PTs) via tailored bilateral agreements
to address shared priorities including improving access to mental health and substance use health.
PTs could use these investments to further advance access to integrated youth services.
This investment will build on Budget 2017 investments of $2.4 billion from 2023-24 to 2026-27 for
mental health & addictions services that have yet to flow to PTs.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT WILL DEMONSTRATE PROGRESS ON SUPPORTING THE MENTAL
HEALTH OF YOUTH
We are committed to improving how health information is collected, shared, used and reported to
Canadians to promote greater transparency on results.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information will report on Canadians need for, and access to care,
including the degree to which mental health and substance use services are available for youth, ages 12
to 25.
IF PRESSED ON ENGAGEMENT
We have engaged with children and youth stakeholders and Canadians of all backgrounds, including
individuals with lived and living experience, to help advance the government’s commitment to
supporting the mental health and wellbeing of young Canadians.
I plan to continue engaging through roundtables and meetings with a number of partners and
stakeholders, including provincial and territorial Ministers responsible for mental health and substance
use challenges and priorities.
IF PRESSED ON CHILDREN AND YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH
We recognizes that children and youth have unique needs and experiences, including as it relates to
mental health.
Statistics Canada is running a second cycle of the Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY)
to explore issues that have an impact on the physical and mental health of children and youth.
The Government of Canada is taking action by providing support for Integrated Youth Services, launching
the Wellness Together Canada portal, developing national standards for mental health and substance
use services, and advancing development of the 988 suicide prevention hotline.
IF PRESSED ON HOW YOUTH MENTAL HEALTH IS BEING SUPPORTED THROUGH THE DEVELOPMENT OF
NATIONAL STANDARDS AND GUIDELINES
Health Canada has partnered with Standards Council of Canada to coordinate the development of
standards/guidelines for mental health and substance use health services in key areas, such as
Integrated Youth Services, with a focus on health equity.
The development of standards and guidelines are guided by a broad range of experts, including youth, to
ensure inclusion of diverse perspectives on complex issues.
This work is anticipated to be completed by March 31, 2024.
BACKGROUND
Mental health issues can impact any population, and children and youth are no exception. Similar to
other populations, the COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children
and youth. Concerns about the virus itself have been compounded by impacts on school and routines,
social activities, isolation, and decreased access to services and supports.
Federal government actions and investments are supporting the mental health and substance use needs
of children and youth, including through transfers to provinces/territories and funding to community-
based organizations.
One way in which provinces/territories are meeting the priority are for children and youth is through the
development and expansion of integrated youth services (IYS) models. IYS models of care provide locally
relevant, effective, youth-focused and integrated services for mental health/substance use within the
community. IYS hubs aim to provide “one-stop shops” of supports in the community, which can include
mental health and substance use services, primary care, sexual health and harm reduction services,
youth and family peer support, social and community services, as well as support for navigating these
systems of care.
There are now approximately 75 hubs across Canada with over 55 more in development. All 13 provinces
and territories have developed or are developing an IYS network (i.e., multiple IYS hubs managed by a
central provincial office or ‘backbone organization’). Additionally, there is a pan-Canadian Indigenous IYS
network in progress.
While progress has been steadily advancing, with a youth population of approximately 6.5M,
approximately 400 IYS hubs across Canada are needed to ensure all youth who need access mental
health and substance use services can get the help they need.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is leading the IYS Network of Networks (IYS-Net)
initiative allowing for research and evaluation to inform continuous innovation and learning, as well as
responsivity to emerging challenges. The goal is to improve access to evidence-based, and evidence-
generating best practices. Funding will focus on strengthening and expanding IYS networks.
FETAL ALCOHOL SPECTRUM DISORDER AND IMPACTS OF COVID-19
ISSUE
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder (FASD) is the leading known cause of preventable developmental
disability in Canada. Caused by prenatal alcohol exposure, FASD has life-long impacts.
KEY FACTS
Fetal Alcohol Spectrum Disorder, or FASD, is a serious public health issue. It is difficult to diagnose and
often goes undetected. In many cases, people with FASD require life-long assistance from a wide range
of services including health, community, remedial education, and many others. Early and appropriate
support can improve outcomes for people with FASD.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada recognizes that FASD is a serious public health issue. Services and supports
for FASD are multi-jurisdictional and multi-sectoral, and addressing FASD will take a coordinated effort
across federal departments and across all levels of government.
Annual funding of $1.5 million is allocated through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s FASD National
Strategic Projects Fund to collaborate with key stakeholders and partners across Canada to develop
nationally applicable tools, resources, and knowledge that can be used to prevent FASD and improve
outcomes for those who are already affected, including their families and communities.
The Government of Canada is continuing to explore options to work with key stakeholders and partners
to address existing knowledge gaps, which will inform effective approaches to FASD awareness and
prevention.
IF PRESSED ON SENATE PUBLIC BILL S-253 – AN ACT RESPECTING A NATIONAL FRAMEWORK FOR FETAL
ALCOHOL SPECTRUM DISORDER
We look forward to debate when this Bill moves to the House.
BACKGROUND
FASD is a diagnostic term used to describe the impact on the brain and body of individuals prenatally
exposed to alcohol. It is a lifelong disability and people with FASD will experience some degree of
challenges with their motor skills, physical health, learning, memory, attention, emotional regulation,
and social skills. The number of people with the disorder is unknown. Recent studies from Canada
estimate that between 0.1% to 3% of children and youth have been diagnosed with the disorder.
According to a 2013 cost-of-illness study which is the latest data available at this time, the economic cost
associated with FASD in Canada was approximately $1.8 billion annually in direct costs alone.
Further, Indigenous partners have signalled the importance of preventing FASD through two
recommendations in the Truth and Reconciliation Commission of Canada’s Calls to Action (#33 and #34).
These recommendations focus on FASD, calling for culturally appropriate preventive programs and
criminal justice system reform.
Bill S-253 – An Act respecting a national framework for fetal alcohol spectrum disorder was tabled by
Senator Mohamed Iqbal Ravalia (an Independent Senator from Newfoundland and Labrador) on October
19, 2022. It is now at committee stage in the Senate. The Bill calls for the Minister of Health to develop a
national framework on fetal alcohol spectrum disorder. It includes specific measures that the framework
must include (i.e., training, education, guidance, research, national standards for prevention and
diagnosis, a strategy to increase awareness of risks, etc.) It also calls for consultations to develop the
framework, and it sets out accountability and reporting requirements. The Bill would require the
Minister of Health to table the framework within one year after the day on which the Act comes into
force.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is the federal lead for addressing FASD in Canada through
the FASD Initiative, which includes the FASD National Strategic Projects Fund (NSPF). The Fund allocates
$1.5 million annually for projects that promote education and awareness; harm reduction approaches;
and research into the social determinants of health that impact alcohol consumption and FASD. Three
contribution agreements were funded through the NSPF in 2022-23. These projects supported
prevention and reduction of stigma, and reached an audience of non-pregnant women of childbearing
age, pregnant women and their partners, young adults, individuals with FASD, service providers and
policy makers.
PHAC leads surveillance activities with respect to maternal and child health issues, including prenatal
alcohol exposure and neurodevelopmental disorders such as FASD. Collecting data to determine how
many Canadians are living with FASD is associated with many challenges. For instance, population-based
surveys tend to underestimate the true prevalence of FASD as they rely on self-reported diagnosis and
use sampling strategies that often miss important segments of the population. However, at present, such
surveys are our best source of information to estimate FASD prevalence in Canada. Using the 2019
Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth, PHAC estimated the prevalence of FASD among Canadian
children and youth aged 1 to 17 years living in private dwellings was 1 per 1000 (0.1%). Canadian
children and youth who identified as Indigenous and lived off reserve had a significantly higher
prevalence of FASD than those who did not identify as Indigenous (1.2% versus 0.1%). Other Canadian
studies have employed various methods to estimate the prevalence of FASD while focusing on different
population groups, jurisdictions, and age ranges. These estimates range from 0.09% - 2.9%. Through the
Centre for Surveillance and Applied Research, PHAC is piloting options to strengthen FASD prevalence
estimation, with a view to identifying proper surveillance approaches for FASD.
The Government of Canada also promotes healthy pregnancies, including FASD awareness and
prevention, through other supportive policy and programs by (1): supporting evidence-based policy and
guidance for health practitioners and the general public on prenatal issues; and (2) investing in
community-based programs to promote the health of pregnant people, young children and families
facing barriers to health equity, including the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP) and the
Community Action Program for Children.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) currently invests $17.9 million annually to support FASD prevention
activities in First Nations and Inuit communities through regionally based solutions. This includes a
funding increase as part of the Budget 2017 announcement of an additional $83.2 million over five years
to expand Indigenous maternal and child health services with $3.7 million ongoing for FASD starting in
2022-23.
Health Canada leads the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS) that aims to protect the health
and safety of all Canadians by minimizing harms from substance use for individuals, families and
communities, including harms caused by alcohol consumption (e.g., FASD). Health Canada is currently
advancing a proposal to strengthen and renew the CDSS, including investments related to prevention, as
well as community-based supports to advance public education and awareness through the Substance
Use and Addictions Program.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invests over $6.5 million in projects that are currently
investigating social epigenetics, the use of magnetic resonance imaging, brain development and mental
health, proteins that may be developmentally protective, pediatric neuroimaging, neurobiomarkers, and
nutritional preventive intervention in the context of FASD.
The Kids Brain Health Network (KBHN) is receiving $50.8 million from 2009-2024 to improve the
outcomes for children and families impacted by neurodevelopmental disabilities, including FASD as a
national Network Centre of Excellence under the Networks of Centres of Excellence Program (NCE). As a
research network, KBHN engages with community groups, non-profit organizations, industry, parents,
clinicians, health professionals, provincial and federal governments to advance knowledge to improve
outcomes for children with neurodevelopmental disabilities, including FASD, and their families.
SUPPORTING THE MENTAL HEALTH OF POST-SECONDARY STUDENTS
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
We continue to engage with stakeholders and Canadians of all backgrounds to help raise awareness and
advance our commitment to supporting the mental health and wellbeing of post-secondary students.
Our Government is providing $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories (PTs) to address shared
priorities. PTs could use these investments to further improve access for post-secondary students.
We also provided $2M to the Canadian Mental Health Association to pilot a Campus Peer Support
program in five universities that empowers post-secondary students to support each other’s well-being.
ISSUE
Students can face mental health problems as they confront challenges with the transition to post-
secondary life, including as a result of increased workload, transition into adulthood, living away from
home, and financial difficulties.
Post-secondary students enrolled during the COVID-19 pandemic faced additional challenges, needing to
adapt to remote learning and distancing from personal supports and networks, which could have
enduring impacts for the remainder of their academic life.
KEY FACTS
Mental health issues are prevalent amongst Canadian post-secondary students. The 2019 National
College Health Assessment by the American College Health Association found that 52% of post-
secondary students in Canada felt so depressed that it was difficult to function (an increase from 46% in
2016). About 69% reported feeling overwhelmed by anxiety (up four per cent since 2016). About 16%
reported having seriously considered suicide within the last 12 months (up from 13 per cent since 2016).
Surveys conducted during the pandemic indicate the pandemic had worsened the state of post-
secondary student mental health. A 2022 survey commissioned by the Canadian Alliance of Student
Associations found that three quarters of student respondents reported that their mental health has
been negatively impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic, on par with 2021 levels. The survey also found
that:
1 in 3 students reported that mental health services at post-secondary institutions do not meet the
diverse needs of students; and,
o Top barriers to access included wait times, ignorance of how to access services, and quality of
services, with 3 in 4 students unaware of how to access on campus services.
Additionally, according to Mental Health Research Canada, in April 2022, Canadian students continued to
report that their studies were extremely impacted by their mental health (49%), significantly higher than
employed Canadians who reported that it was extremely impacting their work (31%).
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government recognizes that students may face considerable mental health challenges as they
navigate the transition to post-secondary education, with increased workloads, settling into a new
environment, and confronting financial difficulties.
We are committed to strengthening the mental health and well-being of post-secondary students so that
they can get the help they need, when and where they need it.
We are working with provinces, territories, and partners to advance the spread and scale of Integrated
Youth Services, which are “one-stop shops” offering integrated supports within the community.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT FOR INTEGRATED YOUTH SERVICES
Our government understands the need to intervene early in ways that are easily accessible and meet
young people where they are.
We continue to work with provinces/territories, Indigenous communities, and stakeholders to help
develop and expand Integrated Youth Services (IYS), which provide a “one-stop shop” of supports in the
community for youth.
In 2022, we announced $18M to fund IYS projects and develop a “network of networks” as well as a
national data framework and infrastructure.
This is in addition to $6.4M for research to examine existing standards, best practices and guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTHCARE FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT AND SUPPORTING POST-SECONDARY
STUDENTS
We will provide $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories (PTs) via tailored bilateral agreements
to address shared priorities including improving access to mental health and substance use health.
PTs could use these investments to further improve access for post-secondary students.
This investment will build on Budget 2017 investments of $2.4 billion from 2023-24 to 2026-27 for
mental health & addictions services that have yet to flow to PTs.
IF PRESSED ON THE REPORT COMMISSIONED BY THE CANADIAN ALLIANCE OF STUDENT ASSOCIATIONS,
“THE NEW ABNORMAL: STUDENT MENTAL HEALTH TWO YEARS INTO COVID-19”, 2022
Our Government understands how the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated mental health challenges
for many Canadians, including post-secondary students, who will continue to feel its impacts into the
future.
We have provided funding to organizations such as the Canadian Mental Health Association and the
Mental Health Commission of Canada to undertake initiatives to improve the mental health and well-
being of students on campuses.
We will also provide $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories (PTs) to address shared priorities.
PTs could use these investments to further improve access for post-secondary students.
BACKGROUND
Almost two out of three mental health problems begin by age 25, which includes the period when many
are studying at the post-secondary level. For post-secondary students, mental health challenges persist
across campuses in Canada, as a result of increased workloads, transition into adulthood, living away
from home and financial difficulties.
These challenges have been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic, as significant barriers to accessing
services have remained, including long wait times, stigma, and confidentiality concerns. Concerns about
the virus itself have been compounded by impacts on school and routines, social activities, isolation, and
decreased access to services and supports.
The Government has provided $2M to the CMHA’s national office to pilot the Campus Peer Support
program, a specialized peer support certification program, in five universities that empowers post-
secondary students to support each other’s well-being. This project will help post-secondary institutions
modify the delivery of their mental health support programs to more effectively promote well-being and
ensure academic success among this at-risk age group. This three-year funding project will end in March
2024.
The following five Canadian post-secondary institutions work in close partnership with their local
CMHAs, and bring expertise in peer-support programming:
University of Prince Edward Island (UPEI) and CMHA PEI (Charlottetown, PEI);
University of New Brunswick (UNB) and CMHA New Brunswick (Fredericton & St. John, NB);
Trent University and CMHA Haliburton Kawartha and Pine Ridge (Peterborough, ON);
Medicine Hat College and CMHA Alberta Southeast (Medicine Hat, AB); and,
University of British Columbia (Vancouver, BC).
There are a range of services from prevention to treatment, including peer support counselling and a
range of self-management options (on-line applications, telephone), that can help promote mental
health and address mental health issues. Research also indicates that increasing mental health literacy
and the building of life skills and resiliency are key to mitigating the high levels of stress during the
transition to post-secondary institutions. However, significant barriers to accessing services remain,
including long wait times, stigma, and confidentiality concerns.
The federal government is working closely with provinces, territories and partners to support post-
secondary student mental health, including through transfers to provinces/territories and funding to
community-based organizations.
Namely, Budget 2023 investments of $25 billion over 10 years to provinces/territories via tailored
bilateral agreements to address shared priorities can be used to improve access to mental health
supports for post-secondary students.
Additionally, the federal government is supporting the development and expansion of Integrated Youth
Services (IYS) models, which can improve access to supports for post-secondary students. IYS models of
care provide locally relevant, effective, youth-focused and integrated services for mental
health/substance use within the community. IYS hubs aim to provide “one-stop shops” of supports in the
community, which can include mental health and substance use services, primary care, sexual health and
harm reduction services, youth and family peer support, social and community services, as well as
support for navigating these systems of care.
DISTINCTIONS-BASED MENTAL WELLNESS STRATEGIES
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Increasing access to the full continuum of mental health and substance use services through evidence-
based, person-centred, trauma-informed, and culturally safe approaches is key to the Government of
Canada’s health care plan.
The Minister of Mental Health and Addictions is working with the Minister of Indigenous Services
Canada to advance Indigenous wellness, in line with the federal approach for integrated mental health
and substance use services.
The Minister and senior officials continue to engage regularly with Indigenous leaders to improve
distinctions-based, culturally relevant, and trauma-informed mental health and wellness supports.
ISSUE
Indigenous Peoples face unique challenges to having fair and equitable access to quality and culturally
safe health care services, including early childhood trauma, income, access to stable housing, and the
historical and ongoing effects of colonization and the residential school system on First Nations, Inuit and
Métis communities.
Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in Canada
through a historic investment of close to $200 billion over ten years, of which $25B will flow to provinces
and territories through tailored bilateral agreements. These bilateral agreements will support progress
on four shared priorities to improve access to health care, with mental health addressed by or included
within all four priorities for residents of PT jurisdictions, including Indigenous peoples.
KEY FACTS
The Government of Canada is providing historic investments in health care, including $25B over 10 years
to provinces and territories for shared health priorities, with mental health and substance use services
addressed by or integrated within them.
The Government of Canada has provided substantial investments to Indigenous Services Canada for
distinctions-based mental wellness supports through Budget 2021 ($597.6 million over 3 years). These
supports provide community-based, culturally relevant and trauma-informed wellness services for
families and survivors.
As part of the historic investments, the Government is also working with Indigenous partners to
distribute an additional $2 billion over 10 years on a distinctions basis to address the challenges faced by
Indigenous Peoples in accessing quality and culturally safe health services including for mental health
and substance use. This approach is in keeping with the federal approach, premised on the fact that
Indigenous peoples are best placed to determine and address their health-related needs.
KEY MESSAGES
Our government recognizes that the ongoing effects of colonization and residential schools on
Indigenous communities are root causes of mental health and substance use harms.
Through Budget 2023, the Government is providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories for
shared health priorities, including mental health and substance use services.
The Government is also working with Indigenous partners to distribute an additional $2 billion over 10
years on a distinctions basis for culturally safe services.
Our Government is committed to working with Indigenous peoples to improve mental wellness.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS IN INDIGENOUS MENTAL WELLNESS
Budget 2021 provided $597.6 million over 3 years for distinctions-based mental wellness supports.
Through Budget 2023, the Government is providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories for
shared health priorities, including improving access to mental health and substance use services.
In addition, the new Indigenous Health Equity Fund provides $2 billion over 10 years to help ensure
access to quality and culturally safe health care services.
The Government of Canada will ensure Indigenous Peoples are engaged in the development of funding
supports, following a distinctions-based approach.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada acknowledges that each First Nations, Inuit and Métis community has a
unique culture, territory, history, and relationship with the Government of Canada, as well as unique
strengths to build on, and challenges to face. It remains committed to working independently with First
Nations, Inuit, and Métis in recognition of their unique attributes to support Indigenous-led approaches
and improve distinctions-based, culturally relevant and trauma-informed mental health and wellness
supports.
The Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has a mandate to “support the Minister of Indigenous
Services to co-develop and invest in a distinctions-based Mental Health and Wellness Strategy to meet
the needs of First Nations, Inuit and the Métis Nation, including culturally appropriate wraparound
services for addiction and trauma, suicide and life promotion and the building of treatment centres.”
The Minister of Indigenous Services Canada is supporting work on Indigenous-led and distinctions-based
strategies in this regard.
Through Budget 2023, the Government is providing $25B over 10 years to provinces and territories
through tailored bilateral agreements for shared health priorities, including improving access to mental
health and substance use services. It is the expectation of the federal government that these funding
supports be directed to meet the needs of all residents in the jurisdictions, including Canada’s
Indigenous communities and peoples living off-reserve, and that provinces and territories will engage
with local indigenous communities on this funding.
Indigenous Services Canada is also engaging with Indigenous partners on the new Indigenous Health
Equity Fund of $2 billion over 10 years funding announced on February 7, 2023. The Fund is being
developed and implemented on a distinctions basis, in alignment with the United Nations Declaration on
the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (UNDRIP), the Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls
(MMIWG) Calls for Justice, and the Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action. It will prioritize
partners’ needs, ensuring alignment with Indigenous-led regional and community health priorities
In addition to the new Indigenous Health Equity Fund, the federal government invests approximately $5
billion in Indigenous health each year. This includes important new investments announced since 2021 to
support further progress, including:
$354 million over five years to increase the number of nurses and other medical professionals in remote
and isolated First Nations communities;
$250 million over five years to further support recruitment and retention of health professionals on
reserve;
$825 million over three years for distinctions-based mental health and wellness strategies;
$127 million over three years to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination; and
$107 million over three years to continue efforts to transform how health services are designed and
delivered by First Nations communities.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
UPDATE ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS
Tobacco is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada.
For decades, the government has undertaken taxpayer-funded activities to address the health hazards
caused by the tobacco industry’s products.
That is why Budget 2023 reconfirmed our government’s commitment to require tobacco manufacturers
to contribute to the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco control.
Health Canada is advancing this work with key federal partners including Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
partner departments, and cost recovery and financial experts, among others.
ISSUE
Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this country, killing
approximately 46,000 Canadians each year. The Government has an ambitious target to reduce tobacco
use to less than five percent by 2035.
KEY FACTS
Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all Canadians who
smoke.
In 2020, the total cost of tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion.
According to 2021 data, approximately 3.8 million Canadians smoke cigarettes – about 12% of the
population over the age of 12.
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to help Canadians quit tobacco
and protect youth and people who do not use tobacco from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330
million investment over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in Canada.
Our government is committed to reducing tobacco use in Canada to less than five percent by 2035.
Health Canada continues to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and people who do not smoke from
smoking, and to provide people with information on the health hazards of tobacco use, and supports for
quitting smoking.
Canada recently became the first country to introduce written health warnings on individual cigarettes.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR PERSONS WHO SMOKE
Quitting smoking can be difficult. Our Government is committed to providing resources to help.
Our Government recently launched a campaign to raise awareness of quit smoking supports. Over four
million dollars is also provided to partners to support the Smoke-Free Curious campaign.
People in Canada can also contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their community,
where available. The number for the helpline is displayed on cigarette packs.
IF PRESSED ON YOUTH VAPING
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority. We are encouraged to see that vaping rates
among youth have levelled off since 2021, however, they remain too high.
We remain concerned about substance use, including youth vaping, and are taking action.
Regulations prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen or
heard by youth, set a maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products, and require manufacturers
and importers to provide sales and ingredients information to Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
The first review of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act was tabled in Parliament on December 9th,
2022.
The review found that the Act appears to be making progress towards protecting youth and achieving its
vaping-related objectives.
It also found more work needs to be done and identified areas for action, such as strengthening
compliance and enforcement.
Public consultations on the second review, which is focused on tobacco, have been launched.
IF PRESSED ON TOBACCO LABELLING REGULATIONS
The Government of Canada is committed to increasing public awareness of the harms of tobacco use.
To this end, we refreshed warning messages and extended health warnings to all tobacco product
packages, to maintain their effectiveness.
We also introduced health warnings on individual tobacco products, so it would be impossible to avoid
health warnings. This is important for youth, who often get their first cigarette from a friend or sibling,
and don’t see the warnings on the pack.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. The Strategy sets a
goal of reducing tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035 (5 by 35).
Data released from the 2021 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) show that smoking rates
continue to decline. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a national
average rate of 12% (3.8M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. While the recent declines are positive,
millions of Canadians are still smoking. Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in
Canada, killing half of all Canadians who smoke. Furthermore, prevalence rates among First Nations and
Inuit are much higher than that of other Canadians. Reaching the 5 by 35 goal will require continued
tobacco control actions both population-wide, and also targeting groups with higher smoking rates.
In March 2023, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms”. The report found that in 2020 the total cost of
tobacco use to society was approximately $11.2 billion, or 22.7% of the total cost of substance use to
Canadians. Furthermore, it was responsible for nearly two in three lives lost (46,366 in 2020).
The previous Minister of Mental Health and Addictions’ mandate letter includes a commitment to
require tobacco manufacturers to pay for the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco
control. This is one of a number of comprehensive measures the Government of Canada is taking to
reach 5 by 35.
POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS INJURIES (PTSI)
ISSUE
What the Government is doing to address Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries among public safety personnel.
KEY FACTS
N/A
KEY MESSAGES
Every day, public safety personnel put their safety at risk to protect and help Canadians. As a result, they
are often exposed to dangerous and traumatic situations that may lead to post-traumatic stress injuries
(PTSI).
The Government is proud to help those who never fail to help us by continuing to advance Canada’s first-
ever National Action Plan on Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries for public safety personnel, launched on April
8, 2019.
The Action Plan focuses on three key pillars: research and data collection; prevention, early intervention
and stigma reduction; and support for care and treatment.
Under the Action Plan, the Government is investing $31 million over ten years to support research on
PTSI. This includes the development of an Internet-delivered cognitive therapy pilot for public safety
personnel, which is operational in Saskatchewan, Quebec, Ontario, Nova Scotia, New Brunswick and
Prince Edward Island.
In February 2022, we announced federal support of $1 million to Runnymede Healthcare Centre for a
feasibility study on a facility dedicated to rehabilitation and post-traumatic stress injuries for public
safety personnel.
In the tragic circumstances where lives are lost, there is a memorial grant program providing first
responder families with $300,000 to help with the transition in the loss of their loved one.
BACKGROUND
Every day, public safety personnel are actively helping to build and reinforce community resilience,
putting their lives on the line by responding to crises, local emergencies and large-scale disasters. In
doing so, public safety personnel may experience traumatic events that trigger the onset of post-
traumatic stress injuries (PTSI) and operational stress injuries (any persistent psychological difficulty
resulting from operational duties). Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) is an anxiety disorder caused by
experiencing or witnessing traumatic events, such as fatal traffic accidents, combat situations and
natural disasters, which may lead to problems in functioning in social or family life and at work or at
school. The term “PTSI” has been adopted as a preferred terminology by the public safety community in
an effort to reduce the stigma commonly associated with a “disorder.”
On April 8, 2019, the Government of Canada announced the release of Supporting Canada’s Public Safety
Personnel: An Action Plan on Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries. The plan will support research, prevention,
early intervention, stigma-reduction, care and treatment for all types of public safety personnel, all
across the country.
The Action Plan was informed through several consultations which began in 2016 with key stakeholders,
including Federal, Provincial and Territorial governments, the Public Safety and Health portfolios, public
safety organizations, academia, union representatives, mental health professionals and non-
governmental organizations.
Public safety personnel is a term that broadly encompasses front-line personnel who ensure the safety
and security of Canadians across all jurisdictions. Examples can include: tri-services (police – including
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, firefighters, and paramedics), correctional employees, border
services personnel, operational and intelligence personnel, search and rescue personnel, Indigenous
emergency managers, and dispatch (9-1-1) personnel.
The Action Plan builds on recent investments by the Government in this area, including:
$5 million over five years to support a new National Research Consortium on PTSI among public safety
personnel between the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) and the Canadian Institute for
Public Safety Research and Treatment (CIPSRT). This consortium is the first of its kind in Canada and will
work specifically to address the incidence of PTSI among public safety personnel; and
$10 million for an Internet-based Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (ICBT) pilot to provide greater access to
care and treatment for public safety personnel, especially in rural and remote areas.
Budget 2023 is providing an additional $16.7 million to CIPSRT to allow them to continue this important
work.
Departmental officials are monitoring progress against the Action Plan. Notable results to date include:
The National Research Consortium has been established, and CIHR has awarded approximately $12.2
million to date in applied research funding that will be undertaken in close partnership with public safety
personnel as the “end-user”.
The 2021 mandate letter of the Minister of Public Safety directed the Minister to work with the support
of the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions to “continue advancing Canada’s first-ever National
Action Plan on Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries, including additional investment to support the health and
well-being of first responders.”
MENTAL HEALTH BENEFITS FOR VETERANS
ISSUE
Mental health and substance use supports for veterans
KEY FACTS
Mental health problems are known to occur at higher rates among serving members than amongst the
civilian population. The prevalence of mental health conditions is particularly high among the most
recently released Veterans: those released between 2015 and 2018 showed rates of depression at
32.9%, anxiety at 29.7%, and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) at 29.7%. For example, 54% of
Canadian Armed Forces (CAF) veterans with a disability benefit related to service in Afghanistan are also
receiving financial support from Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC) for PTSD.
Mental health disorders impact veterans, their partners, and their families, including with respect to
quality of life, disability, income and risk of suicidality.
Suicide risk is nearly one and a half times higher in male CAF Veterans and nearly twice as high in female
CAF Veterans than in the age-adjusted male and female Canadian general population, respectively.
KEY MESSAGES
Our Government is committed to improving access to mental health services for all Canadians, including
veterans.
Mental health disorders among our veterans occur higher rates than among civilians, particularly for
depression, anxiety and PTSD.
That is why we are investing close to $200 billion over 10 years to improve health care, including to
better integrate mental health services in our universal health care system.
It is also why the Government of Canada implemented the Mental Health Benefits in 2022 so that
veterans can obtain coverage for mental health services to address disorders related to depression,
anxiety and trauma-and-stressor-related disorders.
As the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, I am working closely with the Minister of Veterans
Affairs and with provincial and territorial Ministers to ensure that people who live in Canada – including
the brave members of our military forces -- can receive the mental health services they need, when they
need them.
IF PRESSED ON COVERAGE FOR VETERANS AND OTHER CANADIANS FOR MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
Since it was started in 2022, close to 14,000 veterans have been approved for the new federal Mental
Health Benefits.
Veterans have up to two years of coverage so that they can get the care they need for anxiety and
depression as well as trauma-and-stressor-related disorders.
As all Canadians deserve to have access to mental health services when they need them, our
Government recognizes that mental health services need to be integrated as a full and equal part of our
universal health care system.
I am working with my provincial and territorial counterparts to improve access to mental health care as
part of new bilateral health care agreements, supported by federal investments of $25 billion over 10
years.
BACKGROUND
On April 1, 2022, the Department implemented the Mental Health Benefits allowing eligible CAF
Veterans to obtain coverage for health services needed for mental health conditions such as trauma-and-
stressor-related disorders, anxiety disorders and depressive disorders.
Mental health disorders are known to occur at higher rates among serving members than amongst the
civilian population. The prevalence of mental health conditions is particularly high among the most
recently released Veterans: those who released between 2015 and 2018 showed rates of depression at
32.9%, anxiety at 29.7%, and PTSD at 29.7%. For example, 54% of CAF Veterans with a disability benefit
related to on service in Afghanistan are in receipt of a VAC pension/award for PTSD.
Mental health disorders impact veterans, their partners, and their families, including with respect to
quality of life, disability, income and risk of suicidality.
Suicide risk is nearly one and a half times higher in male CAF Veterans and nearly twice as high in female
CAF Veterans than in the age-adjusted male and female Canadian general population, respectively.
Coverage under the Mental Health Benefits starts immediately following a member’s application for a
disability entitlement and may last up to two years.
The Mental Health Benefits provides coverage for prescription drugs as well as treatments and
examinations provided by psychologists, counsellors, social workers, or other mental health
professionals approved by the Minister.
From April 1, 2022 to August 31, 2023, 13,970 applicants were approved for Mental Health Benefits.
Recognizing the broader need to better integrate mental health services in Canada’s universal health
care system, Budget 2023 confirmed the Government of Canada’s commitment to improve health care in
Canada through additional health care transfers of close to $200 billion over ten years. Of this funding,
$25B over 10 years will flow to provinces and territories for four shared health priorities, with mental
health addressed by or embedded within all four priorities. These shared priorities -- family health
services, health workers and backlogs, mental health and substance use, and a modernized health
system --- will together result in improved access to services, including for mental health. Provinces and
territories are also being asked to report on results, with three headline indicators identified to track
progress on improved access to mental health and substance use services.
HEALTH CANADA RELEASES THE FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT ON MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING IN
CANADA
ISSUE
On October 24, 2023, Health Canada released the Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying
in Canada (2022) containing data that provide insights into written requests for MAID and the delivery of
MAID in Canada during 2022.
In 2022, the number of cases of MAID grew by 31.2% over 2021. MAID accounts for 4.1% of all deaths in
Canada in 2022. All provinces except Manitoba and the Yukon continued to experience a steady year-
over-year growth in 2022.
The release of the Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying in Canada may increase
attention to MAID and the safety concerns raised by certain groups regarding MAID implementation, and
the lifting of the exclusion of MAID for people whose sole medical condition is a mental disorder (MD-
SUMC) on March 17, 2024.
On February 2, 2023, the Government of Canada introduced legislation, former Bill C-39, to extend the
exclusion of eligibility for MAID where a person's sole underlying medical condition is a mental illness for
an additional year, until March 17, 2024. Bill C-39 received Royal Assent on March 9, 2023.
KEY FACTS
On October 24, 2023, Health Canada released the Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying
in Canada. This report provides aggregate information on people in Canada who have made a written
request for medical assistance in dying (MAID) and the outcomes of those requests, including those who
received MAID in 2022.
Federal reporting provides a clear picture of the current state of MAID across Canada: who is requesting
MAID, the reasons for these requests, and the circumstances under which it is provided or isn’t provided.
Growth in MAID provision has increased steadily each year as a result of awareness and acceptance of
the practice.
The Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying in Canada reported that the vast majority of
2022 MAID provisions (96.5%) were for individuals where death was naturally foreseeable, providing
compassionate care at the end of life.
The proportion of MAID recipients whose natural death was not naturally foreseeable continues to
remain very small compared to the total number of MAID recipients, representing just 3.5% of all MAID
provisions and only 0.14% of all deaths in Canada.
This year, a number of important initiatives have been launched to support the evolution and practice of
MAID generally and to support the health system’s preparedness for the lifting of the temporary
exclusion of MAID eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness in March 2024.
Guided by the recommendations from the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness, the Government of
Canada has:
Developed a model MAID Practice Standard designed for use by regulatory bodies and clinicians in
addressing complex requests for MAID, including where mental illness is involved (completed March
2023).
Developed and launched (August 2023) a nationally accredited MAID Training Curriculum.
Funded a Knowledge Exchange Workshop (June 2023) that included over 40 MAID practitioners as well
as psychiatrists from across Canada to discuss roles and contributions to the proper assessment and
management of MAID where mental disorders are involved, and supported local training related to
MAID for mental disorders.
Amended the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID in Canada to enhance data collection and enrich
research and analysis and reporting back to Canadians (enacted January 1, 2023 with new data to be
reported in 2024).
Initiated early activities on engagement with Indigenous Peoples (online tool launched August 17, 2023,
with other Health Canada-led and Indigenous-led activities planned for 2024).
Provinces and territories, in collaboration with regulators and MAID communities, have also been
working towards preparedness – some creating specific teams, adding resources, updating their practice
standards and encouraging training to help clinicians in addressing requests for those more complex
MAID cases, and where mental illness is a sole underlying medical condition.
KEY MESSAGES
MAID monitoring and reporting is critical to ensuring transparency and fostering public trust in how
MAID is being implemented.
This annual report represents the collaborative efforts of all levels of government and health
professionals working together to provide a comprehensive picture of the implementation of MAID in
Canada.
Our Government continues to work closely with the provinces and territories and their health
stakeholders to support the development and uptake of resources, such as a Model MAID practice
standards and an accredited MAID curriculum, in order to enable safe access to MAID for people who
suffer solely from a mental illness.
IF PRESSED ON THE FOURTH ANNUAL REPORT ON MAID IN CANADA
The fourth annual report is based on reporting requirements from the 2018 Regulations for the
Monitoring of MAID, and contains data that provide insights into requests for MAID and the delivery of
MAID in Canada during 2022.
Data collection has since been expanded after new Regulations came into force starting in 2023, but data
for 2023 will only be available and reported in 2024.
IF PRESSED ON THE INCREASING MAID DEATHS IN CANADA
In 2022, 96.5% of MAID provisions were for individuals where death was reasonably foreseeable,
providing compassionate care at the end of life.
The proportion of MAID recipients whose natural death was not reasonably foreseeable continues to
remain very small compared to the total number of MAID recipients, representing just 3.5% of all MAID
provisions and only 0.14% of all deaths in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXTENSION OF THE TEMPORARY EXCLUSION
Our Government extended the exclusion of eligibility for MAID for persons suffering solely from a mental
disorder to allow for the dissemination and uptake of key resources by clinicians, including a Model
Practice Standard, an Advice to the Profession document, several knowledge exchange meetings, and a
national accredited MAID curriculum.
We understand this is a complex issue with many diverging views.
Our Government continues to work closely with the provinces and territories and their health
stakeholders to support the development and uptake of these resources for safe access to MAID for
people who suffer solely from a mental illness.
IF PRESSED ON THE QUESTION OF MAID FOR PEOPLE WITH MENTAL ILLNESS AS THE SOLE UNDERLYING
CONDITION
The Government recognizes that mental disorders can cause suffering on par with that of physical
illnesses.
The Government also recognizes that there are diverse views on MAID and mental illness within the
psychiatric community.
Resources such as the Model MAID Practice Standard, Advice to the Profession, the MAID training
curriculum, and additional resources developed by provinces and territories will support the medical and
psychiatric communities in delivering MAID for complex cases.
IF PRESSED ON THE MAID FOR MENTAL ILLNESS AND SUBSTANCE USE
MAID is an option that is available only for eligible Canadians, and the legislation sets a high bar with
stringent eligibility criteria and robust procedural safeguards. The MAID provisions in the Criminal Code
are carefully designed to protect vulnerable people including those suffering from mental disorders
including substance use.
The Government has provided significant funding to support mental health and substance use supports
and to develop national standards for substance use services.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID AS A FORM OF SUICIDE, ESPECIALLY THOSE
WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS
The legislation sets a high bar for access. Only individuals with severe, long-standing and treatment-
resistant mental illnesses will be considered for MAID.
The Model MAID Practice Standard indicates that assessors and providers should ensure that a person’s
request is consistent, unambiguous and rationally considered during a prolonged period of stability, and
not during a time of crisis or suicide ideation.
The Government has provided significant funding to support the launch and implementation of 9-8-8, a
three-digit number for suicide prevention and emotional distress.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S REACTION TO MEDIA STORIES ALLEGING THAT PEOPLE ARE
SEEKING MAID DUE TO LACK OF NEEDED SERVICES
The eligibility criteria and robust safeguards provided by the law set a very high bar for accessing MAID.
Improving access to social and health services remains a priority and governments are working hard to
address disparities.
For example, the Government has introduced Bill C-22, the Canada Disability Benefit Act to reduce
poverty and support financial security of persons with disabilities. This legislation received Royal
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS THAT PEOPLE WILL SEEK MAID DUE TO STRUCTURAL VULNERABILITY
The legislation sets a high bar for access. Only individuals with a serious illness, disease or disability, that
are in an advanced state of decline that cannot be reversed and experience unbearable physical or
mental suffering will be considered for MAID.
While structural vulnerability may exacerbate a person’s suffering, MAID eligibility is determined by an
assessment of the consequences of the person’s medical condition and whether or not the person, as a
result, is experiencing enduring and intolerable physical and psychological suffering.
BACKGROUND
MAID MONITORING AND REPORTING
The federal MAID monitoring system was established in 2018 through the Regulations for the Monitoring
of Medical Assistance in Dying and provides a robust framework for the collection, analysis and reporting
of information. The existing Regulations enable Health Canada to identify and monitor trends in the
delivery of MAID in Canada and assist in supporting transparency and fostering public trust in the MAID
legislation and its application. Data collected from individual MAID providers or from a recognized PT
authority is verified and analyzed by Health Canada, before being published in the annual report. The
Fourth Annual Report on Medical Assistance in Dying, published on October xx, 2023, highlighted the
following key findings:
In 2022, there were 13,241 MAID provisions reported in Canada, accounting for 4.1% of all deaths in
Canada, and a growth rate of 31.2% over 2021. 3.5% of the total number of MAID provisions (463
individuals), were individuals whose natural deaths were not reasonably foreseeable. The average age of
individuals at the time MAID was provided in 2022 was 77.0 years with cancer (63.0%) cited as the most
common underlying medical condition (63.0%). A slightly larger proportion of males (51.4%) than
females (48.6%) received MAID in 2022, a result consistent with previous years. The majority of MAID
recipients (77.6%) had received palliative care in 2022, and of the MAID recipients who did not receive
palliative care (19.6%), 87.5% had access to these services. Private residences continue to be the primary
setting for the administration of MAID in Canada. 18.6% of written requests in 2022 resulted in an
outcome other than MAID: 298 individuals withdrew their request (1.9% of written requests); 560
individuals were deemed ineligible (3.5% of written requests); and 2,144 individuals died prior to
receiving MAID (13.3% of written requests).
On January 1, 2023, the amended Regulations for the Monitoring of Medical Assistance in Dying came
into force to enhance data collection and reporting through the federal MAID monitoring system. Data
collected under these amended regulations now includes, among other things, information related to
race, Indigenous identity, and disability of those seeking MAID. This new information will be reflected in
the annual report on MAID in Canada for the calendar year 2023, to be publicly released in 2024.
MAID LEGISLATION IN CANADA
MAID legislation has evolved since 2016 (former Bill C-14). In 2021, former Bill C-7 repealed the
provision that requires a person’s natural death be reasonably foreseeable in order to be eligible for
MAID, although the repeal excluded eligibility for persons whose sole underlying condition is a mental
illness (MI-SUMC) until March 17, 2023.
This two-year exclusion allowed time to initiate an expert review respecting recommended protocols,
guidance and safeguards to apply to requests for MAID by persons who have a mental illness as a sole
underlying condition. The work was undertaken by a Government-appointed Expert Panel on MAID and
Mental Illness (the Panel). The Panel’s Report was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022.
On March 9 2023, the Government passed legislation (former Bill C-39) that further delayed the repeal
of the above MI-SUMC exclusion, adding an additional year to allow more time for dissemination and
uptake of key resources by the medical and nursing communities. The delay ends on March 17, 2024,
The additional time also allowed for jurisdictions to plan, develop and be ready to implement processes
and supports for MAID requests involving mental illness.
THE EXPERT PANEL ON MAID AND MENTAL ILLNESS
Former Bill C-7, which received Royal Assent on March 17, 2021, included a sunset clause excluding
persons with a mental illness as a sole underlying medical condition from seeking MAID until March 17,
2023. During the two-year exclusion period, the Ministers of Health and Justice were required to launch
an independent expert review on the topic of MAID and mental illness.
An Expert Panel was appointed by Ministers of Justice and Health to conduct an independent review to
consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests by persons who have a mental
illness. The final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness was tabled in Parliament on May
13, 2022. It included 19 recommendations that provide guidance on the interpretation of the MAID
eligibility criteria, the application of the legislated safeguards, and the assessment process, as well as
advice on measures to improve the functioning of Canada’s MAID regime more broadly.
A key conclusion of the Panel was that, the existing MAID eligibility criteria and safeguards, when
interpreted appropriately and buttressed by existing laws, standards, and practices in related areas of
healthcare, can provide an adequate structure for assessing those more complex (track two) MAID
requests, including where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition.
On July 26, 2022, the Ministers of Health, Justice and Disability Inclusion issued a news release on the
Government’s progress in implementing several of the Panel’s key recommendations to help prepare the
MAID practice community in assessing these complex MAID requests. This progress included: developing
a practice standard for MAID; development of a nationally fully accredited MAID curriculum;
enhancements to the data collection system under the Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID; plans for
Indigenous engagement; and, federally-funded qualitative research on MAID.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The 2021 legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated to address the topics of
mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the
protection of Canadians with disabilities.
The Special Joint Committee on MAID (AMAD) submitted an interim report in June 2022, specifically
focused on MAID where a mental disorder is the sole underlying medical condition. The interim report
made no formal recommendations but urged the federal government to support the timely
implementation of the recommendations of the Expert Panel.
AMAD’s final report, containing 23 recommendations on all topics under its remit, was tabled on
February 15, 2023. On June 15, 2023, the Government tabled its Response to AMAD’s report and
recommendations in the House of Commons.
It is anticipated that AMAD will reconvene in 2023 for further study.
PREPAREDNESS FOR THE REPEAL OF THE CLAUSE ON THE EXCLUSION OF MENTAL ILLNESS
On March 9, 2023, the Government of Canada passed legislation to extend the temporary exclusion of
eligibility for persons suffering solely from a mental illness from March 17, 2023 to March 17, 2024.
While the Government, in collaboration with provinces and territories, and their medical communities
had made important progress in preparing for the original March 2023 deadline, the additional year
allowed more time for dissemination and uptake of key resources by the medical and nursing
communities.
In September 2022, Health Canada convened an independent MAID Practice Standards Task Group,
comprised of individuals with clinical, regulatory, and legal expertise, to develop a practice standard to
provide regulators and clinicians with guidance on MAID assessments for complex requests, including
those that involve mental disorders. The Model MAID Practice Standard was published on March 27,
2023, along with another document, Advice to the Profession, which provides more detailed clinical
advice on challenging topics than is typically included in a regulatory practice standard.
On September 13, 2023 the Government announced the launch of the first nationally accredited
bilingual MAID education program (developed by the Canadian Association of MAID Assessors and
Providers) available to licensed physicians and nurse practitioners. It consists of seven modules
addressing various topics related to the assessment and provision of MAID, including mental disorders
and other complex chronic conditions. Six of the seven modules are currently available for registration,
the full program will be available by the end of 2023.
Health Canada continues to work with provinces and territories to support system and clinician
preparedness for mental illness eligibility and is supporting research initiatives targeting
marginalized/underserved populations and knowledge gaps in MAID implementation and delivery.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1554 BY
Ms. Ferreri (Peterborough—Kawartha) DATE
May 29, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Ms. Élisabeth Brière
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to government funding related to drug supply and treatment: (a) what was the total
amount spent by the government on providing "safer supply" drugs in the 2022-23 fiscal year; (b) what is
the breakdown of (a) by province or territory; (c) what was the total amount spent by the government
on opioid agonist therapy in the 2022-23 fiscal year; and (d) what is the breakdown of (c) by province or
territory?
Health Canada
Provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery of health services to most Canadians, including
the majority of prevention, treatment and harm reduction services for people who use drugs.
Recognizing the scale of the overdose crisis, the federal government is working to support a full
continuum of strategies to help save lives and meet the diverse needs of people who use drugs, such as:
essential evidence-based treatment and life-saving services, including harm reduction; awareness,
prevention, and stigma reduction activities; data, research, and surveillance activities; and law
enforcement efforts to enhance safety and security.
Through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP), Health Canada supports safer supply and
Opioid Agonist Therapy (OAT) programs that provide prescriber-led access to pharmaceutical-grade
drugs for people at risk of overdose. As of June 2023, Health Canada has supported 31 safer supply pilot
projects across Canada through SUAP, representing a total funding commitment of over $100.9 million. It
is important to note that SUAP funding is time limited and is not intended to replace funding normally
provided by provincial and territorial healthcare systems for health care service delivery.
Most drugs used in safer supply programs and OAT projects are provided at the discretion of the
healthcare providers running the program and are often covered under provincial and territorial drug
formularies. In addition, provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery of substance use
disorder treatment services. Consequently, the federal government cannot provide a total amount for
federal funding dedicated to drugs used in safer supply and OAT programs. The federal government
supports community-based treatment projects through SUAP and has provided $32,663,360 in overall
SUAP funding in fiscal year 2022-2023.
In conjunction with answer (a) above, Health Canada cannot provide a breakdown of funding dedicated
to drugs used in safer supply and OAT programs. In addition, recipient organizations are not required to
provide a breakdown of the costs associated specifically with the OAT component. Health Canada has
provided a breakdown of overall SUAP funding committed to safer supply programs, of which 7 projects
include an OAT component as part of their suite of treatment options, by province or territory for the
fiscal year (FY) 2022-2023:
FY 2022-2023
British Columbia $11,632,533
New Brunswick $1,497,195
Ontario $18,315,312
Québec $1,218,320
Total $32,663,360
*There is one safer supply project operating in Manitoba that is funded under the auspices of an
organization in British Columbia and as a result is reflected in the British Columbia total.
In general, provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery of substance use disorder treatment
services, including OAT. The federal government supports community-based treatment projects through
SUAP, some of which provide OAT services. SUAP committed $2.25 million to projects providing OAT in FY
2022-23. The amount of money spent on the medications used in these OAT projects is not
systematically collected by Health Canada.
Breakdown of SUAP funding committed to community-based OAT-focused projects by province or
territory for the FY 2022-2023:
FY 2022-2023
British Columbia $1,117,866
Alberta $810,326
Manitoba $328,250
Total $2,256,442
In addition to SUAP funding for OAT, the federal government has provided significant financial support to
provinces and territories to help ensure that appropriate and evidence-based treatment options are
available to Canadians. In 2017, $11 billion in funding over 10 years was committed through bilateral
agreements with provinces and territories for health priorities, including mental health and substance
use. In addition, $150 million in federal funding was committed through Budget 2018 for the Emergency
Treatment Fund to directly support improved access to evidence-based substance use treatment across
the country.
This funding was cost-matched by provinces and territories, resulting in a total national investment of
$300 million. Budget 2023 proposes to invest $25 billion in new funding for tailored bilateral agreements
with provinces and territories on shared priorities, including improved access to mental health and
substance use services.
Since 2018, provinces and territories have used federal investments in treatment services on a wide
range of activities, including expanding services to support youth with substance use disorder, providing
withdrawal management services appropriate for people who use methamphetamine, creating Rapid
Access Addictions Medicine clinics, expanding access to opioid use disorder treatments, and
implementing culturally appropriate care for Indigenous communities.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1610 BY
Mr. Bachrach (Skeena—Bulkley Valley)
DATE
June 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by the Honourable Ya’ara Saks
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
QUESTION
With regard to addiction treatment facilities: how many facilities has the government contributed
funding toward, since 2015, broken down by
(i) the type of proponent of each facility (First Nations, provincial health authority, etc.), (ii) which federal
funding programs were utilized, (iii) the amounts awarded by the federal government, (iv) the year in
which the funding was awarded, (v) the aspect of the project that federal funding was used for (capital,
operations etc.)?
REPLY ORIGINAL TEXT TRANSLATION
Health Canada
The Government of Canada is taking a comprehensive approach to substance use guided by the
Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy supported by commitments of over $1 billion since 2017.
Additionally, the Government of Canada is investing $198.6 billion over ten years through Budget 2023
to bolster the health care system, notably:
An immediate, unconditional $2 billion Canada Health Transfer (CHT) top-up to address immediate
pressures on the health care system. This builds on previous CHT top-ups that total $6.5 billion provided
throughout the pandemic;
A 5 per cent CHT guarantee for the next five years, which will be provided through annual top-up
payments as required. This is projected to provide an additional $17.1 billion over 10 years in new
support; and
$25 billion over 10 years through tailored bilateral agreements to address the health system needs of
each province and territory (P/Ts).
P/Ts will have the flexibility to allocate this funding based on need and circumstance to four shared
priorities: family health services, health workers and backlogs, mental health and substance use, and a
modernized health system. These commitments are in addition to the existing bilateral agreements with
P/Ts following Budget 2017 that committed $11 billion over ten years for health priorities, including
mental health and substance use, and will help provide Canadians with access to timely, equitable, and
evidence-based substance use services.
Recognizing the scale of the toxic illegal drug supply and overdose crisis, the federal government is
working to support a full continuum of strategies to help save lives and meet the diverse needs of people
who use drugs, such as: evidence-based treatment and life-saving services, including harm reduction,
awareness, prevention, and stigma reduction activities; data, research, and surveillance activities; and
law enforcement efforts to enhance safety and security.
Addressing substance use is a shared responsibility with P/Ts. While P/Ts are primarily responsible for the
delivery of substance-use treatment services, the federal government has a role to play in supporting the
availability of evidence- based treatment options. The Government of Canada recognizes that improved
access to treatment services can help those struggling with substance use and save lives. That is why we
have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and removed barriers to
prescribing and dispensing. We have also supported the development of national clinical guidelines for
injectable opioid agonist treatment.
The Government of Canada has also made significant investments in substance use treatment services,
including providing $150 million through the one-time Emergency Treatment Fund (ETF) to provinces
and territories, which, when cost-matched with the provinces and territories, resulted in an investment
over $300 million to improve access to evidence-based treatment services. All $150 million of ETF funds
were provided to P/Ts via bilateral agreements in Fiscal Year 2018/19 (i.e., April 1, 2018-March 31, 2019).
The federal government allocated funding based on the severity of the crisis in the P/T and the size of
the population. This ensured that P/Ts most impacted by the crisis had enough support, and those
jurisdictions that were not as affected were able to prepare for possible future impacts.
The total amount of federal funding was provided in year one of the agreement, with the flexibility for
P/Ts to use their funds during the years they saw fit, with the requirement that all funds be spent by
March 31, 2023.
As part of each bilateral agreement, P/Ts were required to develop individual action plans (publicly
available online) that detail the initiatives that the jurisdiction would implement through the ETF and
submit annual reports to Health Canada to show progress toward increasing access to evidence-based
treatment. Bilateral agreements and action plans allowed for flexibilities to enable P/Ts to meet needs in
a manner that was tailored to their particular jurisdiction. Plans were designed according to the
following broad parameters:
expanding existing treatment approaches being offered (e.g., methadone, psychosocial treatment
interventions, peer-based support programs);
implementing innovative approaches to treatment (e.g., wrap-around care); and,
developing and implementing strategies to enhance healthcare providers’ knowledge of treatment best
practices (e.g., training modules, emergency room protocols).
Based on annual reports from P/Ts, ETF investments improved access to treatment services across
Canada. ETF funds were used to expand existing treatment approaches such as services to support
youth, withdrawal management services appropriate for people who use methamphetamine, Rapid
Access Addictions Medicine clinics, and access to opioid dependence treatment. These funds were also
used to implement innovative approaches to treatment including wrap-around care and virtual supports
as well develop and implement strategies to enhance health care providers’ knowledge of treatment
best practices. Reporting has also indicated that progress was made on: reducing treatment wait times,
increasing the number of treatment beds; and improving access to culturally- appropriate care for
Indigenous communities. PTs are not required to report the names of individual facilities to Health
Canada.
Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides time-limited Grants and
Contributions pilot project funding to other levels of government, community-led and not-for-profit
organizations, Indigenous organizations, and other groups to respond to drug and substance use issues in
Canada. The program supports a wide range of evidence-informed and innovative initiatives in the areas
of harm reduction, treatment, and prevention. Initiatives target a range of psychoactive substances,
including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol and tobacco.
Since 2016, the SUAP has provided $83M in funding for approximately 80 time-limited pilot projects
connected to substance use treatment (described in the table below). These include projects funded
through a range of non-profit, university and provincial health system stakeholders across Canada. SUAP
treatment and recovery investments have supported direct service delivery, treatment system capacity
enhancements, substance use workforce training and Indigenous healing projects.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2016-09-13 $1,064,600 Health Canada Substance Use and Addictions Program
(SUAP) Centre for Addiction and Mental Health
Toronto, ON (Non-profit)Developed a model to help estimate the resources required to address the
needs for treatment services for Substance Use Services and Supports across Canada.
2017-05-17 $960,151 Health Canada SUAP Canadian Academy of Geriatric Psychiatry
(CAGP)
Toronto, ON (Non-profit) Led and facilitated the development of four national guidelines for older
adults to prevent, assess and treat alcohol, opioid, benzodiazepine and cannabis use disorders.
2018-05-17 $799,557 Health Canada SUAP St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver
(BC Centre for Excellence in HIV/AIDS) Vancouver, BC (Provincial Health
System) Brought together professionals providing oral opioid agonist therapy services to increase the use
of best practices in order to improve treatment and care.
2018-07-11 $1,290,891 Health Canada SUAP Eastern Health
St. John’s, NL
(Provincial Government) Established a provincial opioid dependence treatment Centre of
Excellence targeting the health care community and health systems in Newfoundland and Labrador in
order to build capacity for treating opioid addiction.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2018-10-31 $935,184 Health Canada SUAP Canadian Association of Schools of Nursing
(CASN)
Ottawa, ON (Non-profit) Provided health care professionals entering the workforce with tools that ensure
access to evidence-based knowledge related to substance use.
2018-11-21 $540,500 Health Canada SUAP Northern Ontario School of Medicine
Thunder Bay, ON
(Non-profit - Academic) Established virtual communities of health care providers in rural and remote
areas to encourage best practices and address barriers faced by physicians and patients in isolated
communities.
2019-01-10 $933,931 Health Canada SUAP St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver
(BCCSU)
Vancouver, BC
(Provincial Health System) Developed an Opioid Agonist Treatment provider network to address
the need for evidence-based addiction treatment with particular focus on rural and remote providers.
2019-01-18 $505,398 Health Canada SUAP Government of New Brunswick – Dept. of
Health – Addiction and Mental Health Services Fredericton, NB (Provincial Government) Targeted
research, education, prevention and treatment in health care and its workers, people with lived
experience and their families, and stakeholders to help address the problems associated with opioid
addiction.
2019-03-11 $569,390 Health Canada SUAP University of BC Vancouver, BC (University)
Engaging formerly incarcerated men to explore the relationship between trauma and substance use to
inform policies, programs, and practices. The intended impact is to decrease the risk for problematic
substance use and support the successful reintegration to community.
2019-05-21 $270,330 Health Canada SUAP Students Commission of Canada
Toronto, ON (Non-profit) Adapted and delivered a program to reduce tobacco use among 750 youth
aged 12 to 24 across 15 communities representing all provinces and territories.
2019-06-06 $516,076 Health Canada SUAP Opportunities for Independence Winnipeg, MB
(Non-profit) Developed a trauma-informed substance use treatment program in Manitoba for
women in conflict with the law and with intellectual or developmental disabilities, fetal alcohol spectrum
disorder, and other neurodevelopmental challenges.
2019-06-27 $1,899,239 Health Canada SUAP Providence Health Care Vancouver, BC
(Provincial Health Authority) Developing an evidence-based intervention to screen, treat and
providing long-term support for youth with substance use problems, particularly opioids, cannabis and
alcohol, and studying the impact of this intervention on youth living in diverse communities in BC and
Ontario.
2019-07-25 $1,990,112 Health Canada SUAP Sinai Health System (University of Toronto -
Faculty of Medicine) Toronto, ON (University) Developing and evaluating an online and in-person
national evidence-based training module to enable primary health care providers to develop
competencies in treating opioid use disorder, building on the existing, accredited, multi-modal Safer
Opioid Prescribing program.
2019-09-01 $1,993,724 Health Canada
SUAP University of Toronto Toronto, ON
(University) Development, piloting, evaluation and scaling-up interventions for youth and young
adults vaping cessation that is
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
based primarily on an existing smoking cessation app.
2019-09-01 $845,662 Health Canada SUAP University of Saskatchewan Saskatoon, SK
(University) Modifying a service dog program to include intervention for problematic substance use
with a peer support component. An evidence-informed resource toolkit and forum for knowledge
exchange with service dog organizations is being developed and disseminated across Canada.
2019-09-09 $1,248,800 Health Canada SUAP Ontario Lung Association (Lung Health
Foundation)
Toronto, ON (Non-profit) Engaging youth 14 to 19 years of age in the development of an
interactive online and mobile friendly program to include self-directed cessation strategies, peer and
professional support and resources for youth who want to quit (tobacco smoking and nicotine vaping).
2019-10-10 $827,286 Health Canada SUAP Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority Prince
Albert, SK
(Indigenous) Supported First Nations clients/patients living on reserve who were recovering from
opiate use or who were on opiate agonist therapy.
2020-04-30 $696,840 Health Canada SUAP Chippewas of Kettle and Stony Point First Nation
Kettle Point, ON (Indigenous) Developed and implemented a motivational intervention residential
treatment program for members of the Kettle and Stony Point First Nations community to address the
drug crisis in through a community-led approach that promotes healing in court-ordered clients using a
Social Identity Model of recovery
2020-06-01 $794,880 Health Canada SUAP Independent First Nations Alliance
CMWSP
Sioux Lookout, ON (Indigenous) Community-based methamphetamine withdrawal support program for
the Independent First Nations Alliance (IFNA) community
2020-06-16 $441,922 Health Canada SUAP Provincial Health Services Authority Vancouver,
BC (Health Authority) Supporting people in the correctional setting who experience problematic use of
crystal methamphetamine by implementing behavioural treatment consisting of evidence-based
practices. The project is also ensuring a transition to residential treatment post-release in order to
sustain their recovery.
2020-08-17 $1,487,277 Health Canada SUAP Canada FASD Research Network
Ottawa, ON (Non-profit) Developing evidence-based Best Practices for youth and adults with FASD with
substance use issues in treatment programs. This program- based research focuses on treatment
programs for opioid and cannabis use, with strategies and practices applicable to alcohol use as well, in
order to support individuals with FASD as well as the prevention of FASD.
2020-08-19 $487,222 Health Canada SUAP Native Council of PEI Charlottetown, PEI
(Indigenous) Providing an innovative approach to individualized and group treatment recovery plans
by creating and including land-based, culturally sensitive activities to support off-reserve indigenous
peoples in PEI to overcome problematic substance use.
2020-08-20 $2,894,425 Health
Canada SUAP Ottawa Heart Institute Research Corporation Creating regional hubs to support
implementation of the Ottawa Model for Smoking Cessation (OMSC) program
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
Ottawa, ON (Non-profit) that provides evidence-based, clinical nicotine addiction support from
healthcare providers with the goal of reaching an additional 60,000 people per year in five P/Ts (NB, NL,
ON, QC and NU)
2020-09-01 $1,523,118 Health Canada SUAP St. Paul's Foundation of Vancouver
(BCCSU)
Vancouver, BC (Provincial Health System) Developing a National Guideline for the Clinical
Management of High-Risk Drinking and Alcohol Use Disorder, and related knowledge tools and support
to assist health professionals to effectively identify and address high-risk drinking and Alcohol Use
Disorder (AUD) and support patients across the lifespan to address alcohol related health conditions.
2020-12-01 $155,570 Health Canada SUAP NorWest Community Health Centres Thunder
Bay, ON
(Non-profit - Community Centre) Building Enhanced Treatment Responses (BETD) project
empowered service providers in northwestern Ontario with the knowledge, skills, tools and supports
required to enhance service delivery to people who are living with, or at risk of HIV or HCV infections,
including those who inject drugs.
2021-03-16 $4,742,245 Health Canada SUAP Canadian Cancer Society Toronto, ON
(Non-profit) Creating, implementing and evaluating a national tobacco cessation social marketing
campaign. Activities include reaching and encouraging quit attempts among the 2.6 million Canadians
aged 35-64 who continue to smoke with the long-term goal of driving down tobacco use in pursuit of
Canada’s goal of less than 5% tobacco prevalence rate by 2035.
2021-04-19 $576,615 Health Canada SUAP Eastside Movement for Business and Economic
Renewal Society Vancouver, BC
(Non-profit) Providing rapid access, long-term addictions care to people who have gained
employment through the EMBERS Eastside Works program in Vancouver’s Downtown Eastside and are
now ready to address their addictions in order to maintain their employment and stabilize their overall
lives. Key activities include the provision of evidence-based treatment such as an on site weekly ASAM
accredited (or equivalent) doctor or nurse practitioner to administer opioid agonist treatment and
medication for alcohol treatment; facilitation of Contingency Management Group Therapy for those with
problematic stimulant use by a certified therapist or social work counselor; and ongoing case
management of individuals to address their problematic substance use.
2021-08-09 $1,000,000 Health Canada SUAP Government of the Northwest Territories
Department of Health and Social Services Winnipeg, MB
(Provincial Government) Providing care to street-involved individuals in Yellowknife, and
improving access to supports for vulnerable individuals with substance use disorders, by providing a full
complement of prevention, harm reduction, and treatment services and expanding the capacity of
services to reach people throughout the Northwest Territories
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v)) 2022-06-15 $626,575 Health Canada SUAP Bell Island Sobriety,
Housing and Employment Inc.
Bell Island, NL (Non-profit) Developing a robust peer support program in the community of Bell Island to
develop the foundation for long-term supports for people with addictions including peer supports,
counselling, treatment, employment skills and accessible, affordable sober housing.
2022-06-20 $545,977 Health Canada SUAP McMaster University Hamilton, ON (University)
Updated 2017 Canadian guidelines for use of Opioids for the management of chronic non cancer pain,
incorporating new evidence and adopting new knowledge synthesis methods.
2022-06-21 $740,359 Health Canada SUAP Fort McMurray 468 First Nation
Fort McMurray, AB (Indigenous) Developing and piloting an in- community treatment program that will
allow for individuals to experience recovery on their traditional lands and within their own home
community through the Acahkawsis (star child) program.
2022-06-23 $793,163 Health Canada SUAP Salvus Clinic Moncton, NB (Non-profit)
Enhancing outreach, engagement, and treatment of vulnerable populations experiencing substance use
disorder, including those with concurrent disorders, across the community of
Moncton, NB.
2022-06-29 $1,247,203 Health Canada SUAP Wyndham House Guelph, ON (Non-profit) This
project will implement and expand the Concurrent Specialized Youth Hub, which provides youth access
to multiple supports in the City of Guelph and in the Wellington and Dufferin Counties.
Services will include housing, education, financial support and, low-barrier wraparound health care and
support for youth, including those with co-occurring disorders.
2022-07-04 $729,001 Health Canada SUAP Northeast Addiction and Mental Health Centre
for Holistic Recovery Calgary, AB (Non-profit) This project will provide integrated health, housing, and
supportive services to Calgary’s vulnerable South Asian families, including recovery coaching for people
who use drugs.
2022-07-04 $1,060,284 Health Canada SUAP Four Arrows Regional Health Authority Inc.
Winnipeg, MB (Health Authority) Providing direct services to people who use drugs and alcohol in
remote Indigenous communities, who currently do not have routine access to Opioid Agonist Therapy
(OAT) or other specialist addiction medicine services, including withdrawal management and
pharmacotherapy. The project is also providing education to both health staff and community members,
including on aspects of harm reduction, and direct mentorship for local care providers, serving to build
capacity for in- community harm reduction efforts and identification and treatment of substance use
disorders.
2022-07-19 $433,416 Health Canada SUAP St. Paul’s Foundation of
Vancouver Vancouver, BC (Provincial Health System) Developing new and revised curriculum for the
substance use workforce in BC who deliver harm reduction and treatment services to people at high risk
of opioid overdose who face barriers to care due to Indigenous-specific racism.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii))
Proponent of facility (Q(i)) Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2022-07-20 $500,645 Health Canada SUAP Providence Health Care (BC Centre for
Excellence in HIV/AIDS, St. Paul’s Hospital) Vancouver, BC (Non-profit / Provincial Systems) Implementing
and evaluating an integrated program of contingency management (CM) and cognitive behavioural
therapy (CBT) in the Downtown Eastside of Vancouver for individuals with stimulant use disorder.
2022-07-26 $377,788 Health
Canada SUAP Simon Fraser University Burnaby, BC (University) An evaluation project to examine a
range of health services and their associated health outcomes.
2022-08-05 $2,557,060 Health Canada SUAP Saskatoon Tribal Council Health and Family
Services Inc.
Saskatoon, SK (Indigenous) Implementing a comprehensive Indigenous -led urban healing program
in Saskatoon to support people to transition through a harm reduction continuum from street outreach
to detox, treatment and recovery services.
2022-09-23 $305,803 Health Canada SUAP Nipissing First Nation Indian Band
Garden Village, ON (Indigenous ) Activities include an outreach peer support component, which will
assist those in need by providing community outreach, peer support, and streamlined access to services
that promote the safety, self-sufficiency and wellbeing of individuals and their families.
2022-09-29 $897,416 Health Canada SUAP Shared Health (Manitoba)
Winnipeg, MB (Provincial Health) Increasing primary care capacity to treat substance use disorders and
increase access to services “closer to home” for individuals living in rural and First Nations communities
through rapid access to addiction medicine (RAAM) mobile and virtual services in three pilot site
communities.
2022-11-10 $1,220,989 Health Canada SUAP Regional Essential Access to Connected
Healthcare, Niagara St. Catharines, ON (Non-profit - Regional Healthcare) Limiting the impact of
the toxic unregulated drug supply and addressing social determinants of health needs for people who
use drugs through the expansion of existing safer supply initiatives and increasing availability Project
activities include mobile safer supply and medical and primary care, street outreach, addictions and
mental health supports, housing supports, along with peer supports to ensure that lived experience is at
the forefront of care.
2023-01-31 $170,500 Health Canada SUAP Nova Scotia Health Authority #368 Halifax, NS
(Provincial Government) Piloting and evaluating peer support workers in adult outpatient withdrawal
management and recovery support settings across Nova Scotia, including a training program for peer
support workers.
2023-02-06 $678,190 Health Canada SUAP R.E.C.A.P. Health Services Inc.
(Centre for Research, Education and Clinical Care of At-Risk Populations) St. John, NB (Non-profit)
Implementing a comprehensive multidisciplinary treatment team to provide support and wrap around
care individuals in southern New Brunswick with stimulant use disorder.
2023-02-15 $290,500 Health
Canada SUAP Nova Scotia Health Authority #45 Halifax, NS Providing mental health and addictions
support and care in Nova Scotia Emergency Health Departments.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v)) (Provincial Health Authority)
2023-02-22 $188,374 Health Canada SUAP Vasantham - A Tamil Seniors Wellness Centre
Inc.
Scarborough, ON (Non-profit) Delivering a culturally informed psycho- educational therapy and
prevention education for the Tamil population of the greater area of Scarborough / Toronto for people
who are struggling with substance use.
2023-02-22 $696,441 Health Canada SUAP Possibilities Recovery Center Inc.
Saskatoon, SK (Non-profit) Delivering a 16-week intensive outpatient addiction treatment program
for Indigenous women in Saskatoon.
2023-02-24 $1,749,111 Health Canada SUAP Selkirk First Nation Pelly Crossing, YK
(Indigenous) Supporting a range of services including: linking people to traditional knowledge and
substance use counseling services, delivering healing camps on wellness and traditional healing
practices, and delivering professional development to health and social services workers.
2023-02-27 $183,890 Health Canada SUAP Centre for ADD/ADHD Awareness, Canada
Toronto, ON
(Non-profit) Developing and delivering peer-led support groups across Canada for individuals who
have ADHD and use substances or have a substance use disorder. Activities include providing emotional
support and mentorship for participants as well as critical education about ADHD and strategies on how
to manage some of the core symptoms that have led to substance use in the first place.
2023-03-01 $207,561 Health Canada SUAP Hamilton Police Service Hamilton, ON
(Non-profit - Police) Hiring a Concurrent Disorder Navigator to offer outreach and follow up supports
to approximately 150 marginalized clients struggling to access supports in a timely manner. The goal is to
enable better integration of all the programs within the Crisis Response Branch of the Hamilton Police
Services in order to create more consistency and enhance communication for more streamlined care
planning and follow up.
2023-03-06 $597,488 Health Canada SUAP CADDRA - Canadian ADHD Resource Alliance
Toronto, ON
(Non-profit) Developing a training program for Canadian healthcare providers to enhance assessment
and support for individuals with concurrent substance use and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder
(ADHD).
2023-03-07 $470,027 Health Canada SUAP The Governing Council of the University of
Toronto Toronto, ON
(University) Collecting the experiences of people who use drugs (PWUD) when accessing emergency
room care in hospitals in Ontario to help identify barriers to health care. PWUD are hired as co-
researchers to interview others from the represented project communities at the Ontario Network of
People Who Use Drugs (ONPUD).
2023-03-10 $805,534 Health Canada SUAP Jean Tweed Treatment Centre
Toronto, ON (Non-profit) Reinstating a 3-week intensive online addictions program (IOP) for women
with substance use issues living in Ontario who are unable to attend in- residence treatment programs.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2023-03-13 $1,353,365 Health Canada SUAP Centretown Community Health Centre Inc.
Ottawa, ON (Non-profit - Community Centre) Expanding clinical and outreach services at the
Centretown Community Health Centre's existing Urban Health Program for individuals who use the toxic
street drug supply in downtown Ottawa. Providing centralized services such as primary care, mental
health and addictions services, including opioid agonist therapy (OAT) for people who use drugs.
2023-03-14 $293,400 Health Canada SUAP Nova Scotia Health Authority #198 Halifax, NS
(Provincial Government) Providing services to persons with substance use / concurrent disorders
in Eastern Zone.
2023-03-21 $374,827 Health Canada SUAP Georgian Bay Native Women's Association
Midland, ON (Indigenous) Activities include hiring one additional Indigenous Counsellor and two
Knowledge Keepers/Elders and two Peer Support employees to expand the existing "Giinoondaago - You
are Heard" holistic Indigenous wellness counselling program to help address help address the deep-
rooted issues (e.g., trauma and intergenerational impacts of colonization, residential schools, the Sixties
scoop, and stigma and racism) that contribute to substance use.
2023-03-21 $683,675 Health Canada SUAP Nova Scotia Health Authority #126 Kentville, NS
(Provincial Government) Supporting a sustainable patient and family centred addiction medicine
consult service at QEII hospital.
2023-03-23 $1,235,383 Health Canada SUAP Research St. Joseph's - Hamilton
Hamilton, ON (Non-profit) Expanding upon St. Joseph’s Healthcare Hamilton’s (SJHH) work in
developing measurement-based care or point-of- care assessment for patients with substance use
disorders who present in a variety of clinical addiction and concurrent disorders services
at SJHH. The innovative, patient- centred MBC for SUDs model includes point-of care assessment for
both addiction and comorbidities and ongoing patient measurements to monitor changes and inform
within-treatment adjustments and clinical modifications that optimize care.
2023-03-28 $1,963,855 Health Canada SUAP Sacred Circle Indigenous Wellness Society
Chilliwack, BC
(Non-profit - Indigenous) Designing and delivering a 16-week Indigenous program for treating and
preventing substance use disorder. The program includes a series of 1.5-day land-based ceremonies
based on traditional lndigenous knowledge, including knowledge of Tsleil Waututh, Katzie, Stolo,
Tk'eml0ps and Cheam peoples of Central and Southern BC and the Cree and other First Nations, and
Metis People of Treaty 6, 7 and 8 Territories in Alberta.
2023-03-30 $1,287,605 Health Canada SUAP Government of Newfoundland and Labrador –
Department of Health and Community Expanding the provincial Opioid Dependence Treatment Hub
and Spoke model to provide treatment for a range of substance use disorders (in
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii))
Proponent of facility (Q(i)) Utilization of funding (Q(v) Services St. John’s, NL (Provincial Government)
particular, alcohol use disorders) in
specialized, primary health care settings in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL).
2023-05-12 $1,193,514 Health Canada SUAP Gitpo Spirit Lodge #73 Eel Ground, NB
(Non-profit) Providing medically prescribed cannabis to 30 members of the Natoaganeg First Nation
in the Miramichi region of New Brunswick who are currently using opioid agonists to determine if this
combined medication approach helps people reduce and/or replace opioid medications.
2023-03-28 $1,917,838 Health Canada SUAP Manitoba Metis Federation inc. Winnipeg, MB
(Indigenous) Developing, facilitating, and leading a Metis-specific opioid education, stigma reduction,
harm reduction and addictions outreach program for Metis peoples of Manitoba. The project is
conducting community consultations to increase understanding of the current attitudes towards and
knowledge of opioid use within the Red River Metis communities across Manitoba. The project is also
developing and delivering workshops on opioids, safer use and opioid overdose prevention and
response; provide on-site psychiatric care services and opioid medication management services in
Winnipeg; distributing Naloxone kits and fentanyl test strips through seven regional offices across
Manitoba; and, using an outreach van to visit each of the six rural regions once per month.
2018-06-06 $1,295,355 Health Canada SUAP Simon Fraser University Centre for Health
Evaluation and Outcome Sciences (CHEOS) Vancouver, BC (University) Developing a comprehensive,
rigorously defined set of health system performance measures for people with opioid use disorders.
2018-07-24 $713,652 Health Canada SUAP University of Calgary - Department of Family
Medicine
Calgary, AB (University) Adapted a telehealth model for opioid replacement therapy delivery within
remote areas, including Indigenous primary care settings, to increase access to suboxone and reduce
barriers to distribution.
2018-08-11 $183,890 Health Canada SUAP Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (MaRS)
Toronto, ON (Non-profit) Conducted a feasibility study, designed the intervention, and engaged
stakeholders to address Opioid Use Disorder in Ontario utilising outcomes- based contracting, as a Social
Impact Bond (SIB).
2018-09-07 $950,458 Health Canada SUAP Government of BC Victoria, BC
(Provincial Government) This initiative will provide training for pharmacists on opioid agonist treatment.
2019-01-28 $2,967,165 Health Canada SUAP Dr Peter Aids Foundation Vancouver, BC
(Non-profit) Implemented and evaluated an intravenous opioid agonist therapy program in an
integrated health setting for people who use injection drugs.
2019-03-22 $1,599,565 Health Canada SUAP University of BC Vancouver, BC (University)
Studying and analyzing people with severe concurrent disorders to gain knowledge about critical
subgroups (e.g., women, LGBTQ2S, people from rural and remote areas, homeless and Indigenous
people) and monitor the transitions from inpatient treatment to community living.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2020-07-01 $480,225 Health Canada SUAP University of Calgary (Alberta Health Services)
Edmonton and Calgary, AB (University/Provincial Health Authority) Building capacity and evaluating
the effectiveness of contingency management and how this service could be added to routine care for
people who use methamphetamines and who are seeking treatment services.
2020-07-10 $1,332,360 Health Canada SUAP Centre of Excellence for Women's Health
Society Vancouver, BC (Non-profit) Produced gender transformative, equity oriented, harm
reduction and trauma- informed health information and treatment approaches for practitioners, policy
makers and women who use cannabis.
2021-05-04 $1,443,263 Health Canada SUAP McMan Youth, Family and Community Services
Association Calgary, AB (Non-profit) Providing addictions supports and wraparound services to
women who require support with their substance use issues on the wait list for long-term residential
addictions treatment at the Aventa Center of Excellence for Women with Addiction, a residential
treatment centre in Calgary. The primary focus is on recovery and sobriety related to the use of alcohol,
but clients may also seek services for crystal meth, fentanyl or other substances.
2022-08-10 $196,754 Health Canada SUAP Alberta Health Services - Youth Addictions and
Forensic Mental Health Edmonton, AB (Provincial Health Authority) Delivering Indigenous-based
programming and culturally-relevant ways of healing to Indigenous youth (12-18 years old) with
polysubstance use and their families, in Edmonton, its surrounding area as well as Indigenous
communities and towns across Northern Alberta.
2022-10-01 $831,170 Health Canada SUAP St. Paul’s Foundation of Vancouver Vancouver,
BC (Provincial Health System) Supporting seven interdisciplinary learners identified by BC's First
Nations Health Authority (FNHA) and the Indigenous Physician's Association of Canada (IPAC) to
complete the BC Centre on Substance Use (BCCSU) Interdisciplinary Addiction Medicine Fellowship
program.
2023-01-27 $2,579,088 Health Canada SUAP Options Community Services Society Surrey, BC
(Non-profit) Delivering a home-based detoxification service in Surrey, South Surrey, North Delta, and
White Rock, BC. The project is specifically focusing on services for South Asian men.
2023-02-16 $2,505,185 Health Canada SUAP Dan's Legacy Foundation Delta, BC
(Non-profit) Providing on-call care in six hospital emergency departments in Metro Vancouver for at-
risk youth (ages 15-25) admitted for self-harm, psychosis and overdose. Therapists are linking the youth
to housing, food, education, and recovery support programs. The goal is to help youth maintain housing,
engage in trauma-informed therapy programs and begin working towards their individual education,
employment and recovery goals.
2023-02-21 $1,835,450 Health Canada SUAP Northreach Society Grand Prairie, AB
(Non-profit) Delivering opioid agonist treatment (OAT) and related support for residents
of Grand-Prairie’s 120 unit Coordinated Care Campus supportive housing and wraparound support
centre.
Year Funded (Q(iv)) Amount (Q(iii)) Federal funding program (Q(ii)) Proponent of facility (Q(i))
Utilization of funding (Q(v))
2023-02-27 $957,069 Health Canada SUAP Covenant Health Edmonton, AB (Non-profit)
Enhancing existing community-based pathways of care to include culturally appropriate services for
addictions and substance use disorder. The project is delivering outreach services, engaging with
additional primary care partners and increasing the involvement of family members.
2023-03-07 $674,828 Health Canada SUAP Pacifica Treatment Centre Society Vancouver, BC
(Treatment Centre) Offering a pre-treatment program for individuals on the waitlist for residential
treatment services from the Pacifica Treatment Centre in Vancouver, BC, to mitigate the potential for
harms, enhance readiness for those on the waitlist and reduce the high waitlist drop-out rate.
2023-03-09 $824,766 Health Canada SUAP Lookout Housing and Health Society New
Westminster, BC (Non-profit) Designing and delivering a 60-day online substance use recovery program
for men and designing and delivering training for front-line workers in residential treatment programs.
The project is connected to the organization’s residential treatment program in Vancouver and Surrey,
BC.
2023-03-13 $1,172,775 Health Canada SUAP Vancouver Coastal Health Authority (Previously
Sheway) Vancouver, BC (Provincial Health Authority) Delivering a comprehensive Indigenous cultural
support program at Sheway in Vancouver's Downtown Eastside by providing health and social services to
people who are either pregnant or parenting and use or have used substances.
TOTAL $82,910,720
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1708 BY
Ms. Findlay (South Surrey—White Rock
DATE
September 14, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the government’s safer supply program: (a) what were the projections showing a
reduction of overdoses that were used to justify implementing the program; (b) off of what methodology
were the projections in (a) based; (c) what is the government’s explanation for why the number of
overdoses increased following the implementation of the program; and (d) when did the government
first become aware that its projections showing that overdoses would decrease were flawed and
inaccurate?
Health Canada
Since 2017, guided by the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy (CDSS), the Government of Canada
has taken a comprehensive approach to address substance use issues and the overdose crisis, supported
by over $1 billion in spending. There is no one-size-fits-all solution to prevent or reduce overdose deaths
— a full range of services and supports are needed.
Safer supply sits within a continuum of services where medications are prescribed in the context of a
therapeutic relationship between a healthcare provider and a patient. Safer supply services are informed
by well-established domestic and international evidence from medication-assisted treatment (MAT)
services, which are considered the gold standard of treatment for substance use disorder.
With regard to questions (a) and (b) above, surveillance conducted by the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) on the overdose crisis shows a significant increase in apparent opioid-toxicity deaths in
Canada beginning with the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, and rates remain elevated today. PHAC also
conducts forward modelling to provide estimates of how many opioid-related deaths may occur over the
coming months in Canada. Projections are based on assumptions regarding the toxicity of the illegal drug
supply and the impact of health interventions. The model considers all health interventions together and
does not report projections for specific interventions, such as safer supply. The model is updated twice a
year, in June and December.
Health Canada recognizes that additional high-quality evidence is needed that address potential benefits
and risks of safer supply. To help build this evidence, Health Canada is supporting assessment and
evaluation projects related to Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP)-funded pilot projects. This
includes a preliminary assessment of 10 safer supply pilot projects in Ontario, British Columbia and New
Brunswick. The federal government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), is also
supporting a study being conducted by a research team from the Canadian Research Initiative in
Substance Misuse. This four-year evaluation research project focuses on program implementation and
the short-term health outcomes of eleven of the government funded safer supply pilot projects. The
final results of this study are expected in 2025. Additionally, CIHR has awarded $2 million to the
University of Victoria to support a four-year study evaluating the safer supply initiatives in British
Columbia in partnership with Indigenous leaders, Elders and system partners.
With regard to questions (c) and (d) above, there is no one single intervention alone that will reduce
overdose deaths and solve the overdose crisis. This crisis is being driven by a highly toxic illegal drug
supply and a number of underlying socio-economic factors. This is why the federal government has taken
a broad, comprehensive approach under the CDSS focusing on prevention, treatment, harm reduction
and enforcement.
All SUAP-funded safer supply pilot projects are time-limited, innovative interventions designed to
evaluate the effectiveness of providing pharmaceutical-grade medications as safer alternatives to the
contaminated illegal drug supply in Canada. These pilot projects must have linkages to provincial and/or
territorial health systems, involvement of people with lived and living experience of substance use in
design and planning, prescriber/health care provider oversight, and must demonstrate commitments to
research and evaluation.
Safer supply services exist in a limited number of locations in Canada, and currently serve a relatively
small number of clients compared to the total number of people who use drugs and who are at risk of
overdose due to the toxic illegal drug supply in Canada. At the federal level, there are 29 funded pilot
projects, serving approximately 4,300 clients nationally. The focus of federally funded projects has been
on building the evidence around this new practice.
Under the CDSS, the Government of Canada will continue to undertake a comprehensive and evidence-
based approach to substance use issues and the overdose crisis, including testing new ideas and
approaches to help save lives and reduce harms. We will continue to work with all levels of governments
and key stakeholders, who also have critical roles to play. We will continue to monitor and assess all
available evidence regarding our approach, including studying the outcomes of safer supply pilot
projects, to inform both current and future actions, and make adjustments including implementing risk
mitigation measures as appropriate.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1422 BY
Mr. Vis (Mission—Matsqui—Fraser Canyon)
DATE
April 20, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Ms. Élisabeth Brière
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the legislative review of the Cannabis Act launched by Health Canada in September 2022
and the related online questionnaire: how was the online questionnaire advertised to the public; over
what time period did each of the advertising methods in
(a) take place; (c) how many individuals provided feedback through the questionnaire; and (d) what is
the breakdown of the responses to each question in the questionnaire?
Health Canada
The online questionnaire was first communicated to the public on September 22, 2022, when Canada’s
federal health ministers, the Minister of Health and the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and
Associate Minister of Health, announced the launch of the legislative review of the Cannabis Act at an in-
person event alongside the Chair of the independent expert panel.
As part of this launch, the opportunity to participate in online engagement was announced, thereby,
commencing the 60-day online public engagement period. On this day, Health Canada published two
discussion papers online, one for the general public and stakeholders, including a supporting
questionnaire to receive feedback (with a closing date of November 21, 2022), and the other one specific
to First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities (which originally was slated to also close November 21,
2022 but was extended to January 15, 2023, due to requests from Indigenous Peoples that they required
more time to provide feedback). Announcement activities were supported by a news release, social
media, and the launch of a dedicated webpage which included links to participate in the consultation
and provide feedback to the questionnaire. Emails from Health Canada were also shared directly with
stakeholders and Indigenous partners, inviting them to participate in the online engagement process.
Social media was issued frequently throughout the duration of the engagement period, including a push
near the end of the consultation period to remind Canadians to participate in the consultation prior to its
closing date.
As per the response to question (a), on the day of the consultation launch, September 22, emails from
Health Canada were shared directly with stakeholders and Indigenous partners, inviting them to
participate in the online engagement process. Emails reminding these same groups to participate were
also sent mid-way through the consultation and just before the closing date.
The consultation was also posted on the “Consulting with Canadians” page on Canada.ca.
The public engagement gathered feedback from more than 2,300 individuals, organizations, and other
stakeholders. A total of 2,158 individuals responded to the questionnaire. Additionally, a total of 211
email and mail submissions were received
The questionnaire consisted of 17 open and 11 closed-ended questions, nine of which were
demographic questions. The results of the online public engagement, including responses to the
questionnaire, are being analyzed and will be summarized in a report and published online in 2023.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1493 BY
Ms. Zarrillo (Port Moody—Coquitlam)
DATE
May 2, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Ms. Élisabeth Brière
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the Order Amending Schedules 2 and 3 of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act,
published in the Canada Gazette, Part I, Volume 155, Number 25 : (a) has the consultation period length
to receive feedback on the proposed regulations ended; (b) what is the timeline for the government to
decide on final regulations for flavoured vaping products; and (c) is the government still committed to
reducing youth vaping rates through a targeted ban on flavours, including mint and menthol, that appeal
to youth?
Health Canada
The consultation period for the proposed order closed on September 2, 2021. Health Canada received
over 25,000 submissions and continues to assess the input it received from Canadians.
The Government of Canada remains committed to preventing youth vaping and has taken a number of
measures to that effect. The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) prohibits the sale of vaping
products to young persons and bans advertising that could be appealing to young persons. The TVPA also
contains certain restrictions with regard to flavours to help protect young persons from enticement to
use vaping products. Confectionery, dessert, cannabis, soft drink and energy drink are flavours that
cannot be promoted or sold in relation to vaping products labelling, promotion, or packaging.
Three sets of regulations came into effect between 2020 and 2021, the Vaping Product Labelling and
Packaging Regulations, the Nicotine Concentration in Vaping Products Regulations and the Vaping
Products Promotion Regulations. The labelling and packaging regulations require a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning. The nicotine concentration regulations cap nicotine at 20 mg/mL of liquid. The vaping
promotion regulations prohibit advertising and display of vaping products at retail locations, including
online, that can be seen by youth.
Health Canada continues its efforts to improve compliance with TVPA provisions on youth access to
vaping products and promotions. In fiscal year 2022-2023, for example, these efforts included: a)
inspecting
1180 vaping product retailers and seizing non-compliant products at 177 establishments; and b)
conducting inspections of 255 online vaping product retailers and issuing 230 warning letters.
With respect to public education, Health Canada has invested more than $14 million to date in its
“Consider the consequences of vaping” campaign, which seeks to inform youth and their parents about
the risks and harm associated with vaping. The campaign includes traditional and online advertising, as
well as interactive learning tours in schools.
Finally, a new federal excise duty on vaping products came into effect on October 1, 2022. Health Canada
is committed to working closely with the Department of Finance to ensure that Canada’s product
taxation policy is consistent with the government’s health objectives. The Government of Canada will
monitor the impacts of the excise duty to ensure its intended benefits are being achieved.
Protecting the health and safety of youth is a top priority.
INQUIRY OF MINISTRY
PREPARE IN ENGLISH AND FRENCH MARKING "ORIGINAL TEXT" OR "TRANSLATION"
QUESTION NO.
Q-1754 BY
Mr. Lloyd (Sturgeon River—Parkland)
DATE
September 25, 2023
Reply by the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health
Signed by Mr. Darren Fisher
QUESTION
PRINT NAME OF SIGNATORY
SIGNATURE
MINISTER OR PARLIAMENTARY SECRETARY
With regard to the upcoming tenth session of the Conference of the Parties (COP10) to the World Health
Organization Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, from November 10 to 25, 2023, and the third
session of the Meeting of Parties (MOP3) to the Protocol to Eliminate Illicit Trade in Tobacco Products,
from November 27 to 30, 2023: (a) how many individuals will be part of the government's delegation
and what are their names and titles; (b) what is the overall budget for the government's COP10 and
MOP3 participation, broken down by (i) accommodations, (ii) meals or per diems, (iii) hospitality; (c)
what are the government's key priorities or action items for both the COP10 and MOP3; and (d) has the
government been assigned any specific agenda items or resolutions for both the COP1O and MOP3, and,
if so, what are they?
Health Canada
In accordance with the Directive on Travel, Hospitality, Conference and Event Expenditures, Health
Canada strives to find economical means of travel while considering alternatives that minimize or limit
travel costs.
This includes limiting the number of departmental travellers to the minimum necessary to deliver the
business of government, making use of virtual options of participation when available, and selecting
economical meals of travel when booking transportation and accommodations.
The Government of Canada plans to send a delegation of ten individuals to COP10, November 20-25,
2023, including:
Dr. Sonia Johnson, Director General, Tobacco Control Directorate (TCD), Controlled Substances and
Cannabis Branch (CSCB), Health Canada (HC)
Ms. Laura Smith, Director, Office of Policy and Strategic Planning (OPSP), TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Denis Choinière, Director, Tobacco Products Regulatory Office, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Kemba Anderson-Gohlor, Regional Coordinator to the Conference of the Parties for the Region of the
Americas, and Manager, Regulatory and International Policy Unit, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Mr. Dylan Upper, Acting Manager, Multilateral Relations Division, Office of International Affairs for the
Health Portfolio
Ms. Angélique Bisson, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
Ms. Mireille Rigby, Senior Policy Analyst, OPSP, TCD, CSCB, HC
One domestic Non-governmental Organization Representative
Two representatives from the Government of Québec (Provincial/territorial representatives –
travelling at their own expense)
The total cost of travel for COP10, for delegates whose travel is being funded by Health Canada, is as
follows:
Accommodations: $9,500
Meals and per diems: $11,651
Hospitality: N/A
Please note, flights are still in the process of being booked, therefore the final cost is unavailable at this
time. Estimated flights costs are: $16,500.
The government’s key priorities for COP10 are focused on bolstering the Framework Convention on
Tobacco Control implementation globally, enhancing transparency and accountability of the COP and
exploring measures that go beyond the FCTC. In particular, Canada will focus on:
Forward Looking Tobacco Control Measures: Canada has put forward a proposal to COP to consider
exploring tobacco control measures that extend beyond the provisions of the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC). Through this decision point, Canada’s aims to generate new
discussions on tobacco control and reinvigorate a collective response to the global tobacco epidemic.
Supporting Global Implementation of the FCTC: Canada is committed to supporting a new peer- review
and evaluation support mechanism. Canada believes this mechanism will strengthen global
implementation of the FCTC, ensuring that its provisions are effectively translated into action at the
national level. The WHO Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item, can be found at
the following link: https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10- source/Main%20documents/fctc-
cop10-14-en.pdf
Enhancing Transparency and Accountability: Canada will advocate for increased transparency and
accountability of COP through webcasting the plenary sessions.
These priorities underscore Canada’s dedication to public health and our leadership in the global
tobacco control community.
Canada has not been assigned any specific agenda items for COP, but Canada will be presenting a draft
decision for adoption on “Forward looking tobacco control measures” as is detailed above. The WHO
Convention Secretariat report associated with this agenda item , can be found at the following link:
https://storage.googleapis.com/who-fctc-cop10-source/Main%20documents/fctc-cop10-11-en.pdf
