Created: 2024-06-03T13:41:06.424823
Name: Draft_guidance_on_improving_indoor_air_quality_in_office_buildings:_Building_stewardship
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/programs/consultation-draft-guidance-improving-indoor-air-quality-office-buildings/building-stewardship.html
Package ID: 743ed840-0995-49b2-adc7-7d5a0a0baf72
Keywords: ['Draft guidance', 'improving', 'indoor air quality', 'office buildings', 'building stewardship', 'maintenance of property', 'building operators', 'impact IAQ', 'understanding IAQ', 'interaction', 'products', 'furnishings', 'occupants', 'processes', 'air quality', 'building managers', 'employers', 'develop policies-and-procedures', 'implement changes']
Notes: Stewardship refers to overseeing and being responsible for the care and maintenance of property. Building operators and the employer are often able to directly and positively impact IAQ through building stewardship. By understanding IAQ and the interaction between products, furnishings, occupants, processes and the air quality, building managers and employers can develop policies and procedures or implement changes with air quality in mind.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings: Building stewardship - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Health system and services Health-related consultations Consultation: Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings Draft guidance on improving indoor air quality in office buildings: Building stewardship Overview Indoor air quality and health Ventilation Building stewardship Roles and responsibilities Resolution process Hiring a professional For professionals Conclusion and appendices On this page Defining stewardship Building maintenance Space design and renovation Procurement Housekeeping Defining stewardship Good IAQ management must include building stewardship and communication. Stewardship refers to overseeing and being responsible for the care and maintenance of property. Building operators and the employer are often able to directly and positively impact IAQ through building stewardship. By understanding IAQ and the interaction between products, furnishings, occupants, processes and the air quality, building managers and employers can develop policies and procedures or implement changes with air quality in mind. Stewardship includes the day-to-day proactive upkeep and maintenance of the building and building envelope. By promptly identifying and addressing items, the operator or employer will be able to eliminate or reduce the causes of poor air quality, potentially before that item becomes a serious issue. Elements of building stewardship include building maintenance, space design, procurement and housekeeping. Building operators should develop and maintain good communication with occupants and educate employers, custodians, maintenance staff, and occupants about the importance of air quality and good practices to follow. Good communication between building operators and occupants can be facilitated through the development of a formal reporting process. A standardized procedure will ensure that communication regarding building issues is handled consistently over time. Building maintenance Similar to good maintenance practices that are required for ventilation systems, measures should be taken to upkeep or address potential causes of poor IAQ related to the building itself before they become a problem. It is important to schedule routine cleaning and maintenance and to conduct regular inspections of the building. In particular, maintenance personnel or the health and safety committee should inspect and monitor as required to ensure that unwanted contaminants and moisture are not introduced into the building. During inspection of the building and building envelope, some things to consider include: decay, leaks or damage (such as cracks, openings, missing shingles, deteriorated caulking, separating flashings, missing eavestroughs) in exterior walls, masonry work, roofs, eaves, soffits, foundations erosion, cracks or damage between doors or windows and the building itself that may let air or water enter the building changes to the way the ground is graded around the building (that is the ground should be sloped to allow water to run away from the building) damage from plants, trees or shrubs, including their roots (such as roots lifting and cracking concrete, roots accumulating in drainage pipes) water or sewage leaks from plumbing (such as safety showers, emergency eyewash stations, fire suppression sprinkler systems, washrooms, drinking fountains, kitchens, roof drains) damage or discolouration in ceiling tiles, floors and walls condensate (water) forming on windows, windowsills, window frames, exterior walls, water pipes efflorescence, which can occur and can serve as a sign of past water intrusion after the material has dried It is good practice to inspect the building after storms or heavy precipitation (such as rain, ice, or snow), when temperatures rise quickly causing snow to melt, or during extreme heat events to determine if moisture has entered the building or condensation is present on cool surfaces. Identifying and addressing these items early can help maintain good air quality and, in some cases, avoid expensive or extensive repairs or remediation. Space design and renovations When building operators and employers are renovating spaces or reorganizing occupancy within a building, there are many factors they should consider before starting the work. Plan repairs and renovations to include isolation of work areas if normal occupant activities are still ongoing in other parts of the building and to limit the spread of any contamination. Consult with your municipality to determine if permits are required for new installation or renovation of HVAC systems. Schedule activities such as cleaning, disinfecting, repairs or renovations that may create contaminants to be completed at times that will minimize exposure to occupants. Certain renovation projects, including the removal of asbestos-containing materials (ACM), require the ventilation system to be disabled or ventilation ducts sealed. Consult with an HVAC professional before performing any renovations or remodeling activities to identify controls to reduce exposure or activities that may impact IAQ. Plan for changes in air flow patterns when installing partitions, walls or other barriers. Be aware of the use of each space. If a space was designed for one or two people but is later used as a meeting room for 10 people or more, the HVAC system may require adjustment or modification. The same consideration should be made if the use of the space changes (such as the conversion of an office into a photocopying room). Off-gas (that is, air out) new materials that may introduce contaminants into the air before bringing them into the workplace. Use products formulated to have lower emissions. Use products that are known to emit contaminants early in the process to allow for more time for off-gassing and ventilation. Use barriers to limit dust in work areas from entering the air handling system. Before reoccupying a repaired or renovated space: remove all construction materials and debris and adequately clean the area in a manner appropriate to any contaminants that may be present return all systems to a functional state (such as fire, lighting, electrical, mechanical) confirm air handling systems are clean, balanced and operational. Procurement Employers can include IAQ considerations in their purchasing decisions by taking steps to reduce exposure to contaminants from cleaning products, new furnishings, building materials. Consider green/sustainable procurement policies to identify and reduce environmental impacts of supply chains when choosing suppliers of goods and services. Consider long- and short-term maintenance requirements when selecting flooring. Choose low-emitting furnishings and products, when available. Consider selecting low-emission cleaning and disinfecting products. A list of suggested cleaning products is available from the Canadian Committee on Indoor Air Quality and Buildings (CCIAQ), specifically in "Module 3 - Custodial Activities, Maintenance, Repair, and Renovation" , Table 3-2 (CCIAQ 2013b). A list of hard-surface disinfectants for use with infectious diseases (such as COVID-19) is maintained by Health Canada (2022b). Housekeeping Effective housekeeping includes more than just cleanliness. It also requires paying attention to the layout of the space and the use of storage facilities. Schedule routine cleaning of the building to prevent dust from accumulating on surfaces. Reduce the amount of dust that is generated when cleaning by damp wiping, carefully using lint-free cloths, or using wet methods for dusting and mopping (CCIAQ 2013b). Use vacuums equipped with HEPA filters, when possible. Empty or replace vacuum bags and filters as required. Keep entry ways (including areas outside) clear of water or snow to reduce the amount of moisture that may enter the building. Clean and dry mats to reduce debris and moisture. Select less-toxic products and follow manufacturer instructions on the label and, where applicable, the SDS for its safe use. Clean small areas (before the task becomes larger) as appropriate. When cleaning carpets: schedule cleaning when there are no or a limited number of occupants follow the manufacturer's instructions for safe operation of any equipment or products used maximize the amount of water extracted from the carpet, increase ventilation or open windows to help carpets dry faster (within 24 hours) dispose of cleaning solutions and contaminated water properly Keep areas such as food preparation rooms and washrooms clean to minimize microbes and pests. Properly clean dishes/utensils and store food in designated spaces. Health Canada has published cleaning and disinfection guidance (Health Canada 2022c) for use in reducing spread of infectious diseases (such as COVID-19). When using disinfecting products, ensure that they are approved by Health Canada and are labelled with a drug identification number (DIN). Water plants appropriately to prevent excess moisture or spills. Plants placed on carpets should have a stand or method to prevent moisture from entering the carpet. Store paints, solvents and cleaning products as required by the manufacturer. Storage areas should be dry, clean and well ventilated. Keep containers properly sealed when not in use and, if possible, stored in a location not connected to the return air portion of the building ventilation system. For hazardous materials, consult Section 7 (Handling and Storage) of the SDS for more specific storage instructions. Discard expired cleaning products or products no longer used in accordance with manufacturer's instructions and local waste requirements. For hazardous materials, consult Section 13 (Disposal Considerations) of the SDS. Page details Date modified: 2023-02-10 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy