Created: 2024-02-27T19:01:06.244443
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2017-2018:_USB_Chargers
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/chargeurs-usb-2018.html
Package ID: 75d5aac7-168a-4ce7-8201-f413b8a9daa3
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Enforcement', 'summary report', 'cyclical enforcement project', 'USB Chargers', 'sample-USB wall-chargers', 'consensus-based safety stand', 'CSA Standard C22.2 No. 60950-1-07', 'IT Equipment', 'safety', 'general requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this standards project was to sample USB wall chargers and test them to the performance criteria of a consensus-based safety standard in order to verify compliance to the CCPSA. The safety standard used as a basis for the project testing was CSA Standard C22.2 No. 60950-1-07 - Information Technology Equipment - Safety - Part 1: General Requirements.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2017-2018: USB Chargers - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2017-2018: USB Chargers Fiscal Year 2017-2018 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this standards project was to sample USB wall chargers and test them to the performance criteria of a consensus-based safety standard in order to verify compliance to the CCPSA. The safety standard used as a basis for the project testing was CSA Standard C22.2 No. 60950-1-07 - Information Technology Equipment - Safety - Part 1: General Requirements. For this project, compliance of select uncertified USB chargers was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and visually inspected and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the specific project requirement under the CSA standard was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to identify USB charger companies in Canada. This effort resulted in a list of importers and retailers that carried these products in Canada. These companies were sent a letter to advise them of the project and their responsibilities under the CCPSA. Companies were then selected from that list for sampling. Over the course of the 2017-2018 fiscal year, visual evaluation of recognized certification marks was carried out. Sixty-seven products that did not have a recognized certification mark were sampled for electrical testing. The electrical strength test resulted in 40 recalls and 27 products referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities. No other tests from the CSA standard, required for the certification of USB chargers, were carried out. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action 2Connect Double Port USB Charger A1 Imports Distribution Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by A1 Imports Distribution 2Connect Double Port USB Charger A1 Imports Distribution Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by A1 Imports Distribution 2Connect Single Port USB Charger A1 Imports Distribution Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities ABC Double Port USB Charger Amazon Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Amazon Bright Accessories USB Home Adapter (10-pack) S. G. Impex Inc. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by VanPak Ltd. Earldom Double Port USB Charger Amazon Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Eclipse Power Adapter Golden Gate Inc. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Golden Gate Inc. eeco 4-port USB Wall Charger Amazon Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Emaxco Charger Data Cable Packs HQ Technology Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Fifo USB Wall Charger Needs Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Fifo Single Port USB Charger Dartmouth Gate Guardian Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Gems Wall Charger Peavey Mart & MainStreet Hardware Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Peavey Industries LP Happy in trauel Single Port USB Charger Tan Star Trade/Tan Xing Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Tan Star Trade / Tan Xing Hookups Tech Accessories Double Port USB Charger Sherwood Co-operative South Albert Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Hookups Tech Accessories Double Port USB Charger United Farmers Association (UFA) Cooperative Limited Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Hype Wall Charger Combo Dartmouth Gate Guardian Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Iconnek by Lifestyle Double Port USB Charger Les Variétés P. Prud'homme Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Les Variétés P. Prud'homme IETGZ Double Port USB Charger Amazon Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Amazon Mini For Your Power Supply USB Adapter London Itech Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Longtech Computer Distribution No brand name Single Port USB Charger Pharmasave Drugs Ltd. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Double Port USB Charger Zonetronik Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Zonetronik No brand name Single Port USB Charger Tan Star Trade/Tan Xing Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Tan Star Trade / Tan Xing No brand name Double Port Travel Adapter Tan Star Trade/Tan Xing Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Single Port Platinum USB Adapter Tan Star Trade/Tan Xing Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Tan Star Trade / Tan Xing No brand name Power Supply Plaza Dollar Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Davcan Imports & Exports No brand name Power Adapter Plaza Dollar Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Davcan Imports & Exports No brand name USB Charger Compagnie M. Herman In. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Compagnie M. Herman In. No brand name Single Port Travel Adapter Compagnie M. Herman In. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name USB Power Supply Compagnie M. Herman In. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Compagnie M. Herman In. No brand name USB Charger Compagnie M. Herman In. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Compagnie M. Herman In. No brand name Double Port USB Charger Sherwood Co-operative South Albert Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Double Port USB AC Adapter Kimmers #2 Gas and Grocery Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Single Port USB Charger Lawtons Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Mini Adapter for 4/4s/5/5c/5s/6&6plug CanPro Gas and Propane Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Northeast Wholesale Inc. No brand name Single Port USB Charger London Itech Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Budget Electronics No brand name Double USB Wall Charger Deals for Dollars Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Deals for Dollars No brand name Single Port USB Charger Harvest Hill Dollar Plus Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Northeast Wholesale Inc. No brand name Single Port USB Charger HQ Technology Inc. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by HQ Technology Inc. No brand name Double Port USB Charger SMAA Corporation Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Mini USB Charger SMAA Corporation Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by SMAA Corporation No brand name Double Port USB Power Adapter S. G. Impex Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Double Port USB Charger Esso Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Elnour Investments No brand name Power Adapter Esso Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Core-Mark Holding Company No brand name AC Wall USB Plug 1A Red Apple Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Red Apple Stores Incorporated No brand name LED Single Port USB Wall Charger Red Apple Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Groupe KSD No brand name Switching Power Supply Doncath Holdings Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Single Port USB charger Lee's Electronic Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by VJ Supplies No brand name Desktop Charger, 6-port CDC Computers Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Com Gears Canada No brand name 4 in 1 Charger CDC Computers Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Longtech Computer Distribution No brand name Single Port USB Charger LKVape Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities No brand name Single Port USB Charger Groupe KSD Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Original USB Travel Charger 2 in 1 S. G. Impex Inc. Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by S. G. Impex Inc. Phantom Cables USB A Female to AC Adapter Infinite Cables Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Phantom Cables USB Type C Female to AC Adapter Infinite Cables Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Pinyue USB Adapter Crossroads Gas Plus Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Profil Double Port USB charger Distribution Franco Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Distribution Franco Profil Single Port USB charger Distribution Franco Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Distribution Franco Rox USB Wall Charger Bargain Basket Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Anex Select Imports Rox Single Port USB Wall Charger Deals for Dollars Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Anex Select Imports Smart Double Port USB Wall Charger 7-Eleven Canada, Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Smart Double Port USB Wall Charger 7-Eleven Canada, Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Smart 1A AC Wall Charger Chevron Town Pantry Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Creative Planogram Company (SRP) Spike Single Port USB Charger GYB Distribution Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Top Sync USB 5W Power Adapter Quad Source Canada Inc. Product did not have a recognized certification mark Referred to the provincial/territorial Electrical Safety Authorities Tranco Smart 1.1A Charger Fields Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Fields / FHC Enterprises Ltd. VIVO Tech Single Port USB Charger Amazon Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by Amazon Xtreme 1 AMP Xtra Power USB Home Charger CMS Famous Toys Did not meet the electrical strength requirement and product did not have a recognized certification mark Voluntary recall by CMS Famous Toys Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report IncidentsSubscribe to Consumer Product Safety NewsMonitor Consumer Product Safety RecallsContact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2019-01-21 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy