Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:34.644522
Name: International_Cooperation_on_Cosmetics_Regulation_(ICCR)_12th_Annual_Meeting_Held_in_Tokyo,_Japan_from_July_10-12,_2018
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/cosmetics/international-cooperation/annual-meeting-tokyo-japan-july-10-12-2018.html
Package ID: 7ad5bff8-6b17-4758-b1b0-ab2ce44d0b44
Keywords: ['International-Cooperation on Cosmetics-Regulation', 'ICCR', '12th annual meeting', 'cosmetics regulatory authorities', 'cosmetics safety-and-regulation', 'cosmetics industry trade-associations']
Notes: The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities from Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, and to enter into a constructive dialogue with their relevant cosmetics industry trade associations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 12th Annual Meeting Held in Tokyo, Japan from July 10-12, 2018 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Cosmetics International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 12th Annual Meeting Held in Tokyo, Japan from July 10-12, 2018 The International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) held its 12th annual meeting (ICCR-12) from July 10-12, 2018 in Tokyo, Japan. The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities from Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, and to enter into a constructive dialogue with their relevant cosmetics industry trade associations. As stated in the Terms of Reference, the purpose of this multilateral framework is to maintain the highest level of global consumer protection, while minimizing barriers to international trade. In 2018, representatives from ColombiaFootnote *, Israel, South Africa, South Korea, Taiwan, and Thailand participated in the meeting as observers. As part of this meeting, the regulators entered into a dialogue with cosmetics industry trade associations from each jurisdiction on July 11, 2018. The Councilor for Pharmaceuticals of the Ministry of Health, Labour and Welfare – MHLW, Japan – Mr. Kazuhiko Mori, welcomed the group and made opening remarks. The President of the Japan Cosmetic Industry Association – JCIA – Mr. Kazutoshi Kobayashi, made an opening statement on behalf of Japanese industry. The following Joint Working Group topics were discussed at the meeting: Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients Analytical Test Methods Cosmetic Product Preservation Allergens Communications Microbiome Industry provided an update on “e-Commerce”. An open stakeholder session was held on July 11. Representatives from Humane Society International and Cruelty Free Beauty - Japanese Coalition to End Animal Testing for Cosmetics made presentations regarding animal testing. ICCR recognizes the importance of alternatives to animal testing and continues to work on this topic, notably through some of its joint working groups. The following are the outcomes of the meeting: Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients ICCR SC accepted the “Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients – Part II” report and will post to the website. ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will continue to work on case studies as Part III of this activity. Analytical Test Methods ICCR SC accepted the “Review of International Standards on Analytical Methods defined by ISO” report and will post to the website. ICCR SC agreed to reopen the Joint Working Group on International Standards to update the table of relevant ISO standards. Cosmetic Product Preservation ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will continue to work on a white paper. Allergens ICCR SC agreed that the current Joint Working Group will continue to work on a report. Communications ICCR SC agreed to create a new Joint Working Group on Communications on topics related to cosmetics. Microbiome ICCR SC agreed to create a new Joint Working Group on the Microbiome as it relates to cosmetics. The next ICCR meeting will be held in Canada in 2019. Footnotes Footnote * Only an industry representative participated at the meeting. Return to Footnote * referrer Page details Date modified: 2018-09-11 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy