Created: 2022-06-21T17:57:14.820421
Name: Briefing_Binder_for_Minister_of_Health_-_Appearance_before_Standing_Senate_Committee_on_Social_Affairs,_Science_and_Technology:_Study_of_Bill_C-10_(COVID-19)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/7b4ce0ce-9b19-4ec7-a4ec-d3bc1618e712/resource/c7085ecf-c6f9-4fea-bf1f-27a6e5a4d554/download/briefing-binder-for-the-minister-of-health-appearance-before-soci-study-of-bill-c10-.pdf
Package ID: 7b4ce0ce-9b19-4ec7-a4ec-d3bc1618e712
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'legislation']
Notes: Briefing Binder for Minister of Health's March 2, 2022 appearance before Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology concerning the study of Bill C-10 (COVID-19)
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Santé Canada et l’Agence de santé publique du Canada
Bill C-10, An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
Briefing Binder, March 2, 2022
Bill C-10, An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
SOCI Briefing Binder
TABLE OFCONTENTS
1. Minister’s Speech for SOCI
2. Qs and As prepared for Senator Gold
3. Delayed Response to Senator Marshall
4. Text of the Bill
5. Legislative Summary
6. News Release
7. Media Lines and Questions and Answers
8. Redacted–Confidences of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada (Cabinet Confidences)
Remarks for the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos Minister of Health
Appearance before the Standing Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology
Bill C-10: An Act respecting certain measuresrelated to COVID-19
March 2, 2022 Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 5 minutes (maximum) Speech length: 608 words (5 minutes)
Check against delivery
Madam Chair and Honourable Members:
Thank you for this opportunity to speak to the Committee today. I am pleased to be here to discuss Bill
C-10, legislation that would provide Health Canada with the statutory authority to purchase and
distribute up to $2.5 billion worth of COVID-19 rapid tests across the country.
To begin, I want to impress upon you the importance of this Bill, and the need to make rapid tests
widely available right now.
As you know, the COVID-19 pandemic outlook is stabilizing across Canada. Omicron infection rates have
peaked in many areas of the country, followed by a slower decline in hospitalization rates.
While that is good news, we are not out of the woods yet. We have been in this situation before.
As we transition to the next phase of our pandemic response, we need to have the right tools to avoid a
resurgence of the virus.
Testingplays a key role in our efforts to contain and mitigate the pandemic. By identifying infected
Rapid tests can identify cases and effectively reduce the spread of COVID-19 in schools, in workplaces
and in other high-risk settings.
Madam Chair, not everyonewho has the Omicron variant of COVID-19 will show symptoms. In fact, the
prevalence of asymptomatic infection is probably a significant factor in the high rate of transmission of
Omicron.
Bill C-10
Bill C-10 would help to meet provincial and territorial needs for rapid tests, and would continue to
support the national workplace testing program, as well as federal workplace screening initiatives.
With this funding, the Government of Canada would purchase and ship hundreds of millions of
additional COVID-19rapid tests to provinces and territories and Indigenous communities over the next
three months, free of charge.
The funding would also allow Health Canada to continue to provide tests for distribution through
partners such as the Canadian Red Cross, chambers of commerce and pharmacies.
Throughout the pandemic, the Government of Canada has been working closely with our provincial and
territorial partners to ensure they have the tools they need to manage outbreaks and keep people safe.
The federal governmentstarted buying and providing rapid tests free of charge to the provinces and
territories in October 2020. To date, we have purchased more than 520.5 million rapid tests, at a total
cost of almost $3.8 billion.
In December alone, the Government of Canada delivered more than 35 million rapid tests to provinces
and territories.
In January, we secured and delivered another 140 million rapid antigen tests for the provinces and
territories.
Bill C-10 would allow Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting
provinces and territories by securing the rapid tests they need to keep people in Canada safe and
healthy.
And it would help ensure equitable access across all jurisdictions.
Conclusion
After two years of living through the COVID-19 pandemic, all of us are tired of it. But the reality is,
COVID-19 continues to be part of our lives.
As long as the virus continues to circulate in Canada, rapid testing will be an essential tool.
It is safe,effective, easy to administer, and produces results in as little as 15 minutes.
Bill C-10 would help the Government of Canada deliver hundreds of millions more rapid tests across the
country.
This legislation would help reduce the risk of outbreaks, quickly identify and isolate cases, and limit the
spread of COVID-19 and its variants of concern.
It would help keep people in Canada safe as we transition to the next phase of our pandemic response.
Thank you.
Bill C-10 Q&As
Q1–What was the original funding source to procure tests?
The federal allocation of the Safe Restart Agreement provided the initial funding for the procurement of
COVID-19 rapid tests.
Q2. Instead of seeking additional funding, did the Government consider shifting the responsibility of
procurement of tests to provinces and territories?
Since the outset of the pandemic jurisdictions have taken a Team Canada approach, with the
Government of Canada taking a leadership role for funding and procuring vaccines and rapid tests. This
has been critical in a highly competitive global market and to ensure equitable access across Canada.
Q3 How did the Department procure the tests announced by the Prime Minister in January?
With the announcement of $1.7 billion for rapid tests in the 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update, Health
Canada, working with Public Services and Procurement Canada, was able to buy rapid tests for
December, January and February. With this funding the Health Portfolio procured 345.0M tests.
Q4 Why has Health Canada requested funds through the Supplemental Estimates C and Bill C-10?
These planned expenditures for rapid tests have been included in both Supplementary Estimates C and
in Bill C-10 primarily due to timing constraints. As a result of the highly competitive global market for
rapid tests, some manufacturers are requesting advance payments. The statutory authority in Bill C-10
would provide the ability to advance procurement and make payments up to one month earlier than
waiting for Supplementary Estimates C to receive Royal Assent.
Q5 Why do Bill C-8 and Bill C-10 permit the Health Portfolio to cover off costs incurred as of April 1, 2021
and January 1, 2022?
The language of the Bill provides flexibility to replenish sources of funds that were accessedto allow the
procurement of tests prior to the passing of Bill C-8 and Bill C-10.
Q6 Why has the Government introduced Bill C-10 given that Bill C-8 is still pending?
Bill C-8 funding as committed in the 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update addressed needs inDecember to
February. Bill C-10 is needed to respond to the ongoing demand for rapid tests, and ensure equitable
access across Canada.
Q7 What is the source of funds?
Payments will be made from the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
Q8 What authorities does Bill C-10 provide the Minister of Health?
Bill C-10 provides the Minister of Health access for up to $2.5 billion from the Consolidated Revenue
Fund to procure and distribute COVID-19 rapid tests.
The Bill also gives the Minister the authority to distributetests to provinces and territories, any body or
a person in Canada.
Q9 What is the urgency of Bill C-10?
The global demand for COVID-19 rapid tests has resulted in limited supply.
If passed, Bill C-10 would provide statutory authority to spend the $2.5 billion immediately, and not
bound by the fiscal year, enabling the Government to sign contracts quickly for delivery in the next few
months. There is an urgent need for this Bill C-10 to pass so that there is a guarantee of supply in March
to spring 2022.
Q10 Does Bill C-10 provide enough funding for rapid tests?
Bill C-10 would provide funding needed to procure critical supply of COVID-19 rapid tests to support
rapid testing into spring 2022.
Q11 Is the Government spending too much money on rapid tests?
To date, tests procured have or are being deployed to support provinces and territories’ testing regimes,
to fulfill federal mandates, to support employers and vulnerable communities.
Q12 Did the Government of Canada deliver on its promise to get 140M RATs to provinces and territories
in January?
The Government of Canada received 140M rapid tests in January and distributed them to provinces and
territories.
Q13 Why did some provinces and territories get more rapid tests than others?
Initially, shipmentsto provinces and territories were driven by provincial and territorial demand. With
the advent of Omicron and the expansion of the use of COVID-19 rapid tests across all provinces and
territories, the Government moved to a per capita allocation, resultingin provinces with larger
populations receiving higher quantities of tests.
Q14 What is the federal government doing to ensure that Canadians most at risk are getting access to
rapid tests?
The Government has put in place agreements with organizations to support roll-out of workplace
screening, including an agreement with the Canadian Red Cross to provide tests and support for
workplace screening in the non-profit sector.
Due to the success of this initiative and the partnerships that the Canadian Red Cross has will
organizations that support vulnerable populations, the agreement has been expanded so that the
Canadian Red Cross can provide tests to individuals through organizations such as Boys and Girls Club,
YMCA-YWCA and food banks.
The Minister received an emailed request from Senator Marshall’s (CPC) office for more information
regarding C-10, following his appearance at Senate Question Period, on February 9th. In the event that a
similar question is asked at SOCI the question and proposed response appear below.
Question:
I believe Senator Marshall was hoping for a more detailed answer on how that money would be spent,
but we appreciated your offer to get back to us with specific examples, hoping that a more detailed
accounting of how the money is expected to be spent would also be included.
However, regrettably we have not heard back from anyone as of yet. Can someone from your office
please get back to us and let us know when we might expect to hear from you on this issue?
Response:
The Government has proposed additional funding up to $2.5B to Health Canada to procure rapid test
kits and to cover associated logistics and operations costs.
The majority of the funding is for the procurementof approximately 350 million COVID-19 rapid tests.
However, some funding is required for the shipping of tests from Asia. There are also costs related to
the warehousing and domestic transportation in Canada.
First Session, Forty-fourth Parliament,70-71 Elizabeth II, 2021-2022
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C-10
An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
AS PASSED
BY THE HOUSE OF COMMONS
FEBRUARY 15, 2022
91072
RECOMMENDATION
Her Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House of Commons the appropriation of
public revenue under the cir-cumstances, in the manner and for the purposes set out in a measure
entitled “An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19”.
SUMMARY
This enactment authorizes the Minister of Health to make pay-ments of up to $2.5 billion out of the
Consolidated Revenue Fund in relation to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) tests.
It also authorizes that Minister to transfer COVID-19 tests and in-struments used in relation to those
tests to the provinces and territories and to bodies and persons in Canada.
Available on the House of Commons website at the following address:
www.ourcommons.ca
2021-2022 ii 70-71 Eliz. II
1st Session, 44th Parliament, 70-71 Elizabeth II, 2021-2022
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C-10
An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
Her Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of Commons of Canada,
enacts as follows:
Payments out of C.R.F.
1 The Minister of Health may make payments, the total
of which may not exceed $2.5 billion, out of the Consoli-5 dated Revenue Fund for any expenses
incurred on or af-ter January 1, 2022 in relation to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) tests.
Transfers
2 The Minister of Health may transfer to any province or territory, or to any body or person in
Canada, any coro-10 navirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) tests or instruments used in relation to those
tests acquired by Her Majesty in right of Canada on or after April 1, 2021.
91072
Published under authority of the Speaker of the House of Commons
2021-2022 1 70-71 Eliz. II
Available on the House of Commons website at the following address:www.ourcommons.ca
Government Bill C-10
Sponsor: XX
An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19
Ministries: Health
Summary:
Authorizes the Minister of Health to make payments of up to $2.5 billion out of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund in relation to coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19)tests
It also authorizes the Minister of Health to transfer COVID-19 tests and instruments used in relation to
those tests to provinces, territories and bodies and persons in Canada
Minister:
The Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos (Health)
Technical Briefing:
A technical briefing on Bill C-10 was held for all Senators and staff by teleconference on Friday, February
4th, 2022 at 3:00PM Eastern time (EST).
Government Rationale:
The Act Respecting Certain Measures Related to COVID-19 provides the legislation needed to implement
key campaign commitment of protecting our recovery by finishing the fight against COVID-19, which was
reiterated in the Fall Economic Statement 2021. Bill C-10 would allow Health Canada to purchase and
distribute up to $2.5 billion worth ofCOVID-19 rapid tests across the country over the next three
months.
Background and Analysis:
The Government of Canada understands the importance of testing to slow and reduce the spread of
COVID-19 in Canada. As part of our response, we are purchasingand providing hundreds of millions of
rapid tests and sending them free of charge to provinces and territories since October 2020, in line with
the authorization of the first rapid test.
Bill C-10 would allow Health Canada to purchase and distribute up to$2.5 billion worth of COVID-19
rapid tests across the country over the next three months.
This statutory authority would ensure the delivery of hundreds of millions of additional COVID-19 rapid
tests to provinces and territories and Indigenous communities,free of charge. It would also continue to
support screening programs, through partners such as the Canadian Red Cross, Canadian Chambers of
Commerce, and pharmacies, via the Safe Restart Agreement.
We will continue to work with provinces and territories and the manufacturers to continue to buy and
distribute rapid tests as fast as possible to meet the new demand.
Key Messages:
• Rapid tests have become an important additional layer of protection in the fight against COVID-
19, with significantly increaseddemand during the Omicron wave.
• To ensure equal access across all jurisdictions, Minister Duclos introduced Bill C-10, An Act
respecting certain measures related to COVID-19 in Parliament to provide Health Canada with $2.5
billion to purchase and distribute rapid tests across the country.
• This legislation would also give the Government of Canada the authority to transfer inventory
directly to provinces and territories, speeding up the shipping process.
• With the additional funding being sought, our Government will be better placed to secure
consistent, longer-term supply for the coming months, streamlining delivery channels.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
News Release
For Immediate Release
Government of Canada introduces legislation to increase access to rapid testing across the country
January XX, 2022 Ottawa, ON Health Canada
Testing and screening, in combination with local public health measures andvaccination, are important
tools to protect Canadians and limit the spread of COVID-19 and its variants of concern.
Today, the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, introduced Bill C-10-An Act respecting
certain measures related to COVID-19 inParliament to provide Health Canada with the statutory
authority to purchase and distribute across the country up to $2.5 billion worth of COVID-19 rapid tests.
With this funding, the Government of Canada would put in place critical contracts in a highly
competitive global market, to purchase sufficient quantities of rapid tests to meet the continued
demand across the country.
Bill C-10-An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19 would:
• Build on the commitments in the December 14, 2021, Economic and Fiscal Update, in which the
Government of Canada proposed $1.7 billion to increase access to COVID-19 rapid testing for everyone
in Canada;
• Allow Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting provinces
and territories by securing the COVID-19 rapid tests they need.
• Continue to provide additional support to the Canadian Red Cross in their campaign to deliver
rapid tests–free of charge–to community organizations for those most in need; and
• Continue to support small, medium and large businesses and organizations, as well as federal
workplace screening programs through direct delivery and through partners such as Chambers of
Commerce, and pharmacies.
Quote
“As COVID-19 remains a global threat, driven by the highlytransmissible Omicron variant, the demand
for rapid tests has increased worldwide. Keeping Canadians safe has always been our number one
priority, and rapid tests are an important part of that strategy. This Bill will allow Health Canada to buy
the necessary rapid tests so that jurisdictions across the country can identify cases early, break the chain
of transmissions, and reduce outbreaks.”
The Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos Minister of Health
Quick Facts
• The Government of Canada has provided $3 billion viathe Safe Restart Agreement to provinces
and territories to increase capacity to conduct polymerase chain reaction (PCR) testing, perform contact
tracing and share public health data. This funding provided a foundation to help jurisdictions slow the
spreadof the virus.
• In addition to providing free COVID-19 rapid tests, the Government of Canada has provided $6.6
million to the Canadian Red Cross to distribute tests to charities and non-profits for workplace
screening, and $8.1 million to the Canadian Chamber of Commerce to support distribution to small to
medium sized businesses through local chambers.
• Organizations with 200 or more employees, including federally regulated businesses are able to
receive free COVID-19 rapid tests directly from the Government of Canada.
• In partnership with provinces and territories, small and medium-sized businesses and
organizations can also access rapid tests through distribution partners:
o Independent pharmacies, Rexall, Sobeys and Shoppers Drug Mart locations in Alberta,
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, British Columbia, PEI and Northwest Territories,
o Chambers of Commerce in Ontario, Alberta, New Brunswick, and Saskatchewan.
Additional Information
Where to get tested and how to get rapid tests COVID-19 testing, screening and contact tracing
COVID-19 rapid testing and screening in workplaces: Get free rapid tests
Associated Links
Government of Canada increases access to COVID-19 rapid testing for workers
Rapid tests for COVID-19 screening in the workplace
COVID-19 Testing, Screening, and Contact Tracing
Industry Advisory Roundtable on COVID-19 Testing, Screening, Tracing and Data Management
Testing and Screening Expert Advisory Panel
Safe Restart Agreement
COVID-19: Digital tools and apps for staying healthy
Coronavirus disease (COVID-19)
Media Lines
COVID-19 Rapid Test Supply and Distribution
Issue Statement: Minister Duclos introduced Bill C-X, An Act respecting certain measures related to
COVID-19 in Parliament to provide Health Canada with the statutory authority to purchase and
distribute up to $2.5 billion worth of COVID-19 rapid tests across the country.
Key Messages:
• Bill XX would allow Health Canada to purchase and distribute up to $2.5 billion worth of COVID-
19 rapid tests across the country.
• This statutory authority would ensure the delivery of hundreds of millions of additional COVID-
19 rapid tests to provinces and territories and Indigenous communities, free of charge. It would also
continue to support screening programs, through partners such as the Canadian Red Cross, Canadian
Chambers of Commerce, and pharmacies, via the Safe Restart Agreement.
• The Government of Canada has been buying and providing COVID-19 rapid tests free of charge
to provinces and territories since October 2020, in line with its authorization of the first COVID-19 rapid
test. With the expedited passage of this Bill, Health Canada would be able to provide hundreds of
millions more COVID-19 rapid tests to provinces and territories and Indigenous communities over the
nextthree months.
Questions and Answers:
Q1. What is the purpose of this bill and why now?
Through Bill XX, Health Canada would have the statutory authority to purchase and distribute up to $2.5
billion worth of COVID-19 rapid tests across Canada over the next three months.
A critical part of finishing the fight against COVID-19 is continuing to prevent outbreaks. This targeted
investment will ensure the delivery of hundreds of millions of COVID-19 rapid tests to provinces and
territories and Indigenous communities, free of charge. It will support workplace screening programs
through Health Canada, or through one of the Government of Canada’s distribution partners such as the
Canadian Red Cross, Canadian Chambers of Commerce, and pharmacies, via the Safe Restart
Agreement.
Q2. What exactly does the $2.5 billion buy the Government of Canada?
With this funding, the Government of Canada could put in place critical contracts, in a highly
competitive global market, to procure COVID-19 rapid tests to meet the anticipated demand to the end
of April 2022.
Q3. How are the tests currently being distributed and why the change?
The National Emergency Strategic Stockpile plays a critical role in supporting provinces and territories
through the distribution of critical medical supplies and equipment including personal protective
equipment, vaccine ancillary supplies and COVID-19 testing supplies. The NESS has works closely with
provinces and territories to coordinate deliveries of inventories and to respond to an array of requests
for assistance.
Since March 2020, the NESS has distributed over 115 million surgical masks. 540 million pairs of gloves,
75 million N95 respirators and equivalents many and 275 million needles and syringes. Given its
expertise, in the fall of 2020,the Government of Canada decided to include COVID-19 tests in the NESS
inventory. Over a 13-month period, the NESS distributed 78 million tests.
However, with the advent of the Omicron variant and in response to the exponential growth in demand
from the provinces and territories for COVID-19 tests, the Government of Canada aims to procure
hundreds of millions of more tests for distribution over a three-month period. The volume of tests will
require considerable additional resources to distribute in this timeframe.
With this authority, Health Canada would be able to streamline the distribution of COVID-19 rapid tests
to provinces and territories, as well as to workplace screening programs.
Q4. Given the varied approaches to testing in provinces andterritories, is the federal government
considering direct delivery to Canadians like the U.S. is doing?
COVID-19 continues to be part of our lives, and testing and screening remains an important tool to:
• rapidly detect and isolate new cases;
• support follow-up with close contacts; and
• prevent outbreaks in the community by breaking the chain of transmission.
The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the provinces’ and territories’ testing strategies.
The delivery and distribution of COVID-19 rapid tests into and across Canada is a high priority, and is a
large and complex operation. It is the shared responsibility of federal, provincial, and territorial
governments.
The Government of Canada will continue to assess the federal testing strategy as the situation evolves.
Q5. Why is it harder for people in some provinces and territories to obtain rapid tests than in others?
In light of the increased demand for COVID-19 rapid tests and in agreement with the provinces and
territories, allocation hasshifted from a demand basis to a per capita approach as of January 2022 to
ensure equitable distribution across the country.
Provinces and territories have jurisdiction over COVID-19 testing and screening approaches in their
respective regions. Under the Government of Canada’s Safe Restart Program, provinces and territories
receive free COVID-19 rapid tests directly from the federal government and may use these rapid tests in
line with their respective plans, priorities and regulations.
Q6. To date, how many COVID-19 rapid tests have been shipped to the provinces and territories?
As noted on the Government of Canada website, as of January 21, 2022, more than 168 million COVID-
19 rapid tests have been shipped, free of charge, to provinces and territories. The Government of
Canada continues to aggressively procure COVID-19 rapid tests and screening supplies in response to
provincial and territorial needs.
Q7. How many rapid tests are currently authorized for sale in Canada?
As of January 21, Health Canada hasauthorized 107 testing devices, including 10 self-tests and 27 point
of care tests (often referred to as rapid tests). A complete list is available here.
Q8. In the event that Parliament doesn’t pass this bill quickly, what will happen?
If there is a delay in passing the Bill, the Government of Canada may experience difficulty in meeting the
increasing COVID-19 rapid testing needs of Canadians. The Bill currently under consideration by
Parliamentarians would allow the Government of Canada to purchase COVID-19 rapid tests for the
coming months, and meet provincial and territorial needs for the month of February and beyond. Any
delays in the passing of the Bill could impact the collective effort to keep Canadians safe and healthy.
Redacted–Confidences of the Queen's Privy Council for Canada (Cabinet Confidences)
