Created: 2024-06-27T13:20:34.045817
Name: Recreational_water_quality_and_health:_Managing_risk
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environment/recreational-water/managing-risk.html
Package ID: 7b557913-6a0d-41a6-8404-f8eb4fae6663
Keywords: ['Recreational water quality', 'health Managing risk', 'management plans', 'tools', 'surveys', 'source tracking', 'Monitoring water quality', 'Microbial source', 'Managing beach sands', 'Public notifications']
Notes: Understanding hazardsIt's important to understand the potential hazards in recreational water areas. Authorities can help protect people from these hazards with: water quality management plans tools such as surveys and source tracking
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Recreational water and health: Managing risk - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Healthy living Health and the environment Water quality and health Recreational water and health: Managing risk Overview Hazards Managing risk Protecting your health Cyanobacteria and their toxins Technical resources How authorities can identify water quality hazards and protect people from risks. On this page Understanding hazards Monitoring water quality Managing beach sands Public notifications Understanding hazards It's important to understand the potential hazards in recreational water areas. Authorities can help protect people from these hazards with: water quality management plans tools such as surveys and source tracking Environmental health and safety surveys These surveys identify sources of fecal contamination and other hazards at the beach and in the surrounding areas. Surveys collect information such as: weather conditions number of people, birds and dogs location of storm drain overflow pipes litter and other debris, like rocks or logs This information helps authorities prioritize areas to monitor and identify how to improve water quality and safety. Microbial source tracking Microbial source tracking shows the different sources of fecal contamination in a water area, which: helps authorities understand the potential risks to human health can help target actions to reduce these risks These methods detect markers that tell us about the source of the contaminant. They are more complex than routine monitoring methods and require technical expertise. Authorities usually conduct these studies with scientific institutions. Monitoring water quality Routine water quality monitoring helps protect people from water quality hazards. Pathogenic microorganisms in fecal wastes are the primary hazards for many recreational water areas. It's difficult and expensive to test for these pathogens, so authorities check for other bacteria. The ‘fecal indicator' bacteria that are tested for are E. coli and enterococci. They are mostly harmless, but a few types of these bacteria can make you sick. The guidelines for Canadian recreational water quality recommend guideline values for these bacteria in recreational waters. When concentrations are above these values, there is an increased risk of getting infected and sick while swimming or playing in the water. Beach managers and local authorities can use different methods to test the level of E. coli and enterococci in recreational water samples. It can take 18 to 24 hours to receive the results of culture-based methods. These are the most common methods used at Canadian beaches. Newer molecular methods can provide results in a few hours. However, these require specialized scientific equipment and training and aren't yet widely used at Canadian beaches. Water quality monitoring programs may check for other water quality hazards, such as cyanobacteria blooms. Learn more about: Cyanobacteria Managing beach sands Managing beach sand is important as: children often play in the sand at the water's edge beach users often spend more time on the beach than in the water Beach managers can help keep beaches safe by: removing litter that can attract animals to the area installing physical barriers to discourage wildlife, such as: fences gull nets animal-proof garbage cans restricting pet access at public beaches during the operating season removing debris to reduce contamination changing the slope or shape of the beach to improve drainage Public notifications It's important to communicate with the public when managing recreational water quality. Authorities may post public notifications: at the beach on provincial, municipal and other websites on social media through other media, such as: radio television newspapers These notifications may include: warning signs or messages, such as: swimming advisories (swimming should be avoided but the beach is open) beach closures (area closed to all recreational activities) cautionary information, such as the presence of re-occurring cyanobacterial blooms types of activities allowed at the recreational water area, such as primary or secondary contact activities Some jurisdictions also use beach classification systems to tell the public about the level of risk at a recreational water area. These systems assess the hazards at a beach and then assign it an overall rating. Beaches that use classifications should post these ratings using the same methods as for other notifications. Page details Date modified: 2024-06-13 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy