Created: 2024-02-27T18:51:05.065895
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2018-2019:_Children’s_Jewellery_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/childrens-jewellery-regulations-2018-2019.html
Package ID: 7bc24300-8d32-424d-a967-8c151ae8ad45
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Enforcement', 'Summary Report', 'Cyclical Enforcement Project', 'Children’s Jewellery Regulations', 'lead and cadmium', 'industry’s compliance']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of children’s jewellery for lead and cadmium content which are subject to the Children’s Jewellery Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Children’s Jewellery Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Children’s Jewellery Regulations Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and regulations made under it. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of children’s jewellery for lead and cadmium content which are subject to the Children’s Jewellery Regulations. For this project, compliance of select children’s jewellery with the Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance to the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of children’s jewellery stakeholders in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2018-2019 fiscal year, lead and cadmium testing of 22 different products was carried out. The testing resulted in 4 recalls and 1 removal from sale to address non-compliance. There were 17 instances where no corrective action was required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Ardène Best Friends Necklaces Ardène No compliance issues detected None Bijoux doigt de fée Cat Necklace Bijoux doigt de fée No compliance issues detected None Emoticon Necklace 16" Emoticon Necklace collection Bazaar & Novelty Did not meet the allowable lead concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Bazaar & Novelty Expression Rings Girl Power Ring CTG Brands Inc. No compliance issues detected None Eyecandy Donut Necklace and Earring Set EyeCandy Accessories Inc. No compliance issues detected None Fun Express Star Student Dog Tag Necklaces Scholar’s Choice No compliance issues detected None George Best Friend Necklaces Rand Accessories Inc. Did not meet the allowable lead concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Rand Accessories Inc. Great Pretenders Best Friends: Necklace Set Creative Educations of Canada, Inc. Did not meet the allowable lead and cadmium concentration requirement Voluntary recall by Creative Educations of Canada, Inc. Great Pretenders Under the Sea Ring Set Creative Educations of Canada, Inc. No compliance issues detected None Gunner & Lux Run Like A Girl Necklace Redfish Kids Clothing Did not meet the allowable lead concentration requirement No product was distributed. Voluntary removal from sale by Redfish Kids Clothing. Justice Pineapple Locket Necklace Justice No compliance issues detected None Kool Charmz Charm Chain CTG Brands Inc. Did not meet the allowable lead concentration requirement Voluntary recall by CTG Brands Inc. Lovely Charms Deer Necklace Charm Midoco Art & Office Supplies No compliance issues detected None Meri Meri Acrylic Popsicle Pendant Necklace Paper E Clips No compliance issues detected None Meri Meri Rainbow Pendant Necklace Dilly Dally Toys & Delights No compliance issues detected None Meri Meri Star Pendant Necklace Dilly Dally Toys & Delights No compliance issues detected None Meri Meri Tropical Enamel Charm Necklace Benjo No compliance issues detected None Miniso Heart Shaped “Love” Pendant Necklace Miniso No compliance issues detected None Pecoware Charming Charms Necklace and Bracelet Set Mastermind Toys No compliance issues detected None Philcha Mood Ring Mastermind Toys No compliance issues detected None The Children's Place Butterfly Pendant Necklace The Children's Place No compliance issues detected None Thinka Love Necklace Thinka Creative Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report IncidentsSubscribe to Consumer Product Safety NewsMonitor Consumer Product Safety RecallsContact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2020-03-25 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy