Created: 2022-05-19T21:09:29.390738
Name: Health_Canada_-_Special_Committee_on_the_COVID-19_Pandemic_-_Minister_Briefing_Binder_-_Emergency_Meeting_-_HC_-_Special_Committee_on_the_COVID-19_Pandemic_(COVI)_-_Minister_Briefing_Binder_-_Emergency_Meeting
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/7cbffefa-7e6c-48bd-a3ae-cd9a7eaa970c/resource/0c4f3373-15da-4960-afe0-7c113f99396b/download/health-canada-standing-committee-on-health-minister-briefing-binder-emergency-meeting-hc.pdf
Package ID: 7cbffefa-7e6c-48bd-a3ae-cd9a7eaa970c
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances at the Special Committee on the COVID-19 Pandemic (COVI) – Week of January 17 2022
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA:EMERGENCYMEETING
TABLE OF CONTENTS
JANUARY 2022
Key Issues
1. PT Surge Capacity
2. Quarantine Period
3. NACI Recommendations
4. Testing Capacity (Rapid Test)
5. Paxlovid and Other Therapeutics
6. Personal Protective Equipment
7. Biomanufacturing
Health Canada
CSCB
8. Opioid Overdose Crisis
HPFB
9. Access to COVID Vaccines for Children
10. Clinical Trials–Expedited Pathways
11. Status of Vaccine Approvals
12. Test Kits
ROEB
13. Critical Drug Reserve
14. Drug Shortages
SPB
15. Home Care
16. LTC Homes
17. Digital Supports and Virtual Care
18. Health System Capacity
19. Health Transfers
20. Primary Care
21. Mental Health Tools
22. PMPRB Amendments
23. Quebec Vaccine Tax
TF
24. COVID-19 Alert App
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
25. COVID-19 Transmission in White-Tailed Deer
Canadian Institutes for Health Research
26. CIHR-Funded COVID-19 Research
27. CIHR-Funded Mental Health and Addictions Research
Public Health Agency of Canada
28. Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy
29. BorderMeasures
30. Enforcement of Quarantine and Testing Orders
31. Global Efforts/Assistance (COVAX)
32. GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network)
33. Longer Term Effects of COVID-19
34. Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
35. Review of the Pandemic Response
36. Stable Funding for PHAC
37. Vaccine Certification (Passports)
38. Vaccine Injury Support
39. Vaccine Roll-Out
40. Collection and Use of Mobile Data
Annex (added Jan. 18)
41. Protection of Healthcare Workers
42. Omicron Variant and Homelessness (ESDC)
COVID-19 SURGE SUPPORTS FOR PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
Issue
In fall 2020, the Government of Canada created the COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge Capacity initiative as
a means for provinces and territories to access critical services,equipment, and resources needed to
help manage outbreaks in their jurisdictions.
These supports are being offered for potential deployments across Canada, including rural and remote
locations as well as Indigenous communities.
Key Facts
• The Government of Canada has been actively engaged with provincial and territorial,
Indigenous, as well as municipal governments to support a collaborative whole-of-government
approach to monitor and to respond to COVID-19 surge capacity needs across Canada.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is ready to respond to provincial and territorial requests for
assistance for COVID-19.
• We continue to monitor evolving situations and work closely with our provincial, territorial and
federal partners to support COVID-19 outbreak management.
• Supports, such as public health experts in outbreak management, safe voluntary isolation sites,
personal protective equipment, medical equipment, testing and contact tracing assistance,
health human resources, and various immunization supports have been made available to
provinces and territories.
Background
Provinces and territories (PTs) are responsible for prioritizing requests from their local jurisdictions. The
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) serves as the single window to coordinate PT requests under the
COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge Capacity initiative. The Government of Canada triages requests based on
needs and the capacity available at the time of the request.
This initiative is complemented by the Safe Restart Agreements (announced on July 16, 2020), which
provide PTs with over $19 billion in federal investments to support:
• health care system capacity
• outbreak management, testing and contact tracing
• social services to support Canadians
The Fall 2020 Economic Statement committed a further $150 million to support the Canadian Red Cross
and other non-governmental organizations with enhancing their surge capacity workforce for Canada’s
COVID-19 response.
In fall 2020, the Government of Canada established the Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program
(approximately $100 million over 2 years) to complement the efforts of municipal and provincial and
territorial health partners to reduce COVID-19 community transmission by providing safe self-isolation
spaces for individuals living in crowded housing conditions.
In April 2021, the Government of Canada launched the Health Human Resources Assistance Program
(HHRAP) which provides funding to PTs in support of their deployment of resources to other
jurisdictions in need. The HHRAP isaligned with the intent and spirit of the Federal Provincial and
Territorial Operational Framework for Mutual Aid Requests (OFMAR). OFMAR was created in 2013 as a
mechanism that can be activated by PTs to identify and share healthcare professionals and health assets
inter-jurisdictionally during emergency events, with a facilitative role from PHAC.
Through these initiatives and others, surge support resources and mechanisms are made available to
PTs to augment existing services related to: rapid public health assessments, public health specialists
(e.g. epidemiologists, infection prevention and control support, outbreak management support), testing
equipment and supplies, laboratory services (e.g. test processing at surge site laboratories, laboratory
technician support), medical supplies (e.g. personal protective equipment such as masks, and
biomedical equipment such as ventilators), health human resources (such as nurses), therapeutics to
treat COVID-19 patients, safe voluntary isolation sites, and contacttracing. These supports are primarily
provided by PHAC.
Statistics Canada provides contact tracing support. Public Safety Canada administers the Humanitarian
Workforce Program (launched in 2021) and coordinates a variety of federal efforts through the
Government Operations Centre. Indigenous Services Canada oversees services and supports to
Indigenous communities. As a measure of last resort, the Canadian Armed Forces provides a variety of
surge supports to jurisdictions across Canada.
CURRENTADVICE REGARDING QUARANTINE LENGTH
Issue
Due to the rapidly increasing transmission of the Omicron variant in Canada, provinces and territories
are using risk assessment to adapt isolation and quarantine periods in order to preserve their critical
infrastructure and healthcare capacity.
Key Facts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance for public health authorities’ management of
COVID-19 cases and contacts in the community was updated on December 24, 2021.
• The update reflects emerging evidenceregarding vaccine effectiveness, provides further
clarification on considerations for risk of exposure, and clarifies and expands on enhanced case
and contact management strategies in the context of newly circulating variants of concern.
• The guidance uses an evidence-based approach to recommend isolation and quarantine periods
aimed at controlling the spread of COVID-19 in the population.
• Specifically, the guidance recommends an isolation period of at least 10 days for COVID-19 cases
from date of symptom onset or positive test and a quarantine period of 14 days for high-risk
contacts of cases from the date of last known exposure to the case.
Key Messages
• Canada continues to be guided by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology and
expert opinion. Guidance is subject to change as new information becomes available.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada recommends that individuals follow advice and directions
for isolation and quarantine from local/regional public health authorities in theirjurisdiction.
• The Agency is in regular discussion with provincial and territorial counterparts on this issue and
is actively monitoring and evaluating the international and domestic evidence on isolation and
quarantine requirements in the context of theOmicron variant.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) monitors scientific evidence with a view to keeping its
guidance up to date. In light of the impact of Omicron and changes that have been made by
jurisdictions, PHAC is reviewingemerging evidence and consulting with international counterparts
regarding the characteristics of the Omicron variant (e.g. transmission dynamics, vaccine effectiveness,
incubation period, disease severity) to develop options for supporting provinces and territories when
taking a risk-based approach to reducing the duration of isolation and quarantine.
PHAC’s current case and contact management allows flexibility for jurisdiction-specific guidance based
on local circumstances and capacities.
Provinces and territories continue to adapt these recommendations based on risk assessment and their
specific context, which may include the following considerations:
• The epidemiology of COVID-19 in their jurisdiction
• Vaccination coverage in the community
• Implications of and uncertainties around new variants of concern
• Sufficient health care and public health capacity
• Risk reduction measures for high-risk populations and settings, as necessary.
NACI RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE USE OF COVID-19VACCINES
Issue
NACI may make recommendations that are broader or narrower than the conditions of use approved by
Health Canada. As regulator, Health Canada rigorously evaluates safety and efficacy data from clinical
trials before authorizing vaccines, butdoes not dictate practice of medicine or make recommendations
on how the vaccines should be used for public health impact.
Key Facts
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts that
provides recommendations tothe Public Health Agency of Canada on the use of authorized
COVID-19 vaccines to support provinces and territories in planning COVID-19 vaccine programs
in Canada.
Key Messages
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) updates its recommendations
on COVID-19 vaccines based on the latest scientific evidence and their expert opinions.
• COVID-19 vaccines authorized for use in Canada have been essential in saving lives and
protecting the health of Canadians.
• In addition to high vaccination coverage, public health measures, like wearing a well-fitting
mask, hand hygiene and physical distancing, continue to be essential to reduce and control
transmission of the virus, especially variants.
If pressed on the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine in children 5-11 years of age
• NACI recommends that a complete series of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine may be
offered to children 5-11 years of age who do not have contraindications to the vaccine, with a
dosing interval of at least 8 weeks between the first and second dose.
• NACI recommends an interval of at least 8 weeks between doses due to emerging evidence in
adults that suggests longer intervals between the first and second dose of a primary series
results in a stronger immune response, higher vaccine effectiveness that is expected to last
longer. For mRNA vaccines, this interval may be associated with a lower risk of myocarditis
and/or pericarditis in adolescents and young adults.
• It is essential that children and their caregivers are supported and respected during the decision-
making process so they are able to make an informed decision about COVID-19 vaccination.
If pressed on myocarditis and pericarditis in adolescents 12 to 29 years of age
• The benefits of receiving an mRNA vaccinecontinue to outweigh any potential risks, including
the rare risk of experiencing myocarditis and/or pericarditis after vaccination. COVID-19 can
cause severe illness, hospitalization and death, as well as severe health complications, including
myocarditisand pericarditis.
• Rare cases of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of
the heart lining) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines have been reported in
Canada and internationally.
• Most cases haveoccurred in males 12 to 29 years of age and after the second dose of an mRNA
vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly.
• NACI continues to strongly recommend that adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age
receive a complete series of a COVID-19 vaccine. NACI now recommends the preferred use of
the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty mRNA vaccine (30 mcg) in adolescents and young adults 12 to 29
years of age to further reduce the already rare risk of myocarditis/pericarditis following mRNA
vaccination.
• Some provinces and territories have already been using only the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
vaccine for adolescents because there is more experience to date with this vaccine in
adolescents and there is the possibility of a lower rate of myocarditis and/or pericarditis with
this vaccine.
If pressed on guidance on booster doses
• NACI recommends that a booster dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be
offered to adults 18 to 49 years of age at least 6 months after completion of a primaryCOVID-19
vaccine series.
• People who are pregnant and breastfeeding and adults who are moderately to severely
immunocompromised who have received a three-dose primary series are included in those who
may receive a booster dose.
• Some groups of people areat higher risk of severe illness and of waning protection offered by
the vaccine. NACI therefore also strongly recommends a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine should be offered at least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to adults 50
years of age and older; long-term care residents and seniors living in other congregate settings;
people who received two doses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose
of the Janssen vaccine; adults in or from First Nations, Inuit or Métis communities; and all
frontline healthcare workers who have direct in-person contact with patients.
• Booster vaccine programs in Indigenous communities should be determined by Indigenous
leaders and communities with health care and public health partners.
Background
To date, NACI has published recommendations on the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty, Moderna
Spikevax, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria, and Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccines, as well as guidance on
subjects such as extended dose intervals, the interchangeability of vaccines, co-administration of COVID-
19 vaccine with other vaccines, additional doses for immunocompromised individuals and the use of
booster doses.
NACI continues to closely monitor the evolving evidence on COVID-19 and COVID-19vaccines and
updates recommendations as needed.
Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine in children 5-11 years of age
NACI recommends that a complete series of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) may be
offered to children 5-11 years of age who do not have contraindications to the vaccine, with a dosing
interval of at least 8 weeks between the first and second dose. The pediatric formulation of the Pfizer-
BioNTech vaccine is 10 mcg compared to the 30 mcg formulation authorized for adolescents and adults
over 12 years of age.
When authorizing a vaccine, Health Canada reviews clinical trial data submitted by the manufacturer.
When developing their recommendations, NACI reviews clinical trial data and data from real-world use
of the vaccine. NACI recommends an interval of at least 8 weeks due to emerging evidence in adults that
suggests that compared to shorter intervals, longer intervals between the first and second dose of a
primary series results in a stronger immune response, higher vaccine effectiveness that is expected to
last longer, and may be associated with a lower risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis in adolescents and
young adults.
As a precaution, children who experience myocarditis and/or pericarditis after a first dose of the vaccine
should wait to get a second dose until more information is available. Children who have a history of
myocarditis unrelated to COVID-19 vaccination should consult their clinical care team for individual
considerations and recommendations. If they are no longer under activecare for myocarditis, they may
receive the vaccine. Caregivers should be advised to seek medical attention for children if they develop
symptoms including chest pain, shortness of breath, or palpitations following receipt of a COVID-19
vaccine.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) at
least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precaution to help to determine if a side effect
that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine.
There may be circumstances when a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given
at the same time–a healthcare provider can help with this decision.
Children with previous COVID-19 infection may be offered two doses of the vaccineonce symptoms of
acute illness have resolved and the child is no longer considered infectious, based on current criteria.
Children with a history of MIS-C may be vaccinated once they have recovered or once it has been more
than 90 days since diagnosis, whichever is longer.
Children who receive the pediatric formulation of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) for
their first dose who turn 12 by the time of their second dose may receive the adolescent/adult
formulation of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) to complete their primary series. If a
child who has turned 12 by the time of their second dose receives the pediatric formulation (10 mcg),
their series should still be considered valid and complete.
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada and NACI will continue to monitor the safety and
effectiveness of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine (10 mcg) in children 5-11 years of age.
The use of mRNA vaccines in adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age
Rare cases of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the heart
lining) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines have been reported in Canada and
internationally. Most cases have occurred in males 12 to 29 years of age after a second dose of an mRNA
vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly.
New Canadian and international data suggest the risk of myocarditis following vaccination with a COVID-
19 mRNA vaccine is lower with the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnatyvaccine (30 mcg) compared to the
Moderna Spikevax vaccine (100 mcg), particularly after a second dose in males 12 to 29 years of age.
Based on new evidence, and in order to further minimize the rare risk of adolescents and young adults
experiencing myocarditis and/or pericarditis after receiving a COVID-19 mRNA vaccine, NACI now
recommends the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty mRNA vaccine (30 mcg) is preferred for use in adolescents
and young adults 12 to 29 years of age.
Based on clinical judgement, the ModernaSpikevax vaccine (100 mcg) may be considered for
adolescents and adults 12 to 29 years of age who are moderately to severely immunocompromised
given new evidence that the Moderna Spikevax vaccine (100 mcg) may have a slightly higher vaccine
effectiveness and may provide longer protection against infection and severe COVID-19 outcomes
compared to the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg).
Informed consent should include a discussion about the rare risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis
following immunization with an mRNA vaccine. Individuals should be advised of the symptoms of
myocarditis/pericarditis and to seek immediate medical attention should symptoms develop.
In most circumstances, and as a precautionary measure until more information is available, further
doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines should be deferred among people who experienced myocarditis
(with or without pericarditis) within 6 weeks of receiving a previous dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
Some people who experienced myocarditis with or without pericarditis after a first dose of an mRNA
vaccine may choose to receive another dose ofvaccine after discussing the risks and benefits with their
healthcare provider. If another dose of vaccine is offered, they should be offered the Pfizer-BioNTech 30
mcg vaccine due to the lower reported rate of myocarditis and/or pericarditis following the Pfizer-
BioNTech 30mcg vaccine compared to the Moderna 100 mcg vaccine.
Individuals who have a history of myocarditis unrelated to mRNA COVID-19 vaccination should consult
their clinical team for individual considerations and recommendations. People previously diagnosed
with myocarditis but who are no longer being followed by a medical professional for heart issues should
receive the vaccine.
Additional dose of COVID-19 vaccine in moderately to severely immunocompromised individuals
following a primary series
Evidence to date shows that some people who are immunocompromised have a lower immune
response to COVID-19 vaccines compared to the general population. Recent studies show that some
people who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who did not respond to or who had a
reduced immune response after two doses of an mRNA vaccine can have an increased immune response
after a third dose of an mRNA vaccine.
NACI recommends that people in the authorized age group who are moderately to severely
immunocompromised should receive an additional dose of an authorized mRNA vaccine following their
primary series. People who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who have not yet been
vaccinated should receive three doses of an authorized mRNA vaccine as their primary series. An
additional dose, or a 3-dose primary series, provides another opportunity for these individuals to
develop a better immune response.
Even after an additional dose, people who are immunocompromised may have reduced protection;
therefore, it is recommended that they continue to follow personal public health measures and that
their close contacts, including household contacts and healthcare workers, receive a primary COVID-19
vaccineseries to help to protect them.
Guidance on booster doses
A complete COVID-19 vaccine series continues to provide excellent protection against serious illness for
most people. Over time, some people may be less protected against serious illness, such as older adults.
Recent evidence suggests vaccine effectiveness against infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes
COVID-19, is decreasing over time following completion of the primary series. Vaccine effectiveness
against infection for the Omicron variant of concern is also quite low a few months after the primary
series.
A booster dose could help restore protection against infection that may have decreased over time.
Clinical trial data show that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine produces a robust immune
response and has a favourable safety profile comparable to the second dose of the primary series. Real-
world data suggest that a booster dose of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine provides very good short-term
effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Long-term effectiveness of booster doses will continue to be
monitored.
After reviewing the recent evidence and the evolving COVID-19 pandemic in the Canadian context
(including the emergence of Omicron), NACI strongly recommends a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine should be offered at least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to:
• adults 50 years of age and older;
• long-term care residents and seniors living in other congregate settings;
• people whoreceived two doses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose
of the Janssen vaccine;
• adults in or from First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities; and
• all frontline healthcare workers who have direct in-person contact with patients.
Booster vaccine programs in Indigenous communities should be determined by Indigenous leaders and
communities with health care and public health partners.
NACI also recommends that a booster dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered to
adults 18 to 49 years of age at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19 vaccine series
with consideration of jurisdictional and individual risks.
Adults who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who havereceived a three-dose primary
series and pregnant and breastfeeding adults are included in those who may receive a booster dose.
If offering the Moderna vaccine as a booster (which normally is 50 mcg per dose), the 100 mcg dose may
be preferred for adults who are moderately to severely immunocompromised, as well as adults living in
long-term care for seniors or other congregate living settings that provide care for seniors based on the
discretion of healthcare providers.
For people 18 to 29 years of age who are receiving a booster dose ofan mRNA vaccine, the use of the
Pfizer-BioNTech booster dose (30 mcg) may be preferred over the use of the Moderna booster dose (50
mcg) due to lower reported rates of myocarditis and pericarditis with Pfizer-BioNTech. A booster dose
should be provided atleast 6 months after the completion of a primary vaccine series.
The difference between a booster dose and an additional dose for people who are
immunocompromised
An initial vaccine series is considered to be the number of vaccine doses needed to develop a strong
initial immune response. The general population, including older adults, develops a robust immune
response to COVID-19 vaccines. In Canada, a primary vaccine series is two doses of the Comirnaty,
Spikevax and Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccines (or any combination thereof) or one dose of the Janssen
vaccine.
People who are immunocompromised may have a reduced immune response to COVID-19 vaccines. In
this case, anadditional dose provides another opportunity for these individuals to develop abetter
initial immune response.
A booster dose is used to boost the immune system when protection from a primary vaccine series
begins to wane over time.
Co-administration of COVID-19 vaccines with other vaccines
For adults and adolescents over 12 years of age, NACI now recommends that COVID-19 vaccines may be
given at the same time as, or at any time before or after, other vaccines.
After reviewing the evolving evidence on COVID-19 vaccines and considering the extensive data and
experience of giving other routine vaccines at the same time or within days of each other, NACI has
determined that a precautionary approach is no longer necessary. No specific safety concerns have been
identified when routine vaccines are given at the same time or within days of each other.
Allowing COVID-19 vaccines to be given at the same time as or within days of other routine vaccines will
help facilitate the rollout of the 2021 influenza vaccine program in the fall and winter and will make it
easier for individuals to receive other routine vaccines they may have missed due to the pandemic.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) at
least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precaution to help to determine if a side effect
that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may be circumstances when a
dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given at the same time–a healthcare
provider can help with this decision.
Vaccine Interchangeability
NACI continues to recommend that the same mRNA vaccine administered for the first dose in a primary
series be offered for the second dose. If the same mRNAvaccine is not readily available, or the vaccine
administered for the first dose is unknown, another mRNA vaccine can be considered interchangeable
and should be offeredto complete the vaccine series.
An mRNA vaccine is preferred as the second dose for individuals who received a first dose of the
AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine. Results from German studies suggest a potentially better immune
response, including against variants of concern, when a first dose of the Vaxzevria vaccine is followed by
a seconddose of the Comirnaty vaccine compared to two doses of the Vaxzevria vaccine. Evidence
continues to suggest a mixed vaccine schedule has a good safety profile. Receiving an mRNA vaccine as a
second dose also mitigates the potential risk of Vaccine-inducedImmune Thrombosis
Thrombocytopenia (VITT) associated with viral vector vaccines.
Publication of the COVID-19 vaccine chapter in the Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG)
The CIG is an online resource for vaccine administrators in Canada, including health professionals and
vaccine program decision-makers. It includes recommendations and statements from expert advisory
committees, including NACI and Canada’s Committee to Advise on Tropical Medicine and Travel.
Throughout the pandemic, NACI recommendations on theuse of COVID-19 vaccines have been
published on the NACI website. These recommendations have now been included in the CIG in a new
COVID-19 vaccine chapter. Future NACI guidance on the use of COVID-19 vaccines will continue to be
published on the NACI website as short statements or rapid responses and will be incorporated into the
CIG as quickly as possible. The integration of NACIadvice and statements into the CIG is standard
practice, as the CIG is designed to be used as a reference for national vaccineguidance by frontline
health care providers.
COVID-19 TESTING CAPACITY
ISSUE
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories, federal organisations, as well as distribution channels in theprivate sector and
non-profit organisations, such as the Canadian chambers of commerce, Canadian Red Cross and
pharmacies, to distribute rapid tests and self tests
KEY FACTS
• On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide$4.28 billion,as part of
the Safe Restart Agreement, to further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the
associated data management and information sharing systems.
• The2021 Economic and Fiscal Updateproposed to provide$1.72 billionto Health Canadaand
the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
Using these funds, contracts were put in place for almost329 millionCOVID-19 tests, with
delivery dates in December, January and February.
• In total, sincethe beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has purchased over
433Mrapid tests, at a total cost of$3.03B.
• As of January 12, the Government of Canada hasapproved 25 point-of-care rapid tests, as well
as 10 self-tests.
• As of December 31, the Government has funded, procured, and received 130M rapid tests,
which have been distributed to PTs, federal workplaces, and distribution channels in the private
sector and non-profit organizations. A strategic reserve has also been created.
• Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around
237,000 tests per day.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure rapid tests, including self-tests, to meet
both current and future demand as testing needs exploded since December across the country,
following Omicron emergence.
• The2021 Economic and Fiscal Updateproposed to provide$1.72 billionto Health Canada and
the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has purchased over
433Mrapid tests, at a total cost of$3.03B, including almost329 milliontests for the months of
December, January and February.
• As of December 31, the Government hasfunded, procured, and received 130M rapid tests,
which have been distributed to PTs, federal workplaces, and distribution channels in the private
sector and non-profit organizations.
• As of January 12, the Government of Canada hasapproved 25 point-of-care rapid tests, as well
as 10 self-tests.
• The government has ordered 140 million rapid tests for January to support provinces and
territories.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON THE TESTS EFFECTIVENESS VIS-À-VIS NEW VARIANT OMICRON
• My department is working with manufacturers of COVID-19 test devices and other regulators to
assess the impact of the new Omicron variant. Currently, there is no evidence that the Omicron
variant affects the ability of the Health Canada approved tests to confirm COVID-19 cases.
• Health Canada has requested data from some manufacturers to demonstrate the effectiveness
of their tests vis-à-vis Omicron. Health Canada is collaborating with the National Microbiology
Laboratory to validate the effectiveness of the primary tests distributed in Canada vis-à-vis
Omicron.
• If anissue is identified, we will work quickly with the manufacturers to mitigate those risks and
inform Canadians
IF PRESSED ON WHICH TESTS WERE PURCHASED AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION…
• As part of this work, we purchased rapid and self-tests from various suppliers–the Cepheid
GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor, Quidel Sofia, Quidel QuickVue, Lucira,
Roche SD Biosensor, BTNX Rapid Response, Artron COVID 19 antigen test, Switch Health SD
Biosensor, Trimedic Assuretech,–and have worked with our provincial and territorial
counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• In addition, the federal government continues to support multiple distribution channels to
achieve broad reach of rapid antigen tests and self-tests.
• In 2021, Health Canada distributed over4.5 millionto organizations of the private sector for
workplace testing.
• To improve access by small-medium sized organizations, Health Canada also developed
partnerships with pharmacies for test distribution to small-medium sized businesses. Until the
end of 2021, over 2.3Mtests were provided to pharmacies for this initiative.
• Health Canada has also collaborated with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC) to distribute tests to
non-profit and charitable organizations for workplace screening of employees and volunteers.
Approximately300Ktests were provided tothe CRC for this initiative in2021. Futhermore, with
the objective of ensuring that vulnerable people are able to access tests and masks, Health
Canada has also worked with the CRC to identify community partners who would provide tests
and masks to their clients. In December, over1.6M testswere provided to the CRC for this
initiative
• In support of the federal vaccination mandate, as well as voluntary testing of front-line public
servants at organizations including Correctional Service Canada, Health Canada has also
providedover 2.6Mrapid tests to federal departments and agencies.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL DAILY CAPACITY…
• Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around
237,000 per day.
• We havealso put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING ITS TESTING CAPACITY…
• My departmentcontinues to work with their colleagues in Public Services and Procurement
Canada, Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research
Council to identify and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• Thanks to the Government of Canada support, Artron, a rapid test developed and manufactured
in Canada has been approved by Health Canada and is now part of our procurement of rapid
tests.
• As emerging testing and screening products such as self-tests,or platforms become available
and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial
public health laboratories to acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS EDUCATING PUBLIC ON PROPER USE OF RAPID TESTS…
• While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and
territorial jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts through multiple
prongs.
• In December 2021, Health Canada launchedtwo national public health measures advertising
campaigns (The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practising
public health measures, including the use of rapid tests.
• TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated onan ongoing basis to ensure
Canadians have access to the most updated information around testing importance, distribution
to provinces, workplaces and procurement they need.
• The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge
sharing across provinces and territories.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial and territorial
officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and conducting laboratory testingfor the
virus that causes COVID-19. As of January 11, more than 54 million tests for COVID-19 have been
performed in Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Since September 3, 2020, a table outlining progress by provinces and territories in increasing their
testing capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory
compared to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement, has been published
online.
As of November 30, the projected maximum testing capacity reported by provinces and territories was
237,353 tests/day, exceeding the original testing capacity target of 200,000 tests/day as articulated by
provinces and territories under the Safe Restart Agreement.
Province/ Testing Capacity Projected Max. Capacityas %of
Territory Commitmentunder TestingCapacity* Commitment
the SRA(tests/day) (tests/day)
BC 20,000 19,628 101%
AB 22,000 22,000 100%
SK 4,000 3,000 112%
MB 3,000 4,000 117%
ON 78,000 124,700 160%
QC 35,000 46,915 132%
NB 2,500-3,000 3,000 100-120%
NS 2,500 10,000 400%
PE 835 850 102%
NL 2,500-3,000 2,700 90-108%
NU N/A 300 N/A
NWT 225 110 49%
YT 160 150 94%
TOTAL 170,720 – 171,720 237,353 >100%
Thefederal government has activated additional laboratory capacity to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. Six federal labs are currently operational and can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 12,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as well as Correctional Services
Canada. Efforts to increase surge capacity are ongoing.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community.
Public Education
While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts through multiple prongs.
In December 2021, Health Canada launched two national public health measures advertising campaigns
(The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practising public health
measures, including the use of rapid tests.
TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated on an ongoing basis to ensure Canadians
have access to the most updated informationaroundtestingimportance,distributiontoprovinces,
workplacesandprocurementthey need.
Health Canada published the Pan-Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance in October 2020, and
updated it in August 2021. The updates to the guidance were informed by a report on Testing for
COVID-19 in Vaccinated Populations, which included recommendations based on the latest scientific
literature.
Public Health Agency of Canada’s National Microbiology Lab published an interim guidance on antigen
testing in October 2020.
In addition, the Minister of Health established a Testing and Screening Expert Advisory Panel in
November 2020 that provided evidence-informed advice in five reports covering testing and screening,
long-term care, schools, borders and self-testing. The Panel has been in hibernation since August 2021.
The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge sharing across
provincesand territories.
Workplace Screening
The workplace screening initiative will remain an integral part of the overall testing strategy. SMEs will
continue to be able to acquire rapid tests for workplace screening at select pharmacy locations in
Ontario,Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia. Alternatively, SMEs can also pick up
rapid tests for free at participating local chambers of commerce in British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario,
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Charities, Non-Profits and Indigenous Community Organizations can
acquire rapid tests through the Canadian Red Cross for free, in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
PUBLIC EDUCATION
Testing and screening is an important public health measure, which along with vaccination, well-fitting
masks, proper ventilation, hand hygiene, physical distancing and disinfecting surfaces--can help slow
the spread of COVID-19.
Public education & advertising:
• In December 2021, Health Canada launched two national public health measures advertising
campaigns (The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practising
public health measures, including the use of rapid tests.
• In July 2021, Health Canada launched an advertising campaign to promote rapid testing among
Canadian businesses to increaseawareness of the availability of free rapid tests for workplace
screening through digital impressions, and encourage businesses to order kits for their
employees by drivingtraffic toGet free rapid tests.
Marketing:
• Stakeholder and partner engagement and outreach was leveraged to promote rapid testing via
three GC business-focusednewsletters and one external Aboriginal business newsletter, partner
digital resources were leveraged to reach stakeholder groups, and digital marketing assets were
developed for stakeholders (including infographics for employees, handouts for pharmacies and
social media collateral).
Social media:
• In the fall and winter, social media campaigns focused on promoting the use of rapid tests by
businesses and small to medium-sized organizations (pharmacy portal, partner organizations
etc.); however given the uptake in rapid testing, there is now a shift to promote rapid testing to
all Canadians.
Web:
• TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated on an ongoing basis to ensure
Canadians have access to the most updated informationaroundtestingimportance,distribution
to provinces,workplacesandprocurementthey need.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
PAXLOVID AND OTHER THERAPEUTICS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s healthcare system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support tosponsors of clinical trials and treatments
related to COVID-19.
• Health Canada has authorized 5 drugs to treat COVID-19, including remdesivir for hospitalized
people, as well as Paxlovid and 3 biologic treatments for non-hospitalized people who have mild
or moderate COVID symptoms and are at risk of developing severe disease. Several other
treatments are under review to help treat COVID-19.
• On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid, an oral antiviral treatment for
mild-to-moderateCOVID-19 in adults diagnosed with COVID-19 who are at a high risk of
progressing to severe disease including hospitalization or death. Paxlovid is a combination of the
oral antivirals nirmatrelvir and ritonavir, which can be taken at home in pre-packaged doses. As
an oral drug it is expected to ease the burden on the health care system.
• According to the results of the Phase 2/3 clinical trial with unvaccinated non-hospitalised
patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 and at high risk of progressing to severe illness,
Paxlovid reduced the risk of hospitalization or death by 89%, compared to placebo, when
treated within 3 days of symptom onset. Similar reductions were observed in patients treated
within 5 days of symptom onset.
• On December 3, The Governmentof Canada signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an
initial quantity of 1 million treatment courses of the oral antiviral, nirmatrelvir to be used in
combination with ritonavir (Paxlovid).
• On December 22, 2021, the US FDA granted Emergency Use Authorization for Paxlovid.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada has authorized 5 drugs to treat COVID-19, including remdesivir, for hospitalized
people, as well as Paxlovid and 3 biologic treatments for non-hospitalized people who have mild
or moderate COVID symptoms and are at risk of developing severe disease.
• Several other treatments to help prevent or treat COVID-19, including oral antivirals, are under
review. While the interim results from clinical trials for oral antivirals can be promising, all drugs
must be subjected to rigorous regulatory review to ensure the product is safe, efficacious and of
high quality before being authorized for use in Canada.
• The Government of Canada has procured many of these treatments and continues to engage
proactively with domestic and international companies to negotiate advance purchase
agreements for the procurement of treatments to ensure timely access.
IF PRESSED ON PAXLOVID (Pfizer)
• I am happy to share that on January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid. This
drug is the first oral treatment approved in Canada for non-hospitalized adult patients
diagnosed with COVID-19 and who are at a high risk of progressing to severe disease.
• On December 3, 2021, our Government signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an initial
quantity of 1 millioncourses of this oral antiviral.
• Paxlovid provides a new tool in the toolkit against COVID-19 at a crucial time in the pandemic as
we are faced with new variants. Importantly, it is a more easily administered antiviral treatment
for those at high risk ofprogression to severe COVID-19.
• However, no drug is a substitute for vaccination. Vaccination and public health measures remain
the most important tools in preventing illness from COVID-19 infection, and we continue to
strongly recommend vaccination forall eligible Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments, aswell as on products under regulatory review.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of the omicron
variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron variant, Health Canada will
prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while maintaining
high standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON MOLNUPIRAVIR
• Molnupiravir is an oral antiviral treatment that shows some promise in treating non-
hospitalized COVID-19 patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 and at high risk for progression
to severe disease.
• Since August 13, 2021, Health Canada has been working with Merck and international regulatory
partners to expedite review of the drug submission.
Health Canada is aware that the efficacy of molnupiravir is lower than previously reported. Because this
is a rolling submission, Merck will continue to submit evidence to Health Canada to support the
product’s safety, efficacy and quality and Health Canadawill conduct a full review of all the evidence
prior to making a decision.
IF PRESSED ON IVERMECTIN
• There is no evidence that ivermectin works to prevent or treat COVID-19, and it is not
authorized for this use. To date, Health Canada has not received any drug submission or
applications for clinical trials for ivermectin for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19.
• A veterinary version of this medication is available to treat parasitic infections in animals. People
should not use the veterinary version of this product to treat or prevent COVID-19 or for any
other reason. Canadians should never consume health products intended foranimals because of
the potentialserious health dangers posed by them.
IF PRESSED ON BAMLANIVIMAB
• Health Canada is aware that US FDA has revoked the Emergency Use Authorization for
bamlanivimab, at the request of Eli Lilly.
• This revocation is related to lack of efficacy againstemerging variants of concern circulating in
the US, in particular the Californian variants.
• There are no safety concerns with bamlanivimab. This decision was made in the context of the
US having other treatments available, which work better against someof the emerging variants.
• Health Canada has updated the product labelling for bamlanivimab and communicated to
healthcare professionals to provide information on variants and their impact on bamlanivimab
efficacy, and has also discussed this issue with the provinces and territories.
• While bamlanivimab may continue to be used in Canada at this time, Health Canada has
now also authorized several other biologic treatments that are effective against circulating
variants.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS
• Health Canada put in place temporary Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19
drugs and vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized
under the Interim Order can continue to be sold and that new COVID-19 products can be
reviewed and authorized using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food and Drug
Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen and Moderna have been
authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as those from Novavax, Medicago, Sanofi
and Vaccigen, are also being reviewed under the new Regulations.
• A number of treatments not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as oral antivirals and
monoclonal antibodies, are also being reviewed under the new Regulations.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the World Health Organization, amongst
others, to share information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for treatments. The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory
requirements and to stay informed of any potential treatments.
If pressed on approval by internationalregulatory counterparts:
On December 16, 2021, the European Medicines Agency’s Committee for Medicinal Products for Human
Use (CHMP) issued advice to support EU member states emergency use of Paxlovid ahead of EU
conditional marketing authorization. The EMA received an application for conditional marketing
authorization on January 10, 2022, and the review is on-going.
On December 22, 2021, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) issued an Emergency Use
Authorization (EUA) for Pfizer Inc.’s PAXLOVIDTM for the treatment of high-risk adult patients and
pediatric patients 12 years of age and older with COVID-19 outside of the hospital.
On December 31, 2021, the UK’s Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory Agency granted
Conditional Marketing Authorisation for PAXLOVIDTM in Great Britain, and emergency use authorization
for Northern Ireland.
Emergency use authorizations have also been granted in the United Arab Emirates, South Korea,Israel
and Mexico. Rolling submissions in Australia and New Zealand are on-going.
If pressed on International Supply:
There is a limited global supply of Pfizer’s Paxlovid.
Israel reported treating its first patients with Paxlovidon January 2, 2022. The US has received supply
(160K courses) and is treating patients.
South Korea has received a first shipment of 21K courses and started treating patients last week.
The UK is expected to receive a limited supply by the end of this week.
Under the Medicines Patent Pool licensing agreement, some low and middle income countries are also
producing and using the treatment, such as Bangladesh.
BACKGROUND
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a website for the health
product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for questions.
Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials andtreatments related to COVID-19.
TREATMENTS
Dexamethasone
Although not specifically authorized for the treatment of COVID-19, clinical trial results announced in
June 2020, showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to reduce inflammation, cut death rates
by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients admitted to hospital. As a result, the
WHO has updated its guidelines ontreating people with COVID-19.
COVID-19 Authorized Treatments
Remdesivir
On 27 July 2020, Health Canada authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment
of patients (12 years of age or older, who weighat least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen to help them breathe. Health Canada approved this drug with
conditions for the manufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality. Despite the World
Health Organization’s (WHO) updated guidelines advising against the use of remdesivir, Health Canada
continues to support this drug as a treatment option, which is in line with other international regulators.
Specifically, remdesivir modestly decreases patient time in hospital and continues to provide benefit for
patients and health care systems when used according to the authorized indication. Health Canada will
continue to evaluate information about remdesivir as additional information about its use continues to
be collected, and will take the appropriate steps to ensure the health and safety of Canadians.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, 2020, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab, a monoclonal
antibody. Bamlanivimab was authorized under the Interim Order and is currently under review under
the amended Food and Drug Regulations. The updated clinical information is included in the submission
under review and will inform the regulatory decision.
Casirivimab and imdevimab combination
Casirivimab and imdevimab are monoclonal antibodies that are administered together by intravenous
infusion as a single dose, and this product has shown a clear benefit for patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of hospitalization and/or death.This combination drug treatment was
developed by U.S. company Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and is distributed in Canada by Hoffmann-
La Roche Ltd.
Sotrovimab
On July 30, 2021, Health Canada authorized Sotrovimab from GlaxoSmithKline. This monoclonal
antibody is approved for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults and adolescents (12
years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) who are at high risk for progressing to hospitalization
and/or death.
Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination withritonavir)
On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination with ritonavir) for
the treatment of COVID-19 in non-hospitalized adult patients at risk of progressing to serious disease
including hospitalization and death).Nirmatrelvir is an oral anti-viral drug developed by Pfizer, which is.
co-administered with another drug, ritonavir, which acts as a booster to maintain the required
concentration of nirmatrelvir for antiviral effect. Previously, all existing COVID-19 treatments required IV
administration or injection in a hospital and clinical setting. Oral anti-virals, such as Paxlovid, can be
easily administered at home, thereby reducing the strain on the health care system.
The following is a timeline of the regulatoryapprovals of the drug in Canada and internationally:
• On December 1, 2021, Pfizer filed a drug submission with Health Canada. The clinical trials that
were conducted to support the drug submission excluded vaccinated patients and those with a
prior known history of COVID-19. On January 17, 2021, Health Canadagranted market
authorization with terms and conditions for Paxlovid.
• On December 3, 2021, the Government of Canada announced that PSPC has signed an
agreement with Pfizer for the procurement of 1 million doses of nirmatrelvir to be used in
conjunctionwith ritonavir.
• On December 16, 2021, the European Medicines Agency issued advice allowing member states
to begin using the product for emergency use situations while it continues its on-going rolling
review for market authorization.
• On December 22, 2021, the US FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization for Paxlovid. On
December 31, 2021, the UK’s MHRA granted conditional marketing authorization for Paxlovid
for the treatment of mild-to-moderate COVID-19 infection in those who are at increased risk of
developing severe disease.
COVID-19 Treatment Submissions Under Review
Favipiravir is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that has not been authorized in Canada. On December 18,
2020, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories filed a submission to Health Canadafor the treatment of COVID-19.
Health Canada is awaiting results from an ongoing clinical trialthat concluded in October 2021.
Baricitinibis being investigated as a treatment that may reduce the complications related to the
cytokine storm as well as potentially inhibiting cell proteins that have a role in viral replication. On May
13, Eli Lilly filed a drug submission for baricitinib with Health Canada and as of December 1, this
submission is under review. Health Canada is awaiting results from an ongoing clinical trial that will
conclude in February 2022.
Molnupiravir is an anti-viral, in capsule form, for the treatment of adults with mild-to-moderate COVID-
19 and who are at risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 disease. Merck’s drug submission with Health
Canada is under review. The United Kingdom’s (UK) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA) authorized the use of molnupiravir on November 4. The European Medicines Agency
(EMA) issued advice on November 19, allowing member states to begin using the product for emergency
use situations while it continues its on-going rolling review for market authorization. On December 23,
2021, the United States Food and Drug Administration (US FDA) issued an emergency useauthorization
for molnupiravir.
Health Canada has three other submissions for monoclonal antibody treatments ((AstraZeneca’s
Evusheld (tixagevimab and cilgavimab), Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination and
Celltrion’s Regdanvimab)). Monoclonal antibodies are being tested both as treatment for mild/moderate
COVID-19, and also as prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
COVID-19Treatment Submissions Withdrawn
On June 7 2021, the submission to authorize colchicine as a treatment of COVID-19 was withdrawn by
the manufacturer. Colchicine remains authorized in Canada for the prophylaxis and treatment of gout
flares and Familial Mediterranean Fever. Although unproven atthe time, Colchicine was used to treat
the Former President Trump and gained a lot of media attention.
The Sanoclear (Nitric Oxide) submission was withdrawn Sept. 01, 2021, with an expectation that it will
be refiled once additional clinical data is available, and the leronlimab submission was withdrawn
September 16, 2021.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) manages the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to
support provinces and territories during emergencies. To bolster the response to COVID-19 and address
the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care, PHAC works with federal
partners including Health Canada, National Research Council, Global Affairs Canada,the Department of
National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada, Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada.
Key Facts
• Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and
territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters
and other public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes
a variety of items such as personal protective equipment; vaccine ancillary supplies; medical
equipment (e.g. ventilators, biomedical equipment) and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social
service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively distribute incoming medical supplies and
equipment, such as personal protective equipment and vaccine supplies, to provinces and
territories to support Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• Significant stockpiles of supplies are maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
(NESS) and are deployed in response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and
territories.
If pressed on how the government of Canada is working to secure a sufficient quantity of PPE in
Canada
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues towork with provincial and territorial partners to
monitor the sufficiency of National Emergency StrategicStockpile inventories, and will take
steps to address emerging supply gaps if required.
If pressed on NESS Inventory
• As of January 10, 2022, key supplies within the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventory
include:
o N95 respirators: 40 million units (plus 500,000 equivalents)
o Surgical masks: 250 million units
o Face shields: 13 million units
o Nitrile gloves: 820 million pairs
o Disposable gowns: 110 million units
o Needles and syringes: 208 million units
• We continue to proactively replenish our inventory to secure sufficient quantities of supplies,
including through multi-year contracts.
• In addition, the Government of Canada hasprocured enough first aid supplies, including band
aids and swabs, to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines across the country.
Ifpressed on the disposal of PPE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada adheres to the Treasury Board Policy on Materiel
Management, which sets out a lifecycle management continuum for sound management of
crown assets.
Ifpressed on biomedical equipment
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, significant quantities of biomedical equipment have been
procured and deployed to jurisdictions or maintained in the National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile in case they are needed.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with provincial and territorial
governments to identify needs and allocate biomedical equipment, including oxygen
concentrators.
If pressed on the development of a comprehensive management plan for the future of the NESS
• The top priority for the Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting Canada’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Agency is committed to enhancing its preparedness for future public health emergencies,
including working on improvements for the management of the NationalEmergency Strategic
Stockpile.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada agreed with the recommendation of the AuditorGeneral to
develop a comprehensive management plan for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to
support responses to future public health emergencies.
• This plan will focus on key areas, such as optimizing life-cycle materiel management, enhancing
infrastructure and systems, and working closely with provinces and territories and other key
partners to better define needs and roles and responsibilities.
Background
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESSis that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to respond in a reasonable manner to the most common
emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement and management
of personal protective equipment(PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• To provide surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient
• As the sole provider of certain assets, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes,
required forrare public health emergencies
NESS Footprint
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousingand third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 2.8 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
NESS Funding
As of September 2021, the NESS budget for COVID-19 response isapproximately $7.4 billion for the
procurement of PPE, vaccine ancillary supplies, medical equipment and supplies, and for logistics and
warehousing. An additional $65.5 million has been approved for ongoing funding for medical
countermeasures.
Life-cycleManagement
Taking into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC will develop a comprehensive
management plan for the NESS that will focus on capacity and readiness of the NESS to support
responses to future public health emergencies. This will include a focus on key areas such as optimizing
operations, including logistics and life-cycle management; enhancing infrastructure and systems;
working closely with the provinces and territories and other key partners to strengthen Canada’s overall
preparedness; and conducting ongoinganalysis on asset requirements.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in supportof the fight against COVID-19.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Canada has successfully secured an
adequate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet potential demand.
OAG Audit
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) undertook a performance audit on the Government of Canada’s
ability to meet the needs of provinces and territories, and the healthcare sector, for PPE and medical
devices to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The audit period covered January 2020 through to
August 31, 2020 and implicated the PHAC, PSPC and HC.
Overall, the OAG found that PHAC, PSPC and HC helped to meet the needs of provincial and territorial
governments for PPE and medical devices during the pandemic. The report does however highlight that
as a result of long-standing unaddressed problems with the systems and practices in place to manage
the NESS, PHAC was not as prepared as it could have been to respond to the needs of provinces and
territories for PPE and medical devices.
PHAC and HC have both committed to addressing the recommendations from the OAG within one year
of the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
STATUS OF DOMESTICMANUFACTURING CAPACITY FOR MRNA VACCINE
ISSUE
• Canada is committed to securing sufficient supply of domestically produced therapeutics and
vaccines, mRNA and otherwise.
• Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy which aims togrow a
strong, competitive domestic life sciences sector, with cutting-edge biomanufacturing
capabilities, and to make sure Canada is prepared for pandemics and other health emergencies
in the future.
KEY FACTS
• Canada announced the creation of the Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy on July 28,
2021 to re-build a strong and resilient domestic biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
- Investments in biomanufacturing capacity can reduce our reliance on imported products
and strengthen our domestic industrial capacity.
- The Government will work with provinces, territories, and other partners to deliver real
results for Canadians.
- The strategy will be supported by existing resources and Budget 2021 investments,
including support of $2.2 billion for the revitalization of Canada's biomanufacturing and
life science sector.
- Health Portfolio explicit work includes:
- $250 million, overthree years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) to establish a new Clinical Trial Fund (CTF).
- Advancing regulatory modernization efforts, including modernized clinical trial
regulations, a new pathway for advanced therapeutic products, and agile
regulations for the licensing of drugs and medical devices (e.g., through rolling
reviews, terms and conditions).
• This builds on the more than $1.2 billion in investments the government has made since the
beginning of the pandemic to advanceindustrial research and development in vaccines and
therapeutics, as well as to expand biomanufacturing capacity in Canada.
• On August 10, 2021, Canada announced that it entered into a non-binding Memorandum of
Understanding with Moderna to build an mRNAvaccine facility in Canada. Work to negotiate a
definitive agreement is currently underway.
KEY MESSAGES
• The government is working to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19, future pandemics, and other health priorities.
• Canada is making investments to support promising technology areas across platformsfrom
mRNA, viral vectors, protein based and virus-like particle vaccines. We are also
investing to establish world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity–from research and
development to fill and finish.
• In July 2021, the government announced the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy to
improve Canada's long-term pandemic resilience and promote the life-sciencessector.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
IfPRESSED ON THE DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES …
• The COVID-19 pandemic reinforced the importance ofdomestic capacity to develop and
produce vaccines, and has highlighted significant breakthroughs in health science and
technology.
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and
they represent an alternative to conventional vaccines, particularly in relation to their potential
for rapid development and scaling of production.
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development andproduction.
• The Government of Canada is currently in negotiations with Moderna to explore the possibility
of building a domestic mRNA vaccine production facility, building on the non-binding MOU
signed with the company in August 2021. This will help position Canada as an mRNA centre of
excellence and a global mRNA research and development hub.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working to re-establish domestic capacity, across key vaccine platforms, including
mRNA, to be better prepared and tomanage key supply and other risks (including those
encountered throughout the COVID-19 pandemic).
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre which has
partnered with Novavax to pursue options to produce its COVID-19vaccine, pending regulatory
authorization.
• Canada has also taken steps to secure non-mRNA vaccine options with global leaders such as
GlaxoSmithKline to help make sure Canadians have enough vaccine to fight a flu pandemic in
the next 10 years.
• In the fall of 2020, the government signed an agreement with Medicago to secure doses of their
COVID-19 vaccine candidate. This is the first domestically developed vaccine candidate the
Government of Canada has secured.
- Medicago, a biopharmaceutical company headquartered in Quebec, has received
investments through the Strategic Innovation Fund to develop a plant-based COVID-19
vaccine. Phase 3 data for the plant-based vaccine is currently being reviewed by Health
Canada.
BACKGROUND
Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took early and decisive action to
strengthen Canada's biomanufacturing capacity to protect Canadians, and to provide investment to
support domestic biomanufacturing capabilities.A key element is the implementation of the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy) announced in June 2021.
Ministers of Health and Innovation, Science, and Industry have joint accountability for the Strategy
which outlines actions to take a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic capacity to rapidly
develop and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for
future pandemics or other health emergencies and sector growth. This included Budget 2021
investments of $2.2 B.
The five pillars of the Strategy are:
1) Coordinating Governance;
2) Strengthening Research Systems and the Talent Pipeline;
3) Growing Canada’s Life Sciences and Biomanufacturing Sector;
4) Operationalizing National Research Council’s Biologics Manufacturing Centre (BMC) and
Considering a National Centre; and,
5) Ensuring Best-in-Class Regulation & World-Class Clinical TrialsSystems.
Increasing domestic capacity and building a robust life sciences sector will require dedicated efforts to
connect and mobilize federal investments and assets in collaboration with academia and industry to the
broader life sciences ecosystem.
The emergency regulatory measures put in place during COVID-19 aim to make the system more agile,
and enable prompt access within Canada to health products needed to diagnose, treat and slow the
spread of the virus without compromising safety, efficacy and quality. Going forward it will be important
to maintain this level of agility (especially during non-pandemictimes) to ensure Canadians receive
access to needed health products.
Canadian Biomanufacturing Capacity Since 2020
In addition to Budget 2021 funding, the government has announced a number of investments to bolster
domestic production capacity through theStrategic Innovation Fund, Next Generation Manufacturing
Canada Supercluster, the National Research Council, Regional Development Agencies, and other
government partners, including in:
• National Research Council (NRC) (Montréal, QC)-$126 million to establish the new Biologics
Manufacturing Centre;
• Medicago (Quebec City, QC)-$173 million to develop a plant-based virus-like-particle vaccine
and for the construction of a Good Manufacturing Practice facility, alongside an APA for
eventual delivery of its vaccines;
• AbCellera (Vancouver, BC)-$175.6 million in government support of antibody discovery for
clinical testing and for the construction of a GMP antibody production facility;
• Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO) (Saskatoon, SK)–$59.2M, over three years,
starting in 2021-22, to support the development of its vaccine candidates and expand its
Saskatoon facility;
• Precision Nanosystems (Vancouver, BC)-$25.1 million in government support to build a
biomanufacturingcentre for production of RNA vaccines;
• KABS Laboratories (St-Hubert and Val des Sources, QC)-$54.25 million toward a biologics
production facility with a focus on antibody therapies and new fill-finish capabilities;
• Novocol (Cambridge, ON)-$32.7 million contribution for expanded fill-finish capacity;
• Providence Therapeutics and Northern RNA Inc.-$5 million through the Next Generation
Manufacturing Supercluster to expand their operations in Calgary to design and manufacture
COVID-19 vaccines andbuild a pipeline of mRNA vaccines;
• Sanofi Pasteur (Toronto campus)–up to $415 million support towards building an end-to-end
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility; and,
• Resilience Biotechnologies (Mississauga, ON)-$199 million to increase manufacturing and
fill/finish capacity for a number of vaccines and therapeutics including mRNA technologies.
mRNA domestic vaccine development
In August 2021, the Government of Canada has announced a non-binding MOU with Modernato build a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccineproduction facility in Canada.
The MOU outlines how Moderna plans to establish a Canadian mRNA vaccine facility and work as a
valued partner in Canada’s life sciences ecosystem by creating jobs and collaborating ondomestic
research and development.
Should an agreement be reached, the company will contribute to Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life
Sciences Strategy by drawing on its mRNA expertise and by enhancing existing Canadian strengths in
RNA research and nanomedicine technology development and help position Canada as an mRNA centre
of excellence and a global mRNA research and development hub.
Government investment in domestic mRNA solutions
The Strategic Innovation Fund has made a number of key investments in Canadian firms to increase
domestic RNA manufacturing capacity and know how. This includes:
• $199 million to Resilience Biotechnologies to increase its manufacturing and fill-finish capacity
for a number of vaccines and therapeutics, including mRNA.
o Oncecompleted, the company’s Mississauga facility is expected to allow for the
manufacturing of approximately 112 million to 640 million doses of mRNA vaccines per
year.
o In September 2021, Resilience and Moderna announced a multi-year agreement for the
facility to produce mRNA for the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine intended for worldwide
distribution.
• $39.8 million investment to support BioVectra to build a state-of-the-art facility in Prince
Edward Island and reconfigure its facilities in Nova Scotia.
o The investment will make it possible for BioVectra to manufacture mRNA and plasmid
DNA, a key input used to manufacture mRNA vaccines, and add fill and finish
capabilities, allowing the company to provide an end-to-end manufacturing solution for
its clients.
• $25.1 million to Precision NanoSystems Incorporated (PNI), in Vancouver, BC, to build a
biomanufacturing centre to produce RNA vaccines and future genetic medicines including
therapeutics for the prevention and treatment of rare diseases, cancerand other areas of
unmet need.
The Next Generation Manufacturing Supercluster has also contributed $5 million in funding toward
Providence Therapeutics and partner Northern RNA of Calgary to establish mRNA vaccine manufacturing
capacity within Canada and build a raw material supply chain. The National Research Council’s Industrial
Research Assistance Program also contributed $4.7 million toward Providence Therapeutics Phase 1 trial
of its mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
Canadian domestic vaccine development
In the fall of 2020,the government signed an agreement with Medicago to secure up to 76 million doses
of their COVID-19 vaccine candidate. This is the first domestically developed vaccine candidate the
Government of Canada has secured.
In October 2020, the government announced an investment of up to $173 million through the Strategic
Innovation Fund (SIF) in Quebec City-based Medicago to support Canada’s response to COVID-19 and
future preparedness
The project, valued at a total of $428 million, will advance Medicago’s virus-like particle vaccine,
developed on the company’s unique plant-based production platform, through clinical trials. It will also
establish a large-scale vaccine and antibody production facility to increase Canada’s domestic
biomanufacturing capacity.
On February 2, 2021, the Government of Canada announced a memorandum of understanding with
Novavax to pursue options to produce its COVID-19 vaccineat the Biologics Manufacturing
Centre (BMC) once both the vaccine candidate and the facility receive the requiredHealth Canada
authorizations.
In March 2021, the National Research Centre and Novavax signed a collaboration agreement to enable
the technology transfer of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine to begin. This technology transfer has been
under way since May.
OVERDOSE CRISIS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened long-standing challenges regarding substance use and
the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose deaths and
harms.
• In addition,people who use drugs are also facing additional barriers and risks related to the
toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to health and social services, including life-
saving harm reduction and treatment.
KEY FACTS
• Most recent national data indicates that 24,626 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred
between January 2016 and June 2021 Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of
the crisis with as many as 87% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2021 (January to
June) involving fentanyl.
• Our commitment to this crisis has seen us invest over $700 million, including $182 million to
community organizations.
• This includes $150 million through the Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories
to improve access to evidence-based treatment services, which, when cost-matched by
provinces and territories, will result in an investment over $300 million.
• Since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received more than 2.9 million visits,
reversed almost 27,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 127,000
referrals to health and social services.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats inCanada’s history.
• We continue to support efforts to improve access to treatment and harm reduction services;
strengthen enforcement to help reduce the toxic illegal drug supply; increase awareness and
prevention efforts; and, build the evidence base through investments in research and
surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
and people with lived and living experience, to save lives and reverse this national public health
crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEW NUMBERS DISCLOSED IN THE OPIOID REPORT …
• Our Government remains deeply concerned over the tragic loss of so many lives to the opioid
crisis. The lack of available treatment, safer supply, and other services remains a significant
challenge.
• That is why our Government remains committed to addressing the opioid crisis through tools
such as naloxone access and training, supervised consumption sites and safer supply programs,
which are saving lives. Without these interventions in harmreduction, the number of overdose
deaths would be exponentially worse.
• Our Government remains committed to working with all our partners to achieve the results that
will end this complex public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our Government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those
struggling with substance use and save lives.
• We have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and removed
barriers to prescribing and dispensing.
• We have supported the development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist
treatment.
• In addition, our Government has provided $150 million through the Emergency Treatment Fund
for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based treatment services, which,
when cost-matched by provinces and territories, will result in an investment over$300 million.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• The evidence is clear–harm reduction measures save lives.
• The Government has committed funding to innovativeprojects, such as providing medication as
an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• We know that for those who are not yet ready to seek treatment, supervised consumption sites
save lives. Since 2017, federally authorized supervised consumption sites have reversed nearly
27,000 overdoses without a single death at a site.
• Our Government has also increased access to life-saving naloxone across the country, including
to remote and isolated First Nations and Inuit communities.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention efforts, including
awareness building.
• We have invested in prevention campaigns that include engaging youth and young adults on
risks and harms of substance use and the impact of stigma on people who use drugs.
• We supported school-based approaches that enhance student well-being in order to prevent
substance use related harms for this important population.
• We are also funding projects that promote changes in the health system to help enhance the
pathways to care for people who use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our Government is aware that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous illegal
drug supply.
• We have taken action to save lives by providing people who use drugs with safer,
pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• For example, we have allowed pharmacists and practitioners to extend, renew and transfer
prescriptions to facilitate access to medications during the pandemic.
• Our Government is funding safer supply projects in British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, and New
Brunswick and will support and scale up effective models.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• Evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save lives.
• Since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received more than 2.9 million visits,
reversed almost 27,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 127,000
referrals to health and socialservices.
• These sites also provide access to other health and social services for people who use drugs,
including opportunities to access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territories, and stakeholders, to take measures so
that Canadians continue to have access to these lifesaving services.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXPERT TASK FORCE ON SUBSTANCE USE …
• We are committed to a comprehensive public health approach to substance use that is focused
on reducing harms, saving lives, andgetting people the supports they need.
• We are studying the Expert Task Force on Substance Use recommendations on how we can
better treat substance use as a health issue. These recommendations are publicly available on
the Health Canada website.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• In early May, the Canadian Pain Task Force published their final report, which includes
recommendations on key areas to ensure people with pain are recognized and supported, and
that pain is understood, prevented, and effectively treated.
• We will continue to work with our partners to explore implementing the recommendations and
potential next steps.
• We have also invested over $175M in pain-related research through the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research and close to $19M in funding for12 initiatives through the Substance Use and
Addictions Program focused on improving opioid prescribing practices and pain management.
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 24,626 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and June 2021. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the crisis with
as many as 87% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths so far in 2021 (January to June) involving
fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected,there are striking patterns, with death most
common among males and individuals aged 20 to 49 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing higher risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Several jurisdictions have observed unprecedented numbers
and rates in relation to the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although these increases have been observedacross the country, Western Canada continues to be
highly impacted. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,724 illegal drug toxicity
deaths, a 75% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally, the crisis in BC continued into
2021 with 1,782 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths from January to October, a 24% increase over the
same in the previous year (1,438 deaths) and a 112% increase from the same period of time in 2019
(Januaryto October 2019–840 deaths).
Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people in BC have also surged, increasing by 119% in
2020 compared to 2019. Data released by Alberta in December 2021 indicated that from January to
October 2021 the province reported 1,372 deaths from all substances, thehighest number per year
since the province began tracking such deaths in 2016. Of these deaths, 1,247 were related to opioids.
The highest opioid-related death count was in Edmonton (473) followed by Calgary (390).
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of over
$700M to address the overdose crisis and substance use-related harms. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, development of educational products and tools for the public and
health care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement to help support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues address the additional challenges caused by the COVID-19
pandemic. In March 2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of
naloxone kits and opioid overdose response training to support communities that have been particularly
affected by the opioid overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving health outcomes of
their residents. Budget 2021 also committed an additional $116 million to fund projects through the
Substance Useand Addictions Program (SUAP).
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action tomake it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for frontline service
providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
The Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on SubstanceUse in March 2021 that provided
expert advice on Canada’s federal drug policy, including examining potential alternatives to criminal
penalties for personal drug possession. The Task Force provided its final advice on alternatives to
criminal penalties inMay 2021 and on federal drug policy in June 2021. Both reports of the Task Force
have been made publicly available and can be found online athttps://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-force-
substance-use/reports.html.
ACCESS TO COVID-19 VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
ISSUE
• Vaccine use in children under 12 years of age.
KEYFACTS
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty is authorised in younger children, ages 5-11. Health Canada has also
received a submission for the use of a COVID-19 vaccine in this younger age group from
Moderna.
• The positive results in Pfizer’s clinical trialsinvolves approximately 4,600 children ages 5 to 11
years of age in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial
sites. The 90.7% efficacy was established in 1,968 vaccine recipients, and vaccine safety was
evaluated in 3,300 vaccine recipients.
KEY MESSAGES
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® in
children aged 5 to 11.
• Health Canada is also reviewing a submission from Moderna for its Spikevax® vaccine for
younger age groups(6 to 11 years).
• As with all COVID-19 submissions, the Department is prioritizing the review while maintaining
our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewingthe same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamlinereview
processes, while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ONHEALTH CANADA’S REVIEW PROCESS
• In order to expand the use of an authorized COVID-19 vaccine to younger children, the
manufacturer must provide evidence of safety, efficacy and quality to Health Canada for review.
• Timing for the completion of a Health Canada review depends on many factors, including but
not limited to, the need for additional data, discussions with the sponsor, and requirements for
updates to safety information. A decision will only be made once all of the required information
has been submitted by the manufacturer and thoroughly evaluated by Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SAFETY OF VACCINES IN CHILDREN
• The safety of vaccines for children is of the utmost priority for Health Canada. The Department
will not compromise on the evidence standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• The Department conducted a detailed review of the safety data from clinical trials of Comirnaty
to support the authorization of the vaccine in adults, adolescents and children 5 years of age
and older. The Department will similarly conduct a detailed review of the safety data available
from Moderna to determine the vaccine’s safety in younger age groups.
• The risks and benefits are evaluated for each age group in the context of COVID disease. This
requires consideration of vaccine side effects and benefits.
• During clinical trials, dose-finding studies were conducted to determine the correct dose for
vaccine effectiveness in children aged 6 months to less than 12 years. This resulted in the
identification of a lower dose for children, while still maintaining effectiveness.
• The Department continuously monitors the safety of the vaccines after approval in Canada and
internationally, and takes immediate action should any safety concerns arise.
IF PRESSED ON AVAILABILITY OF OTHER VACCINES
• Studies with theComirnaty vaccine are ongoing in children under 5 years of age, and other
manufacturers are also testing their vaccines in children of various age groups. Health Canada
expects to receive data for review in the coming months.
BACKGROUND
The risk of severeillness due to COVID-19 might be lower in children than in adults but this does not
mean that there is no risk:
• Children can still contract COVID-19 and get very sick.
• In Canada, more than 2,000 children (ages 0-19) have been hospitalized with COVID-19, 270
have been admitted to the ICU and 23 have died (as of January 7, 2022.
• In Canada, there have been 269,917 COVID cases in children aged 0-11 years (as of January 7,
2022).
• Some children go on to develop a Multi Inflammatory Syndrome and become severely affected.
Although rare, this is not an insignificant risk.
• Emerging data suggest that children that survive COVID-19 despite of the severity, are at risk of
developing what is now called “long COVID”. This condition is yet poorly understood but it has
been observed in a percentage of adults and children that survive COVID-19.
• In addition, children like adults, can still spread the virus to others. In order to best protect
themselves and the whole community, adolescents and children who are eligible should be
vaccinated if there are no contraindications.
PFIZER Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Comirnaty
• On May 5, 2021 Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®vaccine in
adolescents aged 12-15.This information was also submitted to the US FDA and the European
Medicines Agency. The expanded indication for 12-15 years old was approved by the US FDA on
May 10, 2021 and by the EMA on May 28, 2021.
• Pfizer has completed their clinical trials involving up to 4,600 children ages 5 to 11 years of age
in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The trials
evaluated the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine on a two-dose schedule (approximately 21 days apart).
• On November 19, 2021, Pfizer's pediatric vaccine (ages 5 to 11) was approved by Health Canada
and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) released their guidelines also
recommending the use in this age group.
• On October 26, 2021, the US FDA’s Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory
Committee voted to agree that the overall benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks for children
5-11 years of age. Many committee members stressed that this was based on considerations of
access and personal choice and should not be considered a recommendation to mandate
vaccines in this age group. Active safety monitoring for rare, but potentially serious, adverse
events such as myocarditis will be important.
• On October 29, 2021 the U.S. FDA authorized the emergency use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-
19 Vaccine for the prevention of COVID-19 to include children 5 through 11 years of age.
• On November 5, 2021, the US CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
issued an Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine in Children
Aged 5-11 Years.
• In the United States, as of January 7, 2022 more than 7 million children between the agesof 5
and 11 have received their first dose of Pfizer’s vaccine, and no safety issues have been
identified. The safety profile of children 5 to 11 is generally comparable to what was observed
for the 12 to 15 year olds.
MODERNA Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Spikevax
• On August 27, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of the Moderna COVID-19 Vaccine in
adolescents aged 12 to 17.
On November 16, 2021, Moderna filed their pediatric dossier for ages 6 to 11 years and the submission
is currently under review.
Other Vaccines
• Clinical trials for the Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines in children were paused in Spring2021
due to concerns with blood clots reported with the use of these vaccines in adults. The Janssen
trial has since restarted, with plans to continue recruitment of younger pediatric patients.
• Other manufacturers such as Novavax have also launched clinical trials to test their vaccine in
adolescents.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO CLINICAL TRIALS FOR VACCINES AND
TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Health Canada is using agile regulatoryprocesses to expedite the review of COVID-19 clinical
trials for vaccines and treatments.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all clinical trials for treatments and vaccines for
COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed.
• Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review and facilitate the
conduct of clinical trials for COVID-19 vaccines and treatments while maintaining its high
standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada continues to expedite clinical trials, reviewing applications in under 15 days,
which is half the standard time.
• These measures have allowed us to rapidly authorize several clinical trials in Canada, including
for some vaccines being developed in Canada, without compromising on strict standards for the
safety of clinical trial participants.
IF PRESSED FURTHERON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of
outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of January 2022, 113 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for clinical
trials or for sale in Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
HealthCanada is expediting the review of all clinical trials for treatments and vaccines for COVID-19
while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed.
Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new vaccines and treatments are both safe and
effective in human beings, and Health Canada is also facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in
Canada, using the Interim Order respecting clinical trials for medicaldevices and drugs (including
vaccines) related to COVID-19, which was issued in May 2020.
On May 3, 2021, the Minister of Health approved Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Clinical Trials for
Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to COVID-19. Interim Order (IO) No. 2 replaces IO No. 1. The first
interim order was signed on May 23,2020, as a response to the ongoing need for urgent COVID-19
diagnosis, treatment, mitigation or prevention options.
IO No. 2 continues to support the optional pathway introduced by IO No. 1 to facilitate clinical trials for
potential COVID-19 drugs and medical devices. It also continues to uphold strong patient safety
requirements and validity of trial data.
The IO No. 2 continues to offer regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical trials
to take place more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient and volunteer participation
across thecountry. The IO No. 2 helps to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtaining patient consent in light of public health measures;
• broaden the criteria for health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator duties at
remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinical trial
authorization.
Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half the
normal time).
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Four COVID-19 vaccines are currently authorized by Health Canada and several others are under
review.
KEY FACTS
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and
the Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
• Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
KEY MESSAGES
• The availability of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines is of the utmostpriority. Health Canada
has now authorized COVID-19 vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca and
Janssen.
• In addition, there are four other vaccines currently under review by Health Canada from
Novavax, Medicago, Sanofi and Vaccigen (Covaxin).
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine for children ages 5 to 11. Moderna has a submission under review for
approval of a pediatric indication (6 to 11 years) for their vaccine.
• In November 2021, Health Canada also authorized the use of a booster shot of the Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty and Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccines. Public Health advice should be
followed regarding who would benefit from a booster shot. Submissions have been received
from AstraZeneca and Janssen for approval of booster shot of their vaccine.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review
processes, while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• HealthCanada will continue to review safety data submitted by the manufacturer and adverse
event reports received in the Canada Vigilance Database. In addition, Health Canada will
continue to work closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada, Provinces and Territories, and
international regulators to monitor the safety of the vaccine. The Department will take
appropriate action in a timely manner if new safety concerns are identified and will ensure that
relevant information is available to all Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON …
• Health Canada issued regulatory letters to manufacturers of authorized COVID-19 vaccines and
to those under review, requestingplans to evaluate and address the impact of the omicron
variant on their product and include any proposed studies, timelines for completion and risk
minimization measures. Canadians will be informed in a timely manner of any new key
information about the impact of omicron on vaccine effectiveness.
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of the omicron
variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron variant, Health Canada will
prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while maintaining
high standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON BOOSTER DOSE SUBMISSIONS …
• People who have received a complete vaccineseries, including older adults, have good
protection against severe disease and death. This includes protection from variants of concern
currently circulating in Canada. However, a third dose would ensure further protection.
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) strongly recommends that Canadians
over the age of 50 and other vulnerable populations receive a third dose of an mRNA vaccine.
Canadians aged 18 to 49 can also receive a third dose at least six months after they have
received their second.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS FOR VACCINES UNDER REVIEW …
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Food and Drug Regulations
which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness and quality to Health
Canada as it becomes available. TheFood and Drug Regulations wereamended in March 2021
to provide the same flexibilities as under the Interim Order that was used for the initial
authorizations.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays outthe timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rollingreviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submissions depends on the outcomes of the
companies’ ongoing clinical trials and the review of the data submitted to Health Canada,as well
as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian supply.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. Theseteams have been
working around the clock to expedite reviews.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS …
• Health Canada put in place temporary Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19
drugs and vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized
under the Interim Order can continue to besold and that new COVID-19 products can be
reviewed and authorized using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization underthe Food and Drug
Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen and Moderna have been
authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as those from Novavax, Medicago, Sanofi
andVaccigen, are also being reviewed under the new Regulations.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccinesavailable
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September 2020, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines
by allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as they become available.
Health Canada only authorizesa vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Since the Interim Order was temporary (valid for 1 year, expired on September 16, 2021), in March 2021
Health Canada introduced amendments to the Food and Drugs Regulations (Regulations) to provide a
mechanism for COVID-19 products to gain permanent legal status and allow the vaccines to continue to
be sold in Canada. Companies were required to file a submission to Health Canada under the amended
Regulations. The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® and Moderna Spikevax®, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria® and
Janssen vaccines were authorizedunder the modified Regulations
Summary of approved vaccines, status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Original vaccine approvals
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® vaccine under the Interim Order on
December 9, 2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized theModerna Spikevax® vaccine under the Interim Order on December 23,
2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine under the Interim Order on Feb 26, 2021,
and authorized it under the Regulations on November 19, 2021. Health Canada worked closely with the
European Medicines Agency on the initial review. Health Canada authorized the Janssen vaccine on
March 5, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Janssen vaccine on March 5, 2021 under the Interim Order, and
authorized it under the Regulations on November 23, 2021.
Pediatric and Adolescent approvals
Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 5-11 on November 19, 2021 and
aged 12-15 on May 5, 2021. Modernavaccine was approved for children (12-17 years old) on August 27,
2021. (Please see separate QP on COVID-19 vaccines for children).
Boosters
On November 9, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccine as a booster shot. On November 12, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Moderna
Spikevax vaccine as a booster shot.
Health Canada has received submissions from AstraZeneca and Janssen for booster shot of their
vaccines. Assessment is on-going.
Ongoingreviews of other vaccines
Vaccine submissions from Novavax, Medicago, Sanofi and Vaccigen (vaccine Covaxin) are under review.
Timelines for decisions depend on the submission of outstanding data from the companies, discussions
with the sponsors, and completion of Health Canada’s review.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
TESTS DE DÉPISTAGE DE LA COVID-19 / COVID-19 TEST KITS
ISSUE
• Throughout the pandemic, Health Canada has ensured that testing devices authorized for sale in
Canada meet safety, effectiveness andquality requirements.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada authorizes tests based on the data provided by the manufacturer. The
manufacturer must provide sufficient data to support the intended use and claims being made,
including the sensitivity established for thespecific test.
• Provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery and administration of health care
services. Decisions on the use of medical devices, including “off-label use” of authorized testing
devices, rests with provincial and territorialgovernments.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada has one of the most highly regarded regulatory frameworks for medical devices
in the world.
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada put in place rapid, innovative and agile measures
to ensure prompt access to medical devices to respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing
devices available in Canada have been high performing and reliable.
• Working with our public health partners, we have identified the following testing technologies
as being of the highest priority for evaluation at this time:
o self-testing devices
o ‘multiplex’ devices that diagnose and differentiate between other respiratory viruses
(e.g., Influenza A andB)
o point-of-care antigen or molecular testing devices that use nasal swab or saliva samples
for use in symptomatic and asymptomatic populations administered by trained
operators (rather than health care professionals)
• As of January 13, Health Canada has authorized over 100 testing devices, including 10 self-tests
and 25 tests that can be used in a point of care setting.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF COVID TESTS TO DETECT
VARIANTS …
• Based on the information available to date on variants, the authorized tests continue to be
effective.
• Health Canada is monitoring the potential impact of the new variants, including the recently
identified Omicron variant, on the effectiveness of test devices and will take action as necessary.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON HOME TESTING FOR COVID-19 …
• Applications for self-testing technologies are the highest priority for review at this time.
• As of January 13, Health Canada has authorized ten self-tests.
• The Departmentcontinues to contact manufacturers of self-tests that have been authorized in
other jurisdictions to invite them to submit an application in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON THE USE OFRAPID TESTS FOR SELF-TESTING …
• For public health reasons, Health Canada is not prioritizing the enforcement of off-label sale and
advertising of authorized COVID-19 tests under certain conditions.
• Most rapid tests have been authorized for use by qualified laboratory personnel, health
professionals or trained individuals, however provinces and territories have the authority to set
guidelines for "off-label" use to support their pandemic efforts.
IFPRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON ASYMPTOMATIC TESTING FOR COVID-19…
• Since May 2021, Health Canada has authorized 16 tests to allow for testing in asymptomatic
populations.
IF PRESSED ON WHY TESTS ARE AUTHORIZED IN OTHER COUNTRIES BUT NOT IN CANADA …
• Each jurisdiction has different rules and approval processes.
• Once tests are approved by international partners, we contact manufacturers to encourage
them to apply for authorization in Canada.
• Health Canada accepts submissions made to another jurisdiction and assesses that data
independently.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing
devices available for sale in Canada have been accurate and reliable.
• We have avoided some of the problems other countries have experienced, including recalling
lower-quality tests.
• Canada is one of the few countries with minimal post-market issues, including recalls.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON SALIVA TESTING FOR COVID-19…
• Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and reliable COVID-19 test devices for use
with various samples.
• At this time,Health Canada has authorized the use of gargle and spit samples for use with the
authorized Cepheid Xpertxpress SARS-CoV-2 testing device
• Health Canada has also authorized the Norgen Biotek 2019-NCOV N Gene and Norgen Biotek
COVID-19 E/RDRP Genes, whichboth utilize saliva samples.
• Health Canada is prioritizing the review of applications for test kits that use saliva samples so
Canadians have access to new testing options.
BACKGROUND
Under the Interim Order, manufacturers can submit an abbreviatedapplication to support the safety,
effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an application through the IO
pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Since the beginning of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with publichealth partners to
ensure that applications for COVID-19 testing devices are prioritized to meet urgent public health needs.
Health Canada is currently prioritizing self-testing devices, ‘multiplex’ devices that diagnose and
differentiate between other respiratory viruses (e.g., Influenza A and B) and tests that use less invasive
sample types such as nasal swab or saliva samples.
Health Canada authorizes tests based on the data provided by the manufacturer. The manufacturer
must provide sufficient data tosupport the intended use and claims being made, including the
sensitivity established for the specific test.
Health Canada regulates the sale of medical devices in Canada—not their use.
Provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery and administration of health care services.
Decisions on the use of medical devices, including “off-label use” of authorized testing devices, rests
with provincial and territorial governments. If a test is used in an off-label manner, the performance
characteristics (e.g. established sensitivity) of the device cannot be assured.
Health Canada has set minimum standards for sensitivity that a COVID-19 antigen test must meet for an
authorization to be granted. Tests with sensitivity below this minimum threshold of 80%do not meet
the criteria outlined in the Interim Order, and will not be authorized. Sensitivity values below this level
produce too manyfalse negative results.
To remain agile and allow flexibility, Health Canada will accept data to support serial testingprotocols
for use in asymptomatic populations.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
COVID-19 CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE
ISSUE
• COVID-19 created an increased demand for drugs used in supporting patients with the disease,
against the backdrop of multipleglobal supply chain challenges. Drug shortages, particularly in
the context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at risk.
• Working with provinces, territories and other partners, Health Canada established a COVID-19
Critical DrugReserve, which consists of up to a six-month supply of drugs used to support
patients with COVID-19.
KEY FACTS
• The Critical Drug Reserve was established with a 3-month supply of 12 key drugs used in the
treatment of COVID-19 symptoms.
• Canada assumedthe upfront costs to build and manage the Reserve. The costs are shared 70% /
30% between Provinces / Territories and the Federal Government.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary. All jurisdictions except for Quebec and
New Brunswick have opted in, and are placing orders on the Critical Drug Reserve inventory.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring Canadians have access to the drugs they need is a top priority. The Government of
Canada has taken proactive measures to help mitigate the risk of drugshortages, a global issue,
throughout the pandemic.
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada established the
COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve in 2020.
• This Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drugshortage management
efforts, and functions as a safety net by augmenting the supply of key drugs used in treating
patients with COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT DRUGS HEALTH CANADA PURCHASEDFOR THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE …
• The Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals to support patients with COVID-
19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular blockers. These drugs have been
included in the Reserve based on Canada’s experience in managing drug supply, consultation with
Provinces and Territories, and advice provided by health care experts.
IF PRESSED ON PARTICIPATION …
• The Critical Drug Reserve functions as an additional safety net in the event of shortages of key
drugs used in the treatment of COVID-19symptoms, and complements Canada’s current drug
shortage mitigation measures.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary, with most provinces and territories
participating. Both Quebec and New Brunswick have opted out, but the Government ofCanada
will continue to provide support when requested.
IF PRESSED ON COST …
• To date, the Government of Canada has awarded close to $30 million in contracts for drugs in
the Critical Drug Reserve through competitive processes that are cost-shared with participating
provinces and territories.
• Drug pricing is influenced by a number of factors, including availability, supply chain constraints,
global import/export restrictions, and competition in the global marketplace.
• As with all purchasing, value formoney was a key consideration.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada works with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to
identify mitigation strategies, which includes regulatory measures and/or exploring accessto alternative
products available in other jurisdictions. Creating a reserve for drugs critical to the treatment of COVID-
19 symptomsis one such strategy.
During the first wave of the pandemic, shortages were identified for key drugs used in treating patients
with COVID-19. The Critical Drug Reserve serves as a backstop for Canada’s existing supply,
complements the current drug shortage management systems, and will help prevent critical drug
shortages, which will in turn, help to relieve pressures on provincial and territorial health care systems.
Factors that were considered in the pursuit of a critical drug reserve included whether the drug is
important for the treatment of COVID-19 symptoms, whether the drug either is in shortage or is likely to
be in shortage, and whether alternative or substitute drugs are available. The following drugs are in the
Critical Drug Reserve:
• Cisatracurium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Epinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Fentanyl (Opioid analgesic);
• Norepinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Propofol (Sedative);
• Rocuronium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Salbutamol (Bronchodilator);
• Ceftriaxone (antibiotic);
• Dexamethasone (corticosteroid);
• Hydromorphone (analgesic);
• Midazolam (sedative); and
• Vasopressin (vasopressor).
Engagementwith Provinces and Territories
To address drug supply issues, Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms for managing drug
shortages, and has leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple
partners to identify shortage signals earlier, particularly for critical drugs required for COVID-19. This
increased collaboration and coordination is reflected in the efforts made by Health Canada and the
provinces and territories to create the reserve.
Given the need forclose cooperation on the shortage of critical drugs, a Framework for the Effective
Management of Drug supply in the Context of the COVID-19 Pandemic has been developed and agreed
to by provinces, territories and the federal government. This Framework setsout the common principles
for managing drug shortages and guiding decisions in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Principles
include solidarity, fairness, openness and transparency and FPT collaboration. These principles have
been implemented through the federal government facilitating access to alternative drug supplies to
prevent shortages, and building the Critical Drug Reserve tosupport patients with COVID-19.
The CDR was established as a backstop for a limited period of time and was set to end March 31, 2022.
However, the CDR will be extended due to the prolonged pandemic.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
PÉNURIES DE MÉDICAMENTS / DRUG SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Drug shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic further exposed
vulnerabilities in the drug supply chain that impacted supplies of drugs required to treat
patients with COVID-19 and other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is
continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with Provinces and Territories, and key
supply chain players to mitigate impacts and move towards prevention of drug shortages where
possible.
KEY FACTS
• Four Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviatethe effects of shortages
related to COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. The provisions in these Interim Orders are
gradually being transitioned into permanent regulations.
• As of January 7, 2022, we have been able to de-escalate 44 shortages from criticalstatus, out of
a total of 58 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for our Government.
• Significant efforts were made early inthe pandemic to respond to drug supply disruptions. Four
Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages related to
COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. Some of the provisions in these Interim Orders have been
transitioned into permanent regulations while others will be by March 1, 2022.
• A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve was also created in collaboration with the provinces and
territories to provide a safety net of supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to
help prevent and minimize the impact of shortages.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s Role
Drug shortages can have a significant impact on patientsand health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring federal
leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and territories and
stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory
measures, and explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special DietaryPurpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repealed and replaced the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 that the Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020. On September 2, 2021, the provisions of the interim order were
published as permanent amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations, which will enter into force on
March 1, 2022.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention and Alleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to
COVID-19
This interim order, made by theMinister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduces new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allows the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allows the Minister to impose or amend terms and conditions
on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages(Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduces new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
such as the one recently established bythe United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in
Canada. The interim order also enables the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could
help Health Canada take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
On September 2, 2021, the provisions of the two interim orders above were published as permanent
amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations, which entered into force on November 27, 2021.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing DrugShortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages,and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocatingsupply where it is needed most.
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve was established in 2020, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demandor in shortage, including sedatives, pain
relievers, antibiotics,muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
HOME CARE
ISSUE
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personalhygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care. This situation
increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
KEY FACTS
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories
to strengthenour universal public health care system and public health supports, so all
Canadians can get the care they need no matter where they live.
Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to ensuring the primary care system is
positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as well as working to improve
the quality and availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the
quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces
and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles,
and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care
they deserve.
o Training up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and
mental health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of
Seniors in their work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing
an Aging at Home Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES:
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges that vulnerable
populations face in accessing the health care services they need, including access to home care
services.
• Our government increased funding to provinces and territories to help protect these
populations as part of our pandemic response, which included providing $740 million through
the Safe Restart Agreement. In the case of home care specifically, that additional funding built
on the $6 billion we are already providing over ten years to support better home and
community care, including palliative care.
• Budget 2021 recognised the need to support people at home, with a $90 million investment
over three years to launch the Age Well at Home initiative led byEmployment and Social
Development Canada. This will assist community-basedorganizations in providing practical
support to help low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we committed to strengthen our healthcare system and public
health supports for all Canadians, especially seniors, veterans, persons with disabilities, and
vulnerable members of our communities. This care can include care at or close to home, when
appropriate.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding was provided in 2020 to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in
home care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
Home Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of
these services, including home care, falls within provincialand territorial jurisdiction.
• Home care is not publicly insured under the Canada Health Act.
• While not mandatory, every PT offers home care programs and services, with variations across
each PT.
COVID Impacts on Home Care
In July 2021, the CanadianInstitute for Health Information highlighted the following impacts COVID-19
has had on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
The Omicron-dominated wave of COVID-19 will likely impact seniors’ services in a similar way to
previous waves. Many provinces and territories are experiencing health care staffing issues due to
workers being exposed to or testing positive for COVID-19. For example, the Winnipeg Regional Health
Authority announced that the cancellation of home care visits would be inevitable due to the volume of
staff absences.
2021 Platform Commitments
While not specific to home care, the Liberal platform includes a number of commitments to help seniors
stay in their homes, including:
• doubling the maximum amount for the Home Accessibility Tax Credit (15% of $20,000);
• expanding the Canada CaregiverCredit into a refundable, tax-free benefit;
• raising wages for personal support workers, including a guaranteed minimum wage of at least
$25/hour;
• training up to 50,000 new personal support workers; and,
• establishing an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
Other Relevant Budget 2021 Commitments
Budget 2021 committed to:
• supporting retirement savings for personal support workers, through funding of $27.6 million
over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-FreeSavings Account offered by the Service Employees
International Union Healthcare. The funding will support incentives for worker participation;
• increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022; and,
• establishing a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program ($960 million over three years, led by
ESDC). The purpose of the program is to help employment sectors design and deliver relevant
training, and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health
sector, this program will help to address the need for more skilled personal support workers
who provide care for Canadians at home.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and communitycare, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreedto an asymmetrical arrangement.
Shared Health Priorities Indicators for access to home and community care (Canadian Institute for
Health Information)
• Hospital Stay Extended Until Home Care Services or Supports Ready
• Caregiver Distress
• New Long-Term Care Residents Who Potentially Could Have Been Cared for at Home
• Wait Times for Home Care Services
• Home Care Services Helped the Recipient Stay at Home
• Death at Home/Not in Hospital
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, which are all posted publicly,
and lay out the initiatives that eachjurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s
population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, withthe goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a widerange of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition,
rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident
progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specificpopulation groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
ISSUE
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to
support residents and staff.
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, more than 50% of COVID-19
deaths in Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities (with a proportion varying from 0%
in smaller provinces and territories, to 42% in Ontario, 57% in Nova Scotia, and 72% in Québec.
Eighty percent of the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (53%) and Ontario
(27%). Even residents of facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation
and reduced services.
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government ofCanada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories
to strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all
Canadians can get the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces
and territories will be key to ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future,
including accessible health system data, as well as working to improve the quality and
availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the
quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces
and territories to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles,
and develop national standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care
they deserve.
o Training up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and
mental health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of
Seniors in their work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendationsfor establishing
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges in long-term care,
including gaps in infection prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, and visitation
policies.
• Our Government has made significant investments in long-term care since the pandemic began,
including up to $4B to help provinces and territories improve the standard of care in those
facilities.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we have reiterated our commitment to strengthen health care
for everyone including seniors and persons with disabilities; we know there is work to be done
to better meet long-term care needs.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to improve access to quality long-
term care and to support training and better wages for personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term carefacilities across the
country.
• Our Government welcomed the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian
Standards Association have launched a process to help address those issues.
• The Health Standards Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with
governments, stakeholders, and Canadians todevelop national standards will help inform our
ongoing discussions with provinces and territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in
long-term care.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of
these services, including long-term care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• While the Canada Health Act (CHA) covers physician and hospital services, long-term care is not
publicly insured under the CHA.
• While not mandatory, every PThas LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and
workforce.
Situation in LTC homes throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in long-term care have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19
pandemic. This includes issues related to infection prevention and control; HHR; compliance with
standards and regulations; infrastructure; and PPE. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered major COVID-
19 outbreaks and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in LTC and
seniors’ homes accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many stakeholders have released reports and
recommendations on addressingissues faced in LTC facilities.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates
of depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improvingLTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Healthcare Excellence Canada (formerly the Canadian Foundation for
Healthcare Improvement (CFHI) and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI)) released a report in
summer 2020 outlining promising practices in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term
care and retirement homes prepare for possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate their effects:
• Preparation;
• Prevention;
• People in the workforce;
• Pandemic response and surge capacity;
• Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and,
• Presence of family.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Due to the Omicron-dominated wave of COVID-19, LTC facilities across the country are facing a surge of
outbreaks among residents and staff. As of January 2022, many past restrictions are being implemented
again in LTC facilities. The most common restrictions limit most visitors from seeing residents, as well as
prevent residentsfrom leaving their facilities.
Despite the vast majority of residents in LTC facilities being double or triple vaccinated, certain facilities
are facing severe lockdowns. For example, in early January 2022, the Lakeside LTC facility in Toronto,
Ontario, had all of their residents isolated in their rooms, with some having been under lockdown for a
month.
While there have been some concerns about a low uptake ofCOVID-19 vaccines among LTC employees,
overall, the vast majority of residents and LTC workers have received two shots of a COVID-19 vaccine.
Most PTs prioritized LTC for third doses and residents and staff have since been offered a third shot.
Several provinces have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities, including Alberta,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of the ongoing
investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results.
Several provinces have already announced initiatives to address gaps in LTC, including:
• ON:
o Commitment to build 30,000 new LTC beds over 20 years
o Commitment to add 27,000 LTC staff by 2024/25
o Commitment to 4 hours/day of direct care by 2024/25
o Mandated vaccination for all LTC home staff by November 15, 2021
• QC:
o Transforming more than 2,500 LTC spaces into seniors’ homes by 2022, which are aimed
at providing living environments that are better adapted to seniors’ needs
o Created an accelerated training program to integrate up to 10,000 new personal
support workers in LTC facilities
o Committed to increasing wages of personal support workers in LTC facilities and
hospitals above $25/hour
Provinces are also experiencing staff shortages in a number of health care settings, including LTC, with
some citing the Omicron wave as more challenging than the initial wave of COVID-19. Certain facilities
are reporting that 30% of their staff are unable to work due to contracting COVID-19. This may be
exacerbated as many provinces and territories have brought in requirements for all health care staff to
be vaccinated, or be put on unpaid leave.
Government of Canada initiatives to support PT actions in Long-term Care
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with provinces and territories throughout the
COVID-19 pandemic to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has
responded to COVID-19 through a number of initiatives.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 builds upon previous COVIDmeasures taken by the Government of Canada to support
seniors and vulnerable populations across thecountry. Commitments included:
• $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standards for long-term care areapplied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90M over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development Canada
(ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based organizations in
providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement
saving for personal support workers.
• $960M over three years fora new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC. The
purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and connect
Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would
include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
Fall Economic Statement 2020
In addition to the $1B in funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilitiesacross Canada. The
goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks.
Participating teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to training
sessions and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training
program combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-
term care and home care.
In addition, the Government of Canada:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to
work with the provinces andterritories to ensure LTC facilities have access to the protection
they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least two doses.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low-income essential workers, which included front line workers in hospitals and LTC
facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories,
including to address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick-start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
Third-party standards development process
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care, and the health infrastructure and environmental design
of long-term care facilities. The process is being undertaken by expert standards development
organizations, and is taking place at arms-length from the Government of Canada with broad
engagement.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On June 10, 2021,CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly funded LTC homes
offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of these facilities can be public or private.
Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory. Overall, 54% of
LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (29% for-profit, 23% not-for-profit and 2% no breakdown) and
46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was transferred to the
province in April 2016. VAC now supports about 4,000 Veterans in over 1,150 provincially and privately
owned and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an enhanced level of
services and specializedprograms for veterans.
Since 2007, Revera Inc. is a wholly-owned operating subsidiary of the Public Sector Pension Investment
Board (PSPIB), an independent Crown corporation established under the Public Sector Pension
Investment Board Act in 1999 and is registered under the Canada Business Corporations Act. Public
Service Pensions are the responsibility of the Treasury Board Secretariat.
The PSPIB operates at arm's length from the federal government–i.e., it is not part of the federal public
administration. Its business affairs are managed by an 11-member Board of Directors, and investment
decisions are informed by a governance model outlined in the PSPIB Act.
PERSONNE-RESSOURCE / CONTACT: Sharon Harper (613-219-4286) // Alternate : Lindy VanAmburg
(613-858-1692)
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
DIGITAL SUPPORTS AND VIRTUAL CARE
ISSUE
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada put in place a range of
digital supports to help Canadians get the information, resources and care they need.
KEY FACTS
• In May 2020, $240.5 million was committed to support Canadian healthsystems to accelerate
their efforts to meet health care needs through virtual tools and approaches.
• Of this, $200M is supporting work in health systems to expand deployment of virtual care.
Funding also helped launch a suite of digital tools, includingan online self-assessment tool, a
mobile app to provide trusted information and resources and an online portal for access to
mental health and wellness supports.
• Budget 2021 provided an additional $62 million in 2021-22 for the Wellness Together Canada
portal for continued services to support the mental health and well-being of Canadians, bringing
the total investment up to $130 million to date.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians need access to readily available digital tools and resources to help during the COVID-
19 pandemic, including education, information, mental health and substance use supports,
alerts, screening tools.
• The Government of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories, vendors and
stakeholders to make these tools widely availableto Canadians and their families.
• This investment is supporting virtual care services so that Canadians can safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-conferencing, to have their health
needs met. It also means theycan continue to access specialist services throughout this time of
uncertainty.
• This investment also enabled creation of Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of
virtual mental health and substance use supports. By using the portal, individualshave free
access to different levels of mental health and substance use support 24 hours a day, 7 days a
week ranging from information and self-assessment tools, to support workers, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals for confidential textsession or phone calls with
instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to support the rapid uptake
and use of virtual care services.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada helps reduce the pressure on health systems
and provides Canadians with needed health services and authoritative information in a safe and
secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-conferencing, in addition to in-person visits.
• Our government has signed agreements with all provinces and territories, which will provide a
total of $150M to support enhancements to virtual care.
• In addition, we are providing up to $50M to Canada Health Infoway to develop pan-Canadian
standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing, and provide support to provinces and
territories to implement virtual care initiatives.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
• Privacy considerations were–and continue to be–front and centre at every stage ofthese
initiatives.
• Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve
personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is creating stress and anxiety for many
Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access totheir regular support networks.
• That is why the Government launched an online portal for mental health and substance use
supports: Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for individuals living in Canada to
access self-directed tools and find credible information on mental health andsubstance use
issues.
• It also connects individuals across Canada to peer support workers, social workers, psychologists
andother professionals for confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online counselling.
• The $62 million provided in Budget 2021 will ensure that these valuable services continue to be
available and aligned with the needs of Canadians in 2021-22.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONALPLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
• Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented time for Canadians, and are
continuing to explore how we can best take action in innovative ways.
• We will continue to work closely with provinces and territories and other partners to evaluate
needs and adapt digital supports as the pandemic evolves.
• Recognizing that virtual care and digital systems are powerful tools to improve access to health
care, the Government committed in its election platform to continue working with provinces
and territories to advance virtual care.
• Health Canada continues to monitor the Wellness Together Canada portal by supporting data
collection, reporting and evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
• On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools
for Canadians. As agreements are finalized and announced, they will be posted onCanada.ca.
• Of this, funding of $150M is flowing to PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to
virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote
patient monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-endsupports to integrate
these tools within existing digital systems.
• In addition, Canada Health Infoway has received up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards
on secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives
pursuant to the bilateral agreements. To date, Infoway has led consultations on standards with
all jurisdictions, with a view of identifying key priorities and informing the standards
development process.
• Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure. As part of this work, Health Canada is
supporting key organizations (Infoway, CIHI, CADTH, Centre for Digital Health Evaluation) to
provide insight on the implementation of virtual care.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020-June 20, 2021)
• Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, this
tool was available to all Canadians through theCanada.cawebsite and the Canada COVID-19
app (see below). While active, the self-assessment tool provided guidance over 1.6 million
times.
• Its intent was to complement PT self-assessment tools and empower Canadians to make
informed decisions on the appropriateness of COVID-19 testing and when to access other
resources like telehealth, primary care providers and emergency departments.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020-June 30, 2021)
• Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app provided an
integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and engage on issues related
to
COVID-19. While active, over 1 million people downloaded the app.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April 15, 2020)
• Wellness Together Canada is a free online portal for virtual mental health and substance use
supports, available 24/7 in all provinces and territories in both official languages. It is available
online athttps://ca.portal.gs/
• Depending on their needs, individuals living in Canada can access different levels of support,
ranging from information and self-assessment tools to connecting to peer support workers,
social workers, psychologists and other professionals for confidential text sessions or phone
calls. It also provides individuals living in Canada the opportunity to assess their mental health
and monitor their progress as they engage in their chosen care option.
• Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and connect
users to credible and appropriate promotion and prevention resources. They also help with
determining the level of need as well as self-managing mental health and substance use issues.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources promote
mental health as well as prevent poor mental health, mental illness and problematic substance
use. These will focus on enhancing protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and
social networks) and addressing risk factors (e.g., substance use, social isolation, discrimination
and stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential triage support, chat
sessions, phone calls and online counselling with peer support workers, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals.
• These supports complement, and do not replace, existing provincial and territorial services. Use
of Wellness Together Canada is closely monitored to ensure that tools and supports bestalign
with the needs of Canadians. New resources are continuously added to the portal to support
Canadians in addressing diverse mentalhealth and substance use needs.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
• The Government of Canada put in place an opt-in email subscription service called “Get Updates
on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to those Canadians who would like to be
alerted to updates on the COVID-19 situation in Canada.
CovidTrends through the WeatherCAN app
• CovidTrends, a tool from the Public Health Agency of Canada is available through Environment
and Climate Change Canada’s WeatherCAN app and provides Canadians with summary data
about COVID-19 that is specific to their area.
Health Canada continues to explore other digitaltools with a view to providing Canadians with the
information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
ISSUE
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemichas led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about the health
care system’s capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 confirmed an additional $5 billion in direct support to provinces and territories for
health care, including $4 billion to address backlogs, and $1 billion to support vaccination roll-
out.
• This investment supplements Safe Restart Agreement funding in 2020 of $700 million to help
ensure health care systems are ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable
Canadians–including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative care–who are at risk of
more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500 million in support and protection for people
experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has made investments that are helping provincial and territorial
health systems respond to the virus.
• The federal government is ready to respond with surge supports to provincial and territorial
requests for assistance, e.g., with health human resource support and the facilitation of mobile
health services capacity.
IF PRESSED ON HOW MODELLING IS HELPING TO INFORM DECISIONS ABOUT HEALTH SYSTEM
CAPACITY
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and
territories to track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital
beds and medical equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
• Governments continue to work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under
different modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support
from the Canadian Institute for Health Information.
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase system capacity and
meet projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries,
physically reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and
transferring patients to other settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments. Thiscan help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is
also complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also running
training exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing
to mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for Canadians
experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians–including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care–who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure areliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some
of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’
gradual return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential
services to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public
transit; and
• a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid sick leave
with access to 10 days of paidsick leave related to COVID-19.
2020 Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemic and to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testingsupplies
and supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE
and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as
maintaining the readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing a new Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces
and territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and
control to protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
• Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
• Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work with provinces andterritories to set new,
national standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified
conditions;
• Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
• Continuing to respond to Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a
COVID-19 context; and
• Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond to COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-
19 outbreaks andother large-scale emergencies.
Budget 2021
• Budget 2021 confirmed the Government’s continued support for provinces and territories,
including addressing urgent health care needs, with an additional $5 billion in direct support to
provinces and territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
• The funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care
system pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing
the backlog of medical procedures, patient care, and access to primarycare put on hold due to
the pandemic.
• A one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, is also being provided to the
provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
2021 Economic and Fiscal Update
On December 14, 2021 the Government of Canada tabled its Economic and Fiscal Update outlining
measures to finish the fight against COVID-19 and support Canadians through a robust recovery. The
Economic and Fiscal Update sets out a range of measures to support Canadians through the pandemic
including:
• $1.7 billion to increase access to rapid testing supplies across Canada;
• $2 billion to procure lifesaving COVID-19 therapeutics and treatments;
• $409 million to continue the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic response, including strengthened
surveillance, laboratory research, and emergency management operations;
• $599 million to support and maintain ongoing COVID-19 border testing capacity and operations;
and
• Up to $4.5 billion to respond to the Omicron variant,including border measures, and income
and business supports.
The update provides proposed funding for safer travel. It also provides funding to provinces and
territories through the Safe Return to Class Fund, and to First Nations for on-reserve schools, to improve
ventilation. It also commits additional investments to support ventilation projects in public and
community buildings such as hospitals, libraries, and community centres.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS ANDTRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The government continues to work collaboratively with provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Medicare and provide funding through transfers and bilateral agreements to
improve health care. In addition to the Canada Health Transfer, the Government provided over
$19 billion to provinces and territories last fiscal year to help them manage the pandemic, and
directly invested another $19 billion in health to support the fight against COVID, including
public health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests. This is in addition to targeted
funding provided to the PTs to support specific health care priorities, such as home care, mental
health, substance use, long term care and virtual care.
• As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing PTs with additional
pandemic support including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as support for primary
care, virtual care, long-term care, palliative care, mental health, and problematic substance use.
KEY FACTS
• InJuly 2021, our Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for
health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer to support PTs
to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and$1 billion to support vaccine
roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related healthsystem investments through the$19
billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care
services.
• Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and
territories improve the standard of care in their long-term care facilities
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the needfor resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to
provide pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED (GENERAL)
• From the beginning, the Government of Canada has been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight
COVID-19 and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2020-21, the Government of Canada provided $41.9 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada HealthTransfer (CHT), growing to $43.1 billion in 2021-22 and
$45.2 billion in 2022-23. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to another $19.1 billion in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 (e.g. $4 B to help
address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government made$19
billion in direct health investments in 2020-21 to support the fight againstCOVID, including
public health support and thepurchase of vaccines and tests.
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention
and control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER–PLATFORM COMMITMENT
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring Canadians have access to mental health
and substance use supports when and where they need them.That is why it is so important to
assist jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health and
substance use services.
• The Government of Canada has already made significant investments in this area, including $5B
to support mental health and substance use services through its bilateral agreements with
provinces and territories. The Government of Canada is committed to make significant
additional investments, with accountability and data to demonstrate results for Canadians.We
want to ensure that Canadians get the services and supports they need and that our
investments have a positive impact on their mental health.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories tostrengthen public health
care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 yearsin funds targeted to
support home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the
principles of asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec will also receive $902.4 millionas part of its share of the $4 billion, one-time top-up to
the CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXTSTEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
• The Government of Canada signed home and communitycare and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted
funding for home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend thoseagreements to flow funding
forthe $1 billion Safe Long-term Care Fund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23, and these agreements will also flow Budget 2021commitment of $3
billion over five years to ensure that standards for long-term care are upheld across the country
and that seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion, an increase of $28 billion from $42 billion in 2020-21, or from its
current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called for the CHT to grow by an annual
escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand in December 2021.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health
care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of
procedures caused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to
support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address
infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that
also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigationefforts.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable
funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are:
universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs
will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23.
Pandemic Funding:
In 2020-21, the federal government provided $19.1 billion, beyond the Canada Health Transfer, in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 (e.g. $4 B to help address
health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
In addition, the federal government made $19 billion in direct health investments in 2020-21 to support
the fight against COVID, including public health support and thepurchase of vaccines and tests.
As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing additional pandemic support
including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as, support for primary care, virtual care, long-term
care, palliative care, mental health,and problematic substance use.
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action inhome and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in healthinnovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHIand FPT
governments, to measure and report progress toCanadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate the renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-
23 to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on adetailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada tosupport provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live insafe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The government welcomes the news thatthe Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadiansto develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and supportPTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
QUESTION PERIOD NOTE
PRIMARY CARE
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that primary care plays a critical role in the delivery of
healthcare services for Canadians and isthe backbone to highperforming healthcare systems.
• In 2020, the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health systems to support
access to health care services, including primary care, through virtual approaches and digital
tools.
• TheGovernment of Canada is committed to improving access to high-quality primary care and
continues to work with provinces and territories in this regard.
KEY FACTS
• In Election 2021, our Government outlined continued support for primary and virtual care.
These election promises include:
o $3.2B to PTs for hiring 7,500 new doctors, nurses, and nurse practitioners;
o $6B to support the elimination of health system waitlists;
o $400M (over 4 years) to improve access to virtual care; and,
o Expanding access tofamily doctors and primary health teams in rural areas.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance of high-quality primary care and
acknowledges that many Canadians are still struggling to access the care they need in a timely
manner.
• In 2020, the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health system to support
access to health care services and meet the health care needs of Canadians through virtual
approaches and digital tools, including supporting access to primary care, particularly in
northern, rural and remote communities.
• Going forward, the Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces and territories
to support the delivery of and access to high-quality primary care in Canada.
IF PRESSED ONFUNDING FOR PRIMARY CARE
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to support the rapid uptake
and use of virtual care services, supported by $150M in funding through bilateral agreements.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada provides Canadians with new ways to access
the primary care services on which they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health
services during the pandemic.
• Through this investment, we have been able to work jointly with provinces andterritories to
develop secure messaging and information-sharing platforms, secure video-conferencing
technology, remote patient monitoring tools, ensuring access to COVID-19 and other labresults.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territoriesto identify innovative ways to support
improved access to high-quality primary care services.
BACKGROUND
Primary care is the backbone of high-performing healthcare systems. It serves a dual function in the
healthcare system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination function to ensure
continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians continue to struggle to access primary care.
In 2020, 14.2% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked aregular health care provider1.
Healthis a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction,the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance primary care
priorities.
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to primary care, particularly in northern,rural and remote communities. The adoption of
virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to sustain
access to primary care and specialist health services. On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced
$240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for Canadians. $150M of this fundingis being provided
toprovinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual services.
Health Canada has been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify ways in
which primary care system could be strengthened to:
• Ensure every Canadian has timely access to a family practitioner, and
• Leverage virtual care to support access to and delivery of high-quality healthcare, including
within the context of primary care.
In Election 2021, our Government outlined continued support for primary and virtual care. These
election promises include:
• $3.2B to PTs for hiring 7,500 new doctors, nurses, and nurse practitioners;
• $6B to support the elimination of health system waitlists;
• $400M (over 4 years) to improve access to virtual care; and,
• Expanding access to family doctors and primary health teams in rural areas.
1Statistics Canada.Table13-10-0096-16 Hasaregularhealthcareprovider,byagegroup
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1310009616
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING COVID-19
ISSUE
• The Governmentremains committed to supporting Canadians with their mental health and
substance use challenges as well as increasing access to services so that Canadians can get the
help they need, when they need it.
KEY FACTS
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed to a suite of measures to improve access to
quality and timely mental health supports:
o $45 million over two years to develop national standards for mental health, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and keystakeholders.
o $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote
mental health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the
COVID-19 pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First
Nations, Inuit and Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians.
o $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most
affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
o $10 million for the Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund to support community-based
projects across Canada.
o $13.5 million through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and partners for the
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental
health and substance use responses in the context of COVID-19.
o The Government has allocated an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for the Wellness
Together Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to
support mental health and well-being.
• As of January 10, 2022, over 2 million individuals across all provinces and territories have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portalin over 5.8 million web sessions since launch.
Approximately 39% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than
usual male engagement. Approximately 47% of individuals that have created an account are
under the age of 30, an agegroup that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health
services. For phone sessions, 88% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions,
85% of texters were highly satisfied with the service. Based on a client feedback survey, 28%
indicated they have no other options for support, if not for the portal.
KEY MESSAGES:
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to create stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians.
That is why the Government moved quickly to create Wellness Together Canada, which provides
24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed to a suite of measures to improve access to
quality and timely mental health supports:
o $45 million to develop national standards for mental health;
o $100 million to support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness
in populations disproportionately impacted by the pandemic;
o $50 million to support projects to address posttraumatic stressdisorder (PTSD) and
trauma in frontline workers;
o $10 million for the Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund;
o $13.5 million to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and
substance use responses; and,
o an additional $62 million for the Wellness Together Canada portal so that it can
continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support mental health and well-being.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH…
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to set
national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it.
• Health Canada is working with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and the Public Health
Agency of Canada to implement this commitment, and will promote engagement with a broad
range of stakeholders to inform standards development.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO SUPPORT THE MENTAL HEALTH OF INDIGENOUS PEOPLES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is having profound impacts on the mental wellness in Indigenous
peoples by magnifying existing mental health issues and inequities and creating new gaps and
needs.
• The Minister of Indigenous Services Canada announced an investment of $82.5 million in August
2020 to help Indigenous communities adapt and expand mental wellness services, improving
access and addressing growing demand, in the context of the pandemic.
• This builds on an approximate $450 million annual investment in mental wellness services for
Indigenous communities. These investments meet the immediate needs of communities by
supporting Indigenous-led suicide prevention, life promotion and crisis response, including
through crisis line intervention services, and enhancing the delivery of the culturally appropriate
substance use treatment and prevention services in Indigenous communities.
• Budget 2021 announced $597.6 million over three years for a distinctions-based mental
wellness approach for First Nations, Inuit, and Métis. This included the renewal of funding for
crisis lines and funding that supports essential mental health, cultural, and emotional support to
former Indian Residential Schools and federal Day Schools students and their families as well as
those affected by the issue of Missing and Murdered Indigenous Women and Girls.
• The Hope for Wellness Helpline provides immediate, culturally-safe, telephone crisis
intervention support for First Nations and Inuit, 24 hours a day, seven days a week. It is available
in English and French, and upon request, in Cree, Ojibway, and Inuktitut.
• Furthermore, we have committed to investing an additional $1.4 billion for distinctions-based
mental health and wellness strategies with First Nations, Inuit and Métis Nation partners.
• This investment would build on supporting Indigenous-led approaches to mental wellness and
efforts to address the growing opioid crisis and other substances of concern, the long-term
impacts of the pandemic on mental wellness in Indigenous populations and other priorities and
needs identified by Indigenous leaders, organizations, and communities.
IF PRESSED ON ESTABLISHING A NATIONAL THREE-DIGIT HOTLINE FOR MENTAL HEALTH…
• The Government of Canada is interested in implementing a national, three-digit number for
suicide prevention in Canada, supported by the unanimous vote in favour of the related motion
in this House in December 2020.
• The Canadian Radio-Television and Telecommunications Commission has launched a public
consultation to build a fulsome public record, which will help the Commission determine the
need for a three-digit number. It will also help identify barriers, and should any be identified,
determine how best to address them.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for families who may be especially vulnerable
to stress given the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
• As part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is
providing support to young people via phone, text and live chat. As well, Kids Help Phone
continues to develop new training tools to better equip their frontline staff and volunteers to
support youth.
• We are also investing $7.5 million in Kids Help Phone to support their mental health services for
children and youth during the pandemic.
• In addition to these actions, the Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to
provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access, which
includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS…
• Health care workers and other front line personnel are an important population for Wellness
Together Canada. That is why the portal features a dedicated text line and targeted mental
health and substance use supports for frontline workers and healthcare personnel.
• Frontline workers can also access free counselling, peer support groups, and a range of
completely anonymous, self-guided programming on the portal anytime at their convenience.
This includes co-designed mindfulness sessions for healthcare workers to reduce stress and
support coping with work/life demands.
• The portal also features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers and other
Canadians in accessing portal resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal based on client feedback to ensure
an inclusive portal experience, tailored to meeting the needs of varying age groups and diverse
populations.
• Phonecounselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, which includes 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness, which provides Indigenous
peoples with access to immediate mental health counselling and crisis intervention.
• The portal also supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote
areas, facing stigma or financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• ThePromoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON PREVIOUS INVESTMENTS…
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• As part of the Safe Restart Agreement in July 2020, $500 million was also provided directly to
provinces and territories for immediate mental health and substance use service needs.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help
Phone to provide mental health support for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund is investing $4.9 million annually to support
community-based mental health promotion projects and an associated Mental Health
Promotion for Children & Youth Knowledge Development and Exchange (KDE) Hub.
• The Government of Canada is investing$21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide
prevention service.
• Through Budget 2017, the Government of Canada committed to provide $5 billion over ten
years to provinces and territories to increase access to mental health and addictions services.
Five-year bilateral agreements are currently being renewed for 2022-23, providing opportunities
for provinces and territories to refocus their action plans for the next five years.
IF PRESSED ON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS
• October 26, 2021, the Prime Minister appointed Dr. Carolyn Bennett as the First Minister of
Mental Health and Addictions
• The Prime Minister released mandate letters on December 16, 2021, whichoutline the
objectives that each minister will work to accomplish, as well as pressing challenges they will
address in their role.
• The new Minister of Mental Health and Addictions has been mandated to ensure that mental
health care is treated as a fulland equal part of our universal health care system, working in
close collaboration with provinces and territories, and lead a whole-of-society approach to
address problematic substance use in Canada.
• To realize these objectives, Minister Bennett will deliver in the following commitments:
o Work with the Minister of Health, and with the support of the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Finance, to establish a permanent, ongoing Canada
Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high-quality, accessible and free mental
health services, including for prevention and treatment.
o Support the mental health of Canadians by developing and implement a comprehensive,
evidence-based plan, leveraging existing and new investments, including to:
-Develop mental health standards, with a particular focus on health equity;
-Sustain improved access to virtual mental health services with Wellness Together
Canada;
-Ensure timely access to perinatal mental health services;
-Implement a three-digit suicide prevention hotline; and
-Introduce a new fund for student mental health that will support the hiring of new
mental health care counsellors, improve wait times for services, increase access overall
and enable targeted supports to Black and racialized students at post-secondary
institutions across Canada.
o Support the Minister of Indigenous Services to co-develop and invest in a distinctions-
based Mental Health and Wellness Strategy to meet the needs of First Nations, Inuit and the
Métis Nation, includingculturally appropriate wraparound services for addiction and trauma,
suicide and life promotion and the building of treatment centres.
o Oversee the implementation of our investments in mental health interventions and
supports for people disproportionatelyimpacted by COVID-19, including health care workers,
front-line workers, seniors, Indigenous people, and Black and racialized Canadians.
o Work with the Minister of Families, Children and Social Development and Minister for
Women and Gender Equality and Youth to ensure mental health supports are accessible to
children and youth as they recover from the impact of the pandemic.
o Advance a comprehensive strategy to address problematic substance use in Canada,
supporting efforts to improve public education toreduce stigma, and supporting provinces and
territories and working with Indigenous communities to provide access to a full range of
evidence-based treatment and harm reduction, as well as to create standards for substance use
treatment programs.
o Require tobacco manufacturers to pay for the cost of federal public health investments
in tobacco control.
o Support the Minister of Public Safety to continue advancing Canada’s first-ever National
Action Plan on Post-Traumatic Stress Injuries, including additional investment to support the
health and well-being of first responders.
o Support the Minister of Veterans Affairs to ensure Canadian Armed Forces members
and Veterans have access to adequate mental health resources, services and training programs
tailored to their specific needs.
o With the support of the Minister of Rural Economic Development, explore pathways to
increase the accessibility of mental health services in rural areas.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• As of January 10, 2022, over 2 million individuals across all provinces and territories have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 5.8 million web sessions since launch.
• Approximately 39% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services ishigher than
usual male engagement.
• Approximately 47% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an age
group that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services.
• For phone sessions, 88% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 85% of
texters were highly satisfied with the service.
• Based on a client feedback survey, 28% indicated they have no other options for support, if not
for the portal.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the WTC portal by supporting data collection, reporting
and evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER
CANADA...
• The portal strictly adheres to all applicableprivacy and health information standards to maintain
the security and confidentiality of personal information. Vendors are bound by the privacy
protective terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
• For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING
GRIEF…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling by phone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals withthe
grief they face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/TerritorialMental HealthServices
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada has invested $130million over two years in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 toindividuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate accessto supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text forthose without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers thatprovide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources onthe portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader indeveloping and delivering virtual mental
health solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Healthand Substance Use
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can getfast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government has allocated $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop national standards for mental health, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so that
Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support. This language was interpreted broadly to
include standards for substance use due to its close relationship with mental health.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental
health and preventmental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit
and Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians.
• $50 million over two years,starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations,Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) forpractical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial roundof grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $333
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research. Thisrepresents more than 1700 projects
led by experts across the country.
CIHR is also leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101 research projects, representing a total
investment of $13.5 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel
composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated
through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
CIHR provided the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse with a $1 million directed grant to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providersin light
of COVID-19. This includes the creation of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of
the challenges faced by people who use drugs during the COVID-19 crisis toguide future policy
decisions.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health to better understand the wider impacts of the
pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of research articles based on the first cycle of
data was released in the Health Promotion andChronic Disease Prevention Journal on September 27,
2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020. The Canadian
Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of mental health indicators, and has been collected
for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for ongoing measurement of changes in mental
health of the Canadian population as the pandemic continues and as Canada recovers.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years inthe Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicideprevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis
Services Canada. By 2023, this service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365
bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or
chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising
public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of
research and evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca,
with the next report planned for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called
on the Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was
unanimously supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing
an action planthat alignswith the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made publicon February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of its release (by February 2025).
MODERNIZATION OF THE PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD (PMPRB).
ISSUE
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry has expressed concerns that theregulatory
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to
medicines. They have also filed legal proceedings. To date, the courts ruled to maintain most of
the Amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information. These
rulings are currently the subject of an appeal by the applicants and cross-appeal by the Crown.
KEY FACTS
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six
months due to considerationsassociated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2021,
stakeholders were informed of another6-month delay to July 1, 2022.
• These delays provide additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting
obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing them to continue to
focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains firmly committed to improving the access to and affordability of
quality medicines for Canadians.
• Canada hasamong the highest patented medicine prices in the world. Our Government’s focus
remains on helping Canadians access the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are
launched in major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are
well below those in Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Norway are examples of this.
IF PRESSED ON THE COMING-INTO-FORCE DATE…
• Health Canada is mindful of theongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the continued
need for focused and urgent response, which is why the Government delayed the coming into
force of the Amendments until July 1, 2022.
• This delay provides additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the changes introduced in
the Amendments, allowing them to continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic.
• A delay also allows the Government to further engage stakeholders on the application of these
Amendments within the changing pharmaceutical landscape.
IF PRESSED ON THE ATIP RELEASE OF PMPRB’S COMMUNICATIONS PLAN…
• While we are aware of concerns from some stakeholders that regulatory changes will adversely
impact drug launches in Canada, it is important to underscore that thereis no evidence to
substantiate such claims.
• Nevertheless, we recognize the pressing need to improve access and affordability of prescription
drugs, particularly for many Canadians who require them to treat rare diseases, where the cost
of these medications can be astronomically high.
• That is why our Government is working with all stakeholders and partners, including patients
with rare diseases, their families, and their caregivers–to launch a national strategy for drugs
for rare diseases.
IF PRESSEDON ACCESS TO COVID-19 PATENTED MEDICINES (Drugs and Vaccines)…
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines,
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its revised Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to
specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a
government-wide effort to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently
needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is
received from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a
vibrant domestic life sciences sector.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
IF PRESSED ON RECENT LITIGATION…
• The Government of Canada is pleased that the courts have upheld the majority of the
Amendments.
• As the matter is still before the courts, no furthercomments will be made.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH THE PMPRB GUIDELINES CONSULTATION PROCESS…
• The PMPRB had made revisions to its Guidelines in response to the significant stakeholder
feedback it received.
• The Board has decided not to proceed withthe changes that were proposed in the July 15, 2021
Notice and Comment.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB will seek to monitor and evaluate trends in the pharmaceutical
market before and after the implementation of the new framework through the Guideline
Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the government,
reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market. The
PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to
determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire into any
matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister.
Additionally, the Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the
Patented Medicines Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduledto take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Amendments include three mainelements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth, and medicine markets as Canada.
On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020 and
published its updated Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six months
due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were
informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021. In December 2020, stakeholders were
notified of another 6-month delay to July 1, 2021. In June 2021, the coming-into-force was delayed
further to January 1, 2022. More recently in December 2021, stakeholders were informed of another 6-
month delay to July 1, 2022. These delays provide additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the
new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing them to
continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic.
In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force ofthe regulatory amendments, on January 15,
2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definition of Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance. On April 16, 2021, the Board
revised its decision on the latter, reverting the compliance timeline back to two filing periods. Thus, the
operative datefor assessing compliance was shifted to July 1, 2022.
Following the third delay of the coming-into-force, on July 15, 2021, the PMPRB launched a Notice and
Comment on proposed amendments to the Guidelines. The PMPRB proposed to change the definition of
Gapmedicines, the references to the comparator countries and the international price tests for
Grandfathered medicines and their line extensions. No change to the compliance date was proposed,
thereby retaining the operative date for Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum
list prices as July 1, 2022. The deadline to submit feedback was August 31, 2021. On December 17, 2021,
the Board announced that it has decided not to proceed with the changes that were proposed in the
Notice and Comment.
Moving forward, the PMPRB is putting in place a Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (GMEP) to
assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any future adjustments required to ensure that they are
working as intended. The GMEP will be used to monitor four different areas: impact on prices, impact on
access, impact on the ecosystem and impact on PMPRB processes. For each of these four areas, the
PMPRB, in consultation with its stakeholders, will identify relevant indicators to monitor. Baseline
results (benchmarks) will be generated based on the years immediately preceding the coming-into-force
of the Amendments. Changes will be monitored on an ongoing basis and compared to the benchmarks
to identify and evaluate any relevant changes in the trends in the data.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review ofthe Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck downthe collection of confidentialrebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to upholdthe
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information.
On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed
for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating that
special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-
19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim Orders
will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the federal
Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is reflected in the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
QC chargingadults who do not receive a COVID vaccine
ISSUE
• On January 11, 2022, Quebec Premier Francois Legault told the press adult Quebecers who will
not get vaccinated and do not have a medical exemption will be forced to pay a health
“contribution”.
KEY FACTS
• Minister Duclos has said he personally thinks vaccination mandates will be required at some
point, but the decision would be up to the provincial and territorial governments (Globe and
Mail, 2022-01-08).
• Provinces and territories can raise revenues for their health care system by premiums and taxes.
• The Canada Health Act requires that all insured residents have access to insured health care
services on a prepaid basis, and on uniform terms and conditions.
• One's lifestyle, financial status, occupation, age, or other similar factors, should not restrict
access to prepaid necessary medical services, regardless of the cause of illness.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada acknowledges the right of provinces and territories to employ
various strategies to encourage their residents to be vaccinated, as a means of confronting the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• Provinces and territories have the jurisdiction to raise revenues for their health care system by
premiums and taxes. This can also include determining who will pay taxes/contributions and
who will not.
• Quebec’s plan would pose no Canada Health Act issues as long as non-vaccinated individuals
remain entitled to health services on the same terms and conditions as other Quebec residents.
• The Government ofCanada will consult with Quebec on this issue to determine the extent and
scope of these proposed charges.
• The Government of Canada will continue upholding the Canada Health Act to help ensure that
patients do not face barriers when accessing medicallynecessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In a Canadian Press article from 2022-01-11, Quebec Premier Francois Legault told the press adult
Quebecers who will not get vaccinated and do not have a medical exemption will be forced to pay a
health “contribution”.While there are few details available, the Premier was quoted as saying he
wanted it to be significant enough to act as an incentive to get vaccinated—more than $50 or
$100. (CBC, 2022-01-11). More details are set to be revealed in the coming weeks, butthere is no
indication how the contribution would be levied, and what the consequences are for non-payment.
Provinces and territories have the right and legal authority to raise revenues for its health care system
through taxation or other methods of financing such as premiums. Provinces and territories are also free
to determine who will pay premiums, who will be exempt from payment, and the rates at which
premiums will be levied. Furthermore, Quebec has broad powers to set penalties to enforce the
paymentof taxes, such as charging interest and garnishing provincial benefits.
Quebec would have to defend the nature of a tax that targeted a specific subset of residents if the
affected individuals or groups were targeted based on grounds protected under the Canadian Charter or
the Quebec Charter, such as religious beliefs.
Canada Health Act implications.
Under the universality criterion of the Act, all insured residents of the province/territory must be
entitled to the insured services provided by the provincial/territorial health insurance plan on uniform
terms and conditions. The accessibility criterion of the Act further states that access to insured health
services must be provided on uniform terms and conditions unimpeded by factors such a gender, age,
health status, or ability to pay. Therefore, residency in a province/territory is the only factor which
should be used to determine entitlement to insured health services.
If Quebec’s health tax were a prerequisite to accessing provincially funded health services, then there
could be a conflict with the Canada Health Act under the universality criterion or the accessibility
criterion which could lead to the levying of a discretionary penalty to Quebec’s health transfer. There
may also be user charge considerationsdepending on how payment of thecontribution is tied to access.
COVID ALERT APP
ISSUE
• COVID Alert App continues to be maintained by Health Canada and uses strong measures to
protect the privacy and confidentiality of data.
KEY FACTS
• On July 31, 2020, the Prime Minister announced that COVID Alert, a voluntary national exposure
notification app, was available for download. The app uses Bluetooth and mobile technology to
notify users that they have been in close contact with someone who later tested positive for
COVID-19.
• Health Canada continues to maintain the COVID Alert App and updates provincial dashboards on
a monthly basis and on an ad-hoc basis as requested.
• Since spring 2021, there have been no further investments in promotionor software
development.
• The government is committed to protecting the privacy of Canadians, while taking appropriate
steps to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
• Recent evaluations found the app’s impact on the pandemic was affected by low uptake.
Provinces and Territories (PTs) signaled they would not invest further in one-time keys (OTK)
delivery as their resources have shifted to vaccinations, rapid testing, and vaccine passports.
• As of January 15, 2022, more than 6.8 million (6,875,988) users downloaded the app, and more
than 55K (55,733) one-time keys were claimed in order to inform others of a possible exposure.
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID Alert app is part of a suite of tools and guidance developed by the Government of
Canada to help slow the spread of COVID-19.
• Since its launch, more than 6.8 million Canadians have downloaded the app and more than 55K
users who tested positive for COVID-19 have notified others of a possible exposure.
• The COVID Alert app has undergone a privacy assessment in line with the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner’s (OPC) Framework for the Government of Canada to Assess Privacy-Impactful
Initiatives in Response to COVID-19. The OPC was consulted on the app and published their
review of the app on their website.
• The Privacy Commissioner of Canada indicated that he supports the use of COVID Alert.
• The COVID Alert app does not disclose the identity of users, nor is location data or personally
identifiable information collected.
IF PRESSED
• The approach chosen was anexposure notification app as opposed to contact tracing as it
allows users to be notified of a possible exposure without using personally identifiable data or
location tracking.
• The app uses Bluetooth technology, does not record users’ locations and doesnot collect
identifiable information.
• The app has undergone a thorough privacy assessment, and all data provided to the app is
securely stored and protected.
BACKGROUND
On June 18, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced a national exposure notification app. On July
31, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced that the app, called COVID Alert, is available for
download by all Canadians.
The app, originally developed by the Government of Ontario, helps Canadians and public health officials
identify and isolate the spread of the virus more quickly. Use of the app is voluntary. If someone tests
positive for COVID-19, a health care provider will give that person a one-time key that that person can
enter into the app. Other users who have downloadedthe app and come in close contact with that
person are then notified, through the app, that they may have been exposed to the virus. The app
provides users with information on steps they can take to keep themselves and others safe. Health
Canada worked with the provinces and territories to customize public health information based on their
jurisdictions context.
COVID Alert is a collaboration between Health Canada, the Canadian Digital Service, Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada, and the Ontario Digital Service. It builds upon an exposure
notification solution developed by Shopify volunteers in coordination with the non-profit Linux
Foundation Public Health. It is also the work of a team of developers from across the country. The app
underwent a security review by BlackBerry and the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. It incorporates
Bluetooth technology provided by Apple and Google to log instances where users have come into close
contact without collecting personally identifiable information or tracking a user location. The Office of
the Privacy Commissioner has been engaged on the app and the Commissioner has indicated they
support the use of the app by Canadians.
While the app is national in scope, provincial and territorial health authorities are responsible for
providing the one-time keys to users who test positive for COVID-19. The one-time keys can then be
entered into the app to notify users of a possible exposure. Eight provinces and one territory have
onboarded and are able to issueone-time keys:
• Ontario on July 31, 2020;
• Newfoundland and Labrador on September 3, 2020;
• Saskatchewan and New Brunswick on September 18, 2020;
• Manitoba on October 1, 2020;
• Quebec on October 5, 2020;
• Prince Edward Island on October 8, 2020;
• Nova Scotia on October 15, 2020; and,
• Northwest Territories on November 26, 2020..
COVID-19 TRANSMISSION IN WHITE-TAILED DEER
ISSUE
• Environment and Climate Change Canada published a news release on Dec 1, 2021, about the
confirmed detectiIons of COVID-19 in free-ranging, white-tailed deer in Canada. Information on
the potential impacts and spread of the virus in wild deer populations is currently limited.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has confirmed the first detections of SARS-CoV-2 in free-ranging,
white-tailed deer in Canada.
• We are working collaboratively with provincial and territorial governments to assess the
situation with a view to prevent and reduce its spread.
• There has been no known transmission of SARS-CoV-2 from deer to humans at this time.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACTS TO HUMANS
• Information on the potential impacts and spread of the virus in wilddeer populations is
currently limited.
• Provinces and territories are responsible for the management of wild deer outside of national
parks.
BACKGROUND
• On November 29, 2021, the National Centre for Foreign Animal Disease (Canadian Food
Inspection Agency (CFIA)) confirmed the first detections of SARS-CoV-2 in three free-ranging
white-tailed deer in Canada. These deer were sampled in the Estrie region of Quebec. Samples
for SARS-CoV-2 were collected through a big game registration station in southern Quebec. The
World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) was notified.
• Recent reports have found that white-tailed deer in the US have tested positive for SARS-CoV-2,
indicating that deer can become infected with the virus from humans and also transmit it within
their population.
• Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC), CFIA, Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
and Parks Canada are working closely with federal, provincial, territorial, academia and industry
partners to assess the situation.
• CFIAhas worked with the provinces, other federal partners (ECCC and PHAC), academia and a
private practice veterinarian to complete a rapid qualitative risk assessment for SARS-CoV-2 in
white-tailed deer.
• The OIE considers COVID-19 an emerging disease and requires countries to investigate and
report animal cases.
• Current evidence suggests COVID-19 emerged from an animal source, however there is not
enough evidence to confirm the original source or explain the original transmission to humans
(which may involve an intermediate host).
• The susceptibility of various livestock, pet, and wild species to COVID-19 continues to be
studied.
• Recent susceptibility studies performed by the CFIA on domestic turkeys, chickens and pigs
confirmed that these animals do notspread COVID-19 to humans, animals or the environment.
CFIA scientists demonstrated that the virus does not replicate in domestic turkeys and chicken
and replicates poorly in domestic swine under laboratory conditions. The studies also showed
that these animals did not carry the virus in their tissues used for human consumption.
• Recent experimental studies conducted in cattle by various countries have also shown that the
virus replicates poorly in this species, is not found in tissues used for human consumption, and
does not spread to other animals.
• No natural cases of COVID-19 have been documented in any livestock species (mink not
included).
• The United States reported that tigers and lions in the Bronx Zoo tested positive for the COVID-
19 virus. They are believed to have been infected by one of the zoo keepers.
• Globally, there have been numerous reports of pets infected in households where owners are
sick with COVID-19 in various countries. Some cases have been reported in Canada.
CANADIANINSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
quickly develop and rollout safe vaccines and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and
return to a more normal life.
KEY FACTS
• As of October, CIHR and partners have invested nearly $300 million on 657 research projects
through 26 competitions.
• Funds include competitions such as the initial Rapid Research response (e.g. testing and
vaccines), the COVID & Mental Health Initiative, knowledge syntheses, and emerging research
gaps and priorities, and more recently expanding towards long-term health impacts.
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to findsolutions to this pandemic.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will bring the evidence we need to help
Canada address this public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THESE INVESTMENTS…
• Since March 2020, CIHR has moved quickly,working with partners, to invest more than $250
million in more than 560 research projects, which focus not only on vaccines, but also on other
therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics, and other COVID-19 related priority areas as
they emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Enabled by this investment, CIHR and partners across Canada collaborated to inform the
implementation of promising interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic
preparedness within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that CIHR’s investments towards COVID-19 research have committed to
supporting research that addresses theimpact of the pandemic on the well-being of Indigenous
Peoples, enhancing Indigenous community-led research and knowledge mobilization
• Further, these investments support research that will increase our understanding of persistent
and emerging gaps andpriority areas–including variants of concern and Long-COVID–that
continue to provide decision makers with rapid evidence from which guidance can be developed
and evaluated.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID-19
and is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented paceto mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
This included support for research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and
clinical management, and research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health response
and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
In April 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures against
COVID-19, which:
• enabled researchers toaccelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and
social countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences
on people, communities, and health systems;
• supported CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative;
• secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials to increase the
understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines, therapeutics, mental health
supports and clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR–in partnership with PHAC-funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), anational network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi-disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short-and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
CIHR has also invested in research to better understand and address the impacts of the pandemic on the
opioid crisis in Canada. With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHRfunded network) produced
national guidance documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines
related to prescribing, dispensing, and delivery of opioids and other narcotics during the COVID-19
pandemic to support people who use drugs.
CIHR also invested $2.1 million to fund the Operating Grant for the Evaluation of Harm Reductions
Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the Context of COVID-19. This investment is funding five
research grants that would address harmreduction approaches to the opioid crisis and to better
understand its compounding intersection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR and partners have invested
$3.4M to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with Healthcare Excellence Canada.
CIHR launched two Indigenous COVID-19 Rapid Research Funding Opportunities, with a total investment
of approximately $8 million, to support:
• bold, innovative, Indigenous community-led, strengths-based, solutions-focused research
projects that focus on a wide range of topics and use diverse methods, forming a strong base to
study and understand the experiences of First Nations, Inuit, Métis, and Urban Indigenous
communities throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
• enable rapid and timely distinctions-based, and Indigenous community-led research and
knowledge mobilization that is responsive to the unique circumstances and the current phase of
the COVID-19 pandemic in First Nations, Inuit, Métis and Urban Indigenous communities in
Canada.
Building on the priorities from CIHR’s COVID-19 investments, CIHR launched several additional rapid
response competitions to support emerging priorities. This includes investments:
• to support collaboration and rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge
and evidence across the full breadth of Canada’s COVID-19pandemic response (including public-
health measures, clinical management, health-system arrangements, and economic and social
impacts).
• to expand existing national and international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on
interventions to prevent, detect, manage, and/or treat COVID-19.
• to accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align
efforts in this field.
• in a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research to enable the rapid support of research
activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and population health threats
of emerging variants of concern.
• to address persistent evidence gaps such as variants of the virus, vaccine development and
uptake, testing, mental health, and the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic is having specific
impacts on women, racialized populations, and Métis, Inuit and First Nations Peoples.
CIHR also worked with partners to fund research on vaccine confidence to improve public understanding
ofvaccines and help Canadians to make evidence-based decisions, especially among populations that
are hesitant about vaccines, and to help improve vaccine uptake among populations experiencing
systemic inequities, conditions of marginalization, Indigenous (First Nations, Inuit, Métis and/or Urban
Indigenous) communities and/or among populations who are historically under-vaccinated.
CIHR also invested in 70 projects to improve our understanding of, response to, and recovery from the
co-occurring stressful andtraumatic events that stem from the current COVID-19 pandemic, and/or
restricted conditions associated with public health measures in Canada inresponse to the COVID-19
pandemic, with respect to children, youth and families in Canada.
CIHR is also investing in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative way in consultation with
partners. These investments are targeting key emerging research priorities and gaps to contribute to
Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapidway. The first competition was
launched on March 3, 2021 and the second was launched on July 27, 2021. The total funding amount
available for these competitions is approximately $119M.
Further, the Government of Canada, under the leadership of CIHR, is establishing a Centre for Research
on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies. The Research Centre will allow CIHR to support
real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the research community and
decision-makers alike, as wellas to invest $15 million per year to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has committed to work with theprovinces and territories to
increase the availability of high-quality mental health and addiction services for Canadians,
particularly in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
KEY FACTS
• Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research, over $146 million in research on addictions, and over$23
million dollars in research related to suicide prevention.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years todevelop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government continues to recognize the importance of funding innovative and timely
research that will improve health outcomes for people experiencing challenges relatedto
mental health and substance use.
• That is why, over the last five years, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, we
have invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural disorders research and over
$146 million in research on addictions.
• This includes investments of $13.5 million in the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative,
supporting research to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and
substance use responses in the context of COVID-19.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to developevidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
BACKGROUND
Mental Health
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural
disordersresearch. This represents more than 1700 projects led by experts across the country.
For example, CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS Open
Minds, a national project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care by
developing and testing evidence-informed approaches. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7
provinces and one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways
based on local context. For example, in Ulukhaktok, a remote community in the Northwest Territories
where professional service providers are not always available, the site is evaluating a model where lay
health workers are trained to provide support to youth in distress.
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $23 million dollars in research related to suicide
prevention. This research will lead to the discovery of new, effective solutions for better prevention.
The impacts of COVID-19 on mental health, substance use, and addiction are also being measured,
offering new evidence-based treatments and services to all Canadians. Recent findings identified that
substance use is increasing during COVID-19, and that treatment disruptions can cause relapse,
withdrawal and the restart ofrisky injection behaviours. While caregivers themselves and older
Canadians require additional supports.
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative (CMH)
The mental health of Canadians has worsened during the pandemic. In April 2020, CIHR launched the
CMH initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19. CIHR launched four funding opportunities under this initiative,
supporting a total of 101 projects for a total investment of $13.7Mfrom CIHR and partners, including:
• Rapid synthesis and knowledge-to-action funding opportunity for current evidence on mental
health service needs, delivery and guidelines, practice and related issues, in the COVID-19
context.
• $1M directed grant to the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care
providers in light of COVID-19.
• COVID-19 Mental Health & Substance Use Service Needs and Delivery fundingopportunity to
advance research on understanding rapid system transformations, developing innovative
adaptations of services and/or delivery and matching access to service with needs.
• $191K to four CMH grantees to accelerate rapid research related to emerging SARS-CoV-2
variants and generate timely evidence relevant to biological, clinical, health system, and public
health strategies.
Budget 2021
Highlights with respect to mental health research and services from Budget 2021 include:
• $45 million/2 years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, PHAC, and CIHR to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders.
Substance Use
CIHR supports researchers across Canada that aim to address various issues related to substance use
and has invested more than $146 in the area between 2016-17 and 2020-201.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
ResearchInitiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM is composed of four large regional nodes (British
Columbia, Prairies, Ontario, Québec/Atlantic) that connect researchers, service providers, decision
makers and people with lived experience from across Canada.CRISM is recognized as a critical network
that responds to the policy and evidence needs of decision-makers. CRISM activities include:
• The OPTIMA Study (2016-ongoing)–a national multi-site clinical trial involving over 270
participants recruited from all four CRISM Nodes to compare and evaluate two models of care
for the treatment of opioid use disorder. (~$4.4 million over 4 years).
• National Treatment Guideline–CRISM has developed a National Guideline for the clinical
management of opioid use disorder, which was published in the Canadian Medical Association
Journal on March 5, 2018.
• Implementation Research Program–On September 14, 2017, CIHR announced a new
investment of $7.5 million over six years for CRISM to conduct a national research program for
effective implementation of evidence-based interventions into clinical and community.
On April 16, 2021, CIHR launched CRISM Phase II: Regional Nodes funding opportunity. This funding
opportunity represents a total investment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to
build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number of Regional
Nodes to enhance geographic coverage while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding
capacity.
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamineuse and associated disorders.
Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
In November 2020, CIHR hosted the ‘Innovations in Virtual Care for Mental Health and Substance Use’
BBE in collaboration with theBritish Columbia Ministry of Health, British Columbia Ministry of Mental
Health and Addictions, and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. This BBE brought together
provincial policy and decision makers, researchers and implementation experts, non-governmental
organizations and other key stakeholders to gain an understanding of how virtual care can meet the
unique and evolving mental health and substance use service needs of British Columbia’s diverse
population during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
CONSIDERATIONS
• The Prime Minister released the new mandate letters on December 16, 2021. The Minister of
Health’s mandate letter included a commitment to work with the Minister of Mental Health and
Addictions and Associate Minister of Health and with the support of the Deputy Prime Minister
and Minister of Finance to establish a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer, to
help expand the delivery of high-quality, accessible and free mental health services, including
for prevention and treatment.
The Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health’s mandate letter named
many priorities that will support the mental health of Canadians and require timely and high-quality
mental health and substance use research, including:
• Develop mental health standards, with a particular focus on equity;
• Advance a comprehensive strategy to address problematic substance use in Canada, supporting
efforts to improve public education to reduce stigma, and supporting provinces and territories
and working with Indigenous communities to provide access to a full range of evidence-based
treatment and harm reduction, as well as to create standards for substance use treatment
programs.
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Issue
Safety is acentral consideration for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system assesses vaccines for safety, efficacy and quality before they are authorized. However, no health
product is completely risk-free.
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence inCanada’s immunization programs.
Key Facts
• A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for protecting the health and safety of
Canadians, ensuring public confidence in the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting
Canada-wide immunization efforts.
• The Government of Canada continues to work closely with partners to monitor vaccine safety.
Key Messages
• The safety and effectiveness of vaccines used in Canada is a top priority for this government.
• Canada’s monitoring systems for adverse events following immunization rapidly detects possible
safety issues and investigates them thoroughly.
• Like any medication, vaccines can cause side effects and reactions, also known as adverse
events. The benefits of vaccines authorized in Canada continue to outweigh their risks.
• As part of the Government’s continued commitment to openness and transparency, Health
Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada provide Canadians with weekly updates on
reported adverse events following immunization (AEFI) onCanada.ca.
Background
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are
expected mild reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild
headache), although serious and rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction). However, as the World
Health Organization states: “The fact that a vaccine was administered within a reasonable time period of
the occurrence of an event does not automatically suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the
event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence inCanada’s immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories (P/T), the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. Health
Canada reviews these reports and takes appropriate regulatory actions should new safety issues be
identified. In addition, PHAC receives and reviews reports of adverse events following immunization
from P/Ts through theCanadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS).
This system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness
and sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve vaccine safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to: the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC; and to the Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, a national web-
based platform that collects information about health events occurring after COVID-19 vaccinations, and
that provides weekly reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities.
It is notable that, as of mid-January 2022, more than 31 million people have received at least one dose
of a COVID-19 vaccine in Canada, with side effects reported for 0.048% of all doses administered, of
which 0.010% were classified as serious side effects (i.e. requiring hospitalization, life threatening,
and/or resulting in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or death).
PHAC and Health Canada continue to closely monitor the following safety signals:
• Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome following vaccination with the viral vector
vaccine AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccine. Health Canada has updated the
product monograph to include information about these very rare events of blood clots
associated with low levels of platelets following immunization.
• Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) in Canada following vaccination with the viral vector vaccine
AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccination. Data in Canada indicate a higher
number of reports than would normally be expected in the general population. Health Canada
has updated the AstraZenecaVaxzevria/COVISHIELD product monograph to include information
on GBS.
• Myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the lining
around the heart) following vaccination with COVID-19mRNA vaccines. Data in Canada indicate
a higher number of reports in younger people (i.e. less than 40 years of age) than would
normally be expected in this age group in the general population. Health Canada updated the
product monographs for both ModernaSpikevax and Pfizer-BioTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccines to include information around these risks.
BORDER MEASURES
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in response to
COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
Key Facts
• Between February 3, 2020 and December 21, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 72
Emergency Orders under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in
Canada, to reduce risks fromother countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen
measures at the border to reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
• As of December 15, 2021, the Government of Canada is advising Canadians to avoid all non-
essential travel outside of Canada.
Key Messages
• Canada’s border measures have been central to our pandemic response.
• Border measures are based on the available data, scientific evidence and monitoring of the
epidemiological situation both in Canada and internationally.
• In response to the Omicron Variant, we implemented a number of measures to protect
Canadians and increased our capacity to test more travellers arriving at our air border.
• The Government of Canada is working closely with airport authorities, airlines, and testing
providers and many other partners to increase capacity at airports, manage traveller flow and to
make sure that the testing protocol is as efficient as possible.
• These enhanced border testing measures have been implemented while the Canadian and
global medical, public health and research communities actively evaluate this variant. They will
continue to be evaluated and are subject to adjustment as required.
• As of December 15, 2021, the Government of Canada is advising Canadians to avoid all non-
essential travel outside of Canada. Travel restrictions continue to change around the world and
return options could become limited at any time.
• As of January 15, 2022, certain groups of travellers, who are currently exempt from entry
requirements, will only be allowed to enter the country if they are fully vaccinated. These
groups include international students who are 18 years old and older; professional and amateur
athletes; temporary foreign workers (outside of those in agriculture and food processing); and
essential service providers, like truck drivers.
• The Government of Canada will continue to use the latest data and scientific evidence to guide
decisions on border measures and travel advice and will continue to work with provincial and
territorial colleagues,Indigenous partners, and international counterparts to take these next
steps together.
• Our first and foremost priority remains the health and safety of all people in Canada.
If Pressed
• As of January 15th, 2022 unvaccinated, or partially vaccinated Canadian truck drivers arriving at
the border must be in possession of a valid negative pre-arrival COVID-19 molecular test
collected within 72 hours of entering Canada or a valid pre-arrival positive result for a COVID-19
molecular test collected at least 10 days and no more than 180 days before entering Canada.
• On arrival in Canada, unvaccinated or partially vaccinated Canadian truck drivers will be required
to quarantine at a suitable location for 14 days and take a test on arrival and day 8 of their
quarantine.
• Drivers will be required to present a suitable quarantine plan at the border and may be
instructed to proceed directly to deliver their load following certain public health guidance
(mask, distancing, no other stops, stay in truck where possible.).
• Unvaccinated or partially vaccinated drivers with a right of entry who enter Canada without a
valid pre-arrival test will be considered non-compliant and may be subject to enforcement
action.
• Fully vaccinated drivers that meet all other Entry and QIO requirements and submit all required
information into ArriveCAN, or show proof of vaccination to the CBSA Officer upon arrival at the
port of entry, remain exempt from the pre-arrival test requirements, quarantine and in-Canada
testing requirements.
• Unvaccinated or partially vaccinated American truck drivers are prohibited entry into Canada.
Those who are fully vaccinated remain exempt from the pre-arrival testing requirement, in-
Canada testing requirements and quarantine but are required to show proof of vaccination
through ArriveCAN or to the CBSA Officer upon arrival at the port of entry.
Background
Omicron
On November 26, 2021, the WHO confirmed a new variant of concern (VoC) and named it Omicron.
While preliminary surveillance data suggest milder disease severity compared to Delta, Omicron’s higher
transmissibility and ability to evade immunity will confer a substantial burden at the population level.
With a rapid rise in new infections, an equal or smaller fraction of cases that lead to severe outcomes
among a larger number of Omicron cases has exceeded the absolute number of cases resulting in
hospitalization and/or deaths previously caused by other variants, like Delta. The volume of
hospitalisations and burden on the public health and healthcare system is significant and could overtake
any potential benefit of Omicron’s observed reduced severity.
When Omicron first emerged, public health officials recommended imposing targeted enhanced border
measures on travellers arriving to Canada to slow the importation of the variant as more evidence
became available.
On November 26, the Government announced that foreign nationals who have travelled in South Africa,
Eswatini, Lesotho, Botswana, Zimbabwe, Mozambique, and Namibia within the previous 14 days will not
be permitted entry into Canada. On November 30, the Government added Nigeria, Malawi, and Egypt to
this list.
Canadian citizens, permanent residents and people with status under the Indian Act, regardless of their
vaccination status or having had aprevious history of testing positive for COVID-19, who have been in
these countries in the previous 14 days will be subject to enhanced testing, screening, and quarantine
measures. These individuals will be required to obtain, within 72 hours of departure, a valid negative
COVID-19 molecular test in a third country before continuing their journey to Canada. Upon arrival to
Canada, they will subject to immediate arrival testing. All travellers will also be required to complete a
test on day 8 after arrivaland quarantine for 14 days.
With evidence that the Omicron VoC is now present on every continent, these border measures were
discontinued on December 19, 2021, because there was no longer the data and public health rationale
to warrant a requirement for entry prohibitions on specific countries.
In response to the Omicron VoC, all fully vaccinated travellers arriving by air with a 14-day travel history
anywhere other than the United States (U.S.) and Canada are required to complete on-arrival testing.
Thesetravellers are required to quarantine while they await the results of their arrival test.
Fully vaccinated travellers who have only been in Canada and/or the U.S. in the last 14 days continue to
be subject to mandatory random testing with no quarantine requirement. However,these travellers are
asked to follow public health measures, including wearing a well-fitted and well-constructed mask,
maintaining a list of contacts for the 14 days after entry to Canada, and exercising extra precautions by
avoiding high-risk settings such as long-term care facilities.
Unvaccinated travellers, with right of entry to Canada or who meet an entry exemption, will continue to
be tested on arrival and day 8, and quarantine for 14 days.
As another layer of precaution, as of December 21, 2021, Canada lifted the pre-arrival test exemption
for Canadians taking short trips of less than 72 hours, meaning that the requirement for pre-arrival
testing is in place again for travellers and for trips of all durations, with limited exceptions.
These enhanced testing measures will be in place until at least January 31, 2022.
Additionally, as of December 15, 2021, the Government of Canada re-issued a Level 3 Global Travel
Advisory to encourage Canadians to avoid all non-essential travel outside of Canada at this time. This
advisory is in place until at least January 15, 2022.
Fully vaccinated travellers
Canada allows entry of travellers from any country for discretionary reasons if they have been fully
vaccinated with Government of Canada accepted vaccines at least 14 days prior to entering Canada, and
if they also meet specific entry requirements.
Fully vaccinated travellers must:
• submit all required COVID-19 information electronically into the free ArriveCANapp prior to
travelling to Canada;
• provide a negative molecular test result 72 hours before arrival or proof of a previous positive
test result taken between 14 and 180 days before arrival (as of January 15, positive tests from
10 to 180 days prior willbe accepted);
• be asymptomatic upon arrival;
• have a paper or digital copy of their proof of vaccination in English or French (or certified
translation);
• mask when in public spaces; and
• keep a list of contacts forthe 14 days after their entry.
Fully vaccinated travellers who have been anywhere other than the U.S. and Canada in the previous 14
days are subject to arrival testing and are required to quarantine until they receive their negative result.
Fully vaccinated travellers who have only travelled to the U.S. and Canada in the previous 14 days will
not have to quarantine upon arrival to Canada if they meet the criteria for entry; however, they must
show proof of a suitable quarantine plan in case the border services officer determines that they donot
meet the fully vaccinated exemption. Foreign nationals who are travelling for non-
essential/discretionary purposes must meet Canada’s definition of fully vaccinated in the context of
border and travel requirements in order to be eligible for entry. Travellers who are not considered fully
vaccinated may be denied boarding or entry.
Unvaccinated or partially vaccinated travellers
All partially or unvaccinated travellers must have a quarantine plan, and unless otherwise exempted, will
be required to quarantine for 14 days. They must also have a pre-departure, on-arrival and post-arrival
test completed.
All travellers will be allowed onward travel to their place of quarantine unless they are symptomatic, a
close contact of a positive case and/or they do not have a suitable place of quarantine upon arrival.
Travellers who do not have a suitable place to quarantine may be directed to a federaldesignated
quarantine facility.
Entry exemptions for unvaccinated travellers
As of January 15, 2022, Canada will movetowards a vaccination-based border control approach,
increasing alignment with domestic policies on COVID-19 vaccination.
In response to increased access to vaccination, a prohibition on entry for all unvaccinated travellers has
replaced the current prohibitions on entry. At this time, numerous cohorts previously exempt from the
entry prohibition will no longer be permitted to enter Canada if unvaccinated. This includes professional
and amateur athletes, international students over the age of 18, work permit holders (with few
exceptions), crew of commercial air and land conveyances, and foreign medical workers,among others.
Exemptions will remain in place for unvaccinated travellers exempted under national interest purposes,
compassionate entry, agricultural Temporary Foreign Workers, resettled refugees, asylum seekers, and
for foreign nationals less than 18 years of age entering with a fully vaccinated foreign national parent,
step-parent, guardian or tutor, or to reunite with family members in Canada, orto attend a listed
institution.
Those with a medical contraindication to a COVID-19 vaccination will also be permitted to enter. The
Chief Public Health Officer (CPHO) will continue to have the authority to permit entry for essential
service providers.
Enforcement
Compliance with border measures is subject to monitoring, verification and enforcement. If travellers do
not comply, they may be transferred to a quarantine facility, face fines and/or imprisonment. Maximum
penalties for failing to comply with anorder under the Quarantine Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation
and Other Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the power to issue tickets, with fines of up to $5,000 for different offences, to people who
do not comply with the Quarantine Act (this does not apply in Alberta, Saskatchewan and the territories
as these jurisdictions have not signed onto the contraventions regime).
In addition to the Quarantine Act, individuals can also be subject to fines, under Transport Canada’s
Aeronautics Act, for non-compliance in relation to mandatory requirements priorto boarding a flight to
Canada.
OAG Audit Report on the Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General tabled the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing
Orders report on December 9, 2021.
Key Facts
• The Audit ofEnforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, which covered the
period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021, focused on whether the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) improved its administration of mandatory quarantine orders to limit the
introduction of the COVID-19 virus and its variants in Canada.
• It also focused on whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures
introduced in early 2021 (such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and
quarantine of air travellersat government-authorized hotels pending the results of their on-
arrival COVID-19 tests.)
• This audit follows the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures which was tabled on March 25, 2021.
Key Messages
• Protecting thehealth and safety of Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the two recommendations from the Office of the
Auditor General from this audit. Work is already underway to address them.
• The Agency will continue to consider findings and recommendations from this audit report—
along with other audits, evaluations and further lessons learnedfrom the response to COVID-
19—to inform planning and better position Canada to respond to future global health events.
• The Agency’s approach to border measures, like its guidance and advice, has evolved during the
pandemic and will continue to be informed by the latest available scientific evidence,
epidemiology and expert opinion, which can change as new information becomes available. We
have seen this most recently in the changing border measures we have introduced to respond to
the evidence around the Omicron variant of concern.
If pressed
• The Agency is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better
follow up with travellers who are subject to border measures, and is implementing GBA+
considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and future programs on
diverse and vulnerable groups.
Background
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has directed the
implementation of border restrictions and border control measures to help prevent travellers from
spreading the virusthat causes COVID-19 in Canada.
OnMarch 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory quarantine
under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
This audit follows up on some of the findings of the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and
Border ControlMeasures, which covered the period from January 1, 2020 to June 30, 2020, and which
was tabled on March 25, 2021.
The objective of this audit was to determine whether PHAC implemented testing and quarantine
requirements for incoming travellers to limit the introduction and spread of the COVID‑19 virus and its
variants in Canada.
The Office of the Auditor General made tworecommendations to the Agency:
• That the Agency improve its enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit the spread of
COVID-19 by:
• improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better follow up with
travellers who are subject to border measures
• implementing GBA+ considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing
and future programs on diverse and vulnerable groups.
• That the Agency should:
• better use information on the outcomes of its referral for follow-up, to assess whether
its enforcement approach is working to limit the introduction of COVID-19 and its variants.
• Improve its capability to achieve a consistent enforcement approach to border
measures nationwide, including exploring other tools that could be used in all Canadian
jurisdictions.
Work is already underway toaddress these recommendations.
The agency plans to implement the followingactions to address the recommendations from this audit:
• It will review its IT systems and broad requirements to improve data and address issues related
to the consistency and quality of data used for matching test results to traveller records.
• It willimprove and streamline methods for assessing data quality internally.
• It will identify requirements for an automated tracking process as border measures evolve.
• It will continue to provide specialized training on gender and diversity considerations to
frontline staff at the border and at designated quarantine facilities, including training on bias
(launched in September 2021), security awareness andde-escalation.
• It will update its GBA+ analysis and incorporate results in the implementation of future border
measures.
• It will continue to engage with law enforcement partners, with a particular focus on seeking
information regarding referral outcomes for priority cases and utilize this information in its risk-
based approach to compliance and enforcement.
• It will assess additional mechanisms to enforce the Quarantine Act more consistently nationally.
• It will continue to engage with its provincial and territorial counterparts to ensure maximum
collaboration in following up with travellers, particularly those who have tested positive or are
in quarantine.
EFFORTS MONDIAUX
Issue
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, theWorld Health Organization (WHO), and the
Pan American Health Organization to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts on fighting COVID-19.
Key Facts
• Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss
COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as
the U.S.
• On June 3-4, 2021 the former Minister of Health participated in the G7 Health Ministers meeting
to discuss COVID-19 measures, global health security, clinical trials, digital health and
antimicrobial resistance with her counterparts.
• G7 Health Ministers endorsed a Declaration on these topics, in addition to the G7 Therapeutics
and Vaccines Clinical Trials Charter and most recently met on December 16, 2021, to discuss the
response to the Omicron variant.
• Canada also participated in the G20 Health Ministers Meeting and the G20 Finance and Health
Ministers Meeting, endorsing the establishment of a G20 Finance and Health Task Forcethat will
present options for the sustainable financing of global pandemic prevention, preparedness, and
response this year.
• Canada looks forward to continuing our engagement under the 2022 G7 German Presidency and
the G20 Indonesian Presidency to end the acute phase of the pandemic and improve global
preparedness against future health threats.
• On December 1, 2021, Canada and other WHO Member States agreed to launch a process to
develop a new convention, agreement, or other international instrument to enhance global
pandemic prevention, preparedness and response.
Key Messages
• Canada has contributed $2.5 billion to the global fight against the virus. This includes a total of
$1.3 billion to support the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator.
• During theG7 Leaders’ Summit on June 11-13, 2021, G7 leaders announced a collective
commitment of more than 2 billion vaccine doses to be shared with the world. Canada’s portion
of that is 100 million doses.
• The Prime Minister announced that Canada will donate the equivalent of at least 200 million
doses to the COVAX Facility by the end of 2022. This includes an immediate commitment to
contribute up to 10 million Moderna vaccine doses.
• Canada is also working with international partners to address barriers to equitable access of
vaccines by improving global capacity to manufacture them.
• The Prime Minister announced an investment of up to $15 million to COVAX Manufacturing Task
Force partners in support of establishing the South Africa Technology Transfer Hub. This
initiative will help build capacity to enable the development and production of mRNA vaccines
and technologies in the region.
• Canada supports the development of a new international instrument to improve multilateral
cooperation on pandemic prevention,preparedness and response. We also need to improve the
tools we already have by strengthening the World Health Organization and its existing core
international legal instrument for health emergencies, the International Health Regulations.
If Pressed–Mixed Doses
• The Government of Canada has successfully pursued a strategy to engage and encourage other
countries and international partners to recognize people in Canada who have received mixed
vaccine schedules as being ‘fully vaccinated.’
• Internationalrecognition of mixed vaccine schedules can support accelerated global access to
vaccines and slow the pandemic by expanding options for vaccination where supply is unstable,
and by using vaccine doses for public health objectives, rather than for travel documentation.
If Pressed–Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness
and Response
• Canada is pleased to see the important consensus reached at the recent Special Session of the
World Health Assembly to negotiate anew international instrument to improve multilateral
cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. This sends a critical message
to the global community on our collective will to take bold action to ensure we are better
prepared for the next pandemic.
• Our work should provide a foundation for action across all levels and sectors and integrate a
One Health approach so that we can effectively and collectively prevent, detect, prepare and
respond to future infectious disease threats.
• We also need to improve the tools we already have by strengthening the WHO and its existing
core international legal instrument for health emergencies, the International Health
Regulations.
• Canada is ready to collaborate with other countries to design this new instrument, should it be
legally binding or otherwise, so that it will have a real impact on the health and safety of people
around the world. We look forward to these discussions.
If Pressed–Findings from the International Pandemic Preparedness and Response Panel
• The Government of Canada welcomes the frank assessment and bold recommendations from
the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response.
• We thank the Panel members for their efforts to understand how a localized outbreak becamea
global pandemic, and to assess how the international system responded.
• One of the Panel’s important conclusions is that the world was not prepared for the pandemic
on a number of fronts. We know there are many lessons from this pandemic, which we are
learning from to adjust our approach.
• Canada is working with our international partners to improve global cooperation so that we
remain well-positioned and prepared to respond to future global health events.
Background
Canada has participated in variousG7 and G20 discussions on ways to strengthen our collective
capacities to prevent, prepare and respond to future health emergencies. This has also contributed to
enhancing bilateral relationships with key partners such as the U.S. and the EU. On June 3-4,2021 the
former Minister of Health participated in the G7 Health Ministers
meeting to discuss COVID-19 measures, global health security, clinical trials, digital health and
antimicrobial resistance. G7 Health Ministers endorsed a Declaration on these topics, in addition to the
G7 Therapeutics and Vaccines Clinical Trials Charter. Most recently, G7 Health Ministers met on
December 16, 2021, to discuss the response to the Omicron variant. Germany has assumed the
Presidency of the G7 for 2022.
At theCanada-European Union (EU) Leaders’ Summit in June 2021, the Prime Minister met with his EU
counterparts and announced a Canada-EU dialogue on health to enhance collaboration inthe post-
pandemic environment.
Recently, G20 Health Ministers Meeting met on September 5-6, 2021 with discussions focussed on
healthy and sustainable recovery, building One Health resilience, coordinated and collaborative
response, and equitable access to vaccines, therapeutics and diagnostics, and the impact of mental
health and wellbeing. The joint G20 Finance and Health Ministers Meeting was also held on October 29,
2021, focusing on the financing of global pandemic prevention, preparedness and response through the
commitment to establish a Finance and Health Task Force to exploreoptions to strengthen existing and
develop new financing mechanisms. This work is expected to be concluded with recommendations to
Finance and Health Ministers in October 2022.
Indonesia has assumed the G20 Presidency for 2022. This year’s theme is Recover Together, Stronger
Together. The agenda for the health track will focus on Reshaping the Global Health Architecture.
Canada looks forward to working with our G20 partners to support the objectives of the Presidency,
building resilience for the global health system, harmonizing global health protocol standards, and
expanding global manufacturing and knowledge hubs for pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response.
Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s impact across sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers
are engaging regularly with their international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs,
Agriculture and Employment. The G20 Leaders Summit was held October 30-31, and included
commitments to support the achievement of a 70% vaccination rate in all countries by mid-2022,
support for the Access to COVID Tools Accelerator (ACT-A), as well as the continuity of health services,
including for sexual and reproductive health and mental health.
On November 18, 2021, the Prime Minister attended theNorth American Leaders Summit in
Washington D.C. along with U.S. President Joseph Biden and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López
Obrador. The three leaders agreed to several commitments, including re-envisioning and updating the
North American Plan forAnimal and Pandemic Influenza; shoring-up critical medical supply chains;
supporting the Global Health Security Agenda; and continuing trilateral engagement under the North
American Drug Dialogue to address the ongoing opioid overdose crisis. The Prime Minister also held his
first in-person bilateral meeting with President Biden, and reaffirmed the commitments in the February
2021 Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership. The Prime Minister and President agreed to
launch a Canada-U.S. Working Group on Supply Chains, tasked with producing a progress report in the
next 120 days; and to develop a renewed vision for joint management of the border, applying lessons
learned from the pandemic.
In addition, senior and technical staff of the Health Portfolio have engaged with their counterparts in a
variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally (e.g., World HealthOrganization (WHO), U.S. Centers
for Disease Control and Prevention, Global Health Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert and
ResponseNetwork), to exchange information and best practices that have informed and enhanced
Canada’s response to COVID-19.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has successfully pursued a strategy to engage and
encourage other countries and international partners to recognize people in Canada who have received
mixed vaccine schedules and/or extended dose intervals as being ‘fully vaccinated.’ The first priority for
engagement has focused on national health and scientific decision-making authorities with significant
impact and influence and with whom we have close, trusted relationships, including the U.S. and the
U.S. CDC, United Kingdom, the European Union and the European Centres for Disease Control. Following
these engagement efforts, we have confirmed thatat least 40 countries, including the United States, the
United Kingdom, Germany, France, Japan and Australia, as well as the vast majority of popular sun
destinations, consider individuals who have received mixed doses as fully vaccinated. This list is not
exhaustive, and we continue to monitor and engage as needed. PHAC has also engaged with the WHO,
given its global influence. On December 16, 2021, WHO released interim recommendations for
heterologous COVID-19 vaccine schedules. WHO recommends a flexibleapproach to mixed vaccine
schedules and considers two mixed doses of any EUL COVID-19 vaccines to be a complete primary
series. We have also successfully added supportive commitments to recognizing mixed dose recipients
in recentG7 and G20 Health Declarations.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
On May 12, 2021, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR) published
their final report and recommendations. The report concludes that the pandemic was a result of
“failures and gaps in international and national responses” at every juncture of preparedness for, and
response to, COVID-19. As a result, “February 2020 was a lost month when steps could have been taken
to curtail the epidemic and forestall the pandemic.”
The IPPPR suggests that the failure of countries to respond was a combination of two things: “they did
not sufficiently appreciate the threat and know how to respond”; and, “in the absence of certainty
about how serious the consequences of this new pathogen would be, “wait and see” seemed less costly
and consequential than concerted public health action.”
The IPPPR also notes that stronger leadership and better coordination at national, regional and
international levels were needed to more effectively respond and recommenda more focused and
independent WHO, a pandemic treaty and a Senior Global Health Threats Council that would be led at
the Head of State and Government level. Among its recommendations, the Panel also recommends
greater investment in preparedness and stronger accountability mechanisms to spur action. They call for
improved surveillance and for the WHO to have authority to rapidly publish information and to dispatch
expert missions.
Canada has consistently supported a comprehensive evaluation and review process of the global
response to COVID-19. Efforts to strengthen WHO and Member States preparedness and response
capacities are also being discussed in several international fora including the WHO, G7, G20, Global
Health Security Initiative, Global Health Security Agenda and North American Plan for Animal and
Pandemic Influenza. Canada recognizes the importance of continued bilateral and multilateral
discussions on how to enhance health security and to effectively address risks.
Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response
On November 29 to December 1, 2021, the World Health Assembly convened for a Special Session for
only the second time in the organization’s history. The Assembly adopted a milestone decision,“The
World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response”, which was co-sponsored by upwards of 120 Member States,
including Canada. The decision establishes an intergovernmental negotiating body (INB), open to all
Member States, to draft and negotiate a new WHO convention, agreement or other instrument, with
the expectation that this work will proceed with the intention of creating a binding instrument, while at
the same timekeeping the door open to other forms of non-binding agreements should the INB decide.
In discussing a new instrument, Member States reiterated several themes, including:
• equity, particularly the importance of timely and equitable access to medical countermeasures;
• universal health coverage and primary health care in strengthening health systems to support
both prevention and response;
• the importance of a whole of government/whole of society approach; andthe need for a One
Health approach
Member States will convene the first meeting of the INB by March 1, 2022, to elect Member State co-
chairs and vice-chairs for the process, agree on working methods, and begin the development of the
substantive elements and a working draft of the new instrument. A second meeting will be held by
August 1, 2022, to start discussions on a zero draft and confirm whether the international instrument
will be legally binding.
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
Issue
In the fall of 2020,the Minister of Health announced an independent review of the Public Health Agency
of Canada’s Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). The final report was published on July
12, 2021. In addition, the Auditor General’s Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border
Control Measures was released in March 2021, and includes a recommendation relating to GPHIN.
Key Facts
• GPHIN analysts conduct a daily review of more than 3,500 articles in nine languages (Arabic,
Farsi, English, French,Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
• Outre le rapport quotidien du RMISP, si un article répond aux critères précis liés à une menace
pour la santé publique, le RMISP produit ce qu’on appelle« alerte »-un courriel contenant un
article mis en évidence sur un incident sanitaire d’intérêt potentiel, qui est envoyé aux abonnés
internationaux et nationaux.
• Ces alertes ne comprennent pas d’évaluation des risques ou de recommandations quant à des
mesures ou à des interventions particulières.
• Le rapport final pour l'examen du RMISP découlant de l’examen fournit des recommandations
pour se préparer à d’éventuels événements touchant la santé et améliorer les outils de
surveillance de la santé publique à l’ASPC. Le rapport comprend des recommandations pour
améliorer les opérations du RMISP et la collaboration avec les partenaires de la santé publique.
Le rapport présente des facteurs à prendre en considération pour mieux intégrer les
programmes de surveillance et d’évaluation des risques de l’ASPC afin qu’elle soit mieux placée
pour détecter les événements sanitaires éventuels qui pourraient toucher la population
canadienne et y réagir.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety ofCanadians, and we are
committed to improving Canada’s early warning system for potential emergencies, including
pandemics.
• That is why, in 2020, this government requested that an Independent Review Panel undertake a
review of the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN).
• The Panel’s recommendations were publicly released in July 2021, and will be used to support
PHAC in determining how this global public health surveillance system can continue to best
serve Canadians and the international community.
If pressedfor details on the final report
• The final report provides recommendations on the role and purpose of GPHIN, its organization
and flow of information, andtechnology considerations going forward.
• The recommendations relate to a range of topics, from international and domestic partnerships
to advice on the next generation of public healthintelligence systems, and the future of
surveillance tools.
• The Independent Panel confirmed that GPHIN was never shut down. GPHIN provided early
warning of COVID-19 to Canadian public health professionals, and continues to operate as
Canada’s event-based public health surveillancesystem.
Background
About GPHIN
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open-source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public healthagencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance.
GPHIN’s products and services are freely available to eligible users. GPHIN is an important contributor to
the World Health Organization’s (WHO) EpidemicIntelligence from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
• an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing
to automatically collect and filter data from multiple open sources; and
• a professional multidisciplinary team of analysts that reviews and refines the filtered data, and
also monitors additional open sources to scan for signals of potential public health threats.
Every day, the GPHIN system automatically collects about 7,000 articles, halfof which are filtered out
before the GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of the remaining 3,500 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
Articles are collectedfrom open sources, and are validated and assessed for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report. This report goes directly from GPHIN to Canadian public health
practitioners at the federal, provincial, territorial and regional levels, including senior management at
PHAC and other government departments.
In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential public
health threat, GPHIN issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlightedarticle about a
health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic
subscribers. Such alerts do not include a risk assessment or recommendations for specific actions or
responses.
Independent Review of GPHIN
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health requested an independent review of GPHIN. This review
considered:
• the capabilities of the existing system;
• its role in detecting and informing PHAC’s response to COVID-19, and in global and domestic
public health surveillance;
• opportunities to improve the system; and
• the future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next generation
of intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of Canada
is well positioned to respond to future public health events.
The Panel members, Margaret Bloodworth (Panel Chair), Dr. Paul Gully, and Dr. Mylaine Breton, were
selected based on their collective expertise in public health, governance, health security, and
intelligence.
The finalreport was published online on July 12, 2021, and the 36 recommendations therein relate to:
• the role and purpose of GPHIN, including articulating its role and functions as part of PHAC's
public health surveillance activities, extending its partnershipsand subscriber outreach, and
regularly evaluating its processes and products;
• organizational considerations and flow of information, including establishing a new Risk
Assessment Office at PHAC, linking GPHIN to PHAC's broader surveillance activities, andtraining
and recruiting GPHIN staff; and
• technology, such as incorporation of additional social media and other new sources of data,
platform improvements, and advice on the next generation of public health intelligence
systems.
Auditor General Report on Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
titled COVID-19 Pandemic: Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures. This included an audit of PHAC’s and the Canada Border Services Agency’s pandemic
response. The report notes that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC
quickly mobilized and adapted its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potentialpublic health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed.
• PHAC officials confirmed that by the end of December 2019, other international sources had
already shared news of the virus and therefore it was unnecessary for GPHIN to issue an alert.
• GPHIN did issue daily reports about the new virus to Canadian partners (including federal,
provincial, and territorial public health officials) starting on December 31, 2019, and thus
performed its key function of providing early warning within Canada.
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after which the
number of alerts decreased significantly.
• PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of, and response to,
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert
reporting.
• In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure
was put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
In response to the Auditor General’s recommendation, and the recommendations from the GPHIN
Independent Review, PHAC will make further improvements to GPHIN, including the alert process.
POST COVID-19 CONDITION
Issue
The typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness is twoto six weeks. However, some patients have
described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months after acute illness.
Key Facts
• Most COVID-19 cases recover from their illness within two to six weeks. However, some people,
includingthose with milder illness, may experience symptoms for weeks or months after their
initial diagnosis. These longer-term symptoms are often referred to as “post COVID-19
condition”, “long COVID” and “post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection”. The condition can
affect both adults and children. Affected individuals are commonly referred to as COVID-19
long-haulers.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that some of the Canadians who contracted COVID-19 are facing a
long recovery. While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building,
there is still much that is unknown about post COVID-19 condition.
• The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international experts to build
the evidence base on post COVID-19condition to support Canadians experiencing longer-term
effects.
• Increasing our understanding of COVID-19, including its longer-term effects, is key to addressing
and recovering from the pandemic. To that end, since March 2020, the Government of Canada
has invested more than $250 million in critical areas of COVID-19 research.
• The Government of Canada is investing an additional $119 million in COVID-19 research,
including funding further studies to better understand post COVID-19 condition.
If pressedon the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition in Canada
• There are currently insufficient data available to determine the percentage of people
experiencing post COVID-19 condition in the Canadian population.
• The World Health Organization estimates that10-20% of people who had a COVID-19 infection
will later experience one or several symptoms past 12 weeks after their initial diagnosis and/or
after their symptoms first appeared. Based on the global evidence reviewed by the Public Health
Agency of Canada,that proportion could be as high as 50%.
• The studies reviewed by the Agency so far predate the last wave of infections associated with
the Omicron variant. There is currently no data available linking infections with the Omicron
variant with longer-termeffects and post COVID-19 condition.
• Studies that follow COVID-19 patients over time, from their initial diagnosis, are underway in
Canada. These studies will provide high quality evidence upon which to make decisions.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with the provinces, territories and other
domestic and international partners to monitor and better understand the long-term effects of
COVID-19.
Background
The typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness is two to six weeks. However, some patients have
described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months after acute illness. The
World Health Organization (WHO) has developed the first version of a clinical case definition of post
COVID-19 condition inadults, which reads as follows:
“Post COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of probable or confirmed SARS CoV-2
infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19 with symptoms and that last for at least 2
months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis. Common symptoms include fatigue,
shortness of breath, cognitive dysfunction but also others and generally have an impact on everyday
functioning. Symptoms maybe new onset following initial recovery from an acute COVID-19 episode or
persist from the initial illness. Symptoms may also fluctuate or relapse over time.”
We know that post COVID-19 condition can also affect children. The WHO is in the process of developing
a separate clinical case definition for children, which they expect tocomplete in the coming months.
The range of symptoms reported is broad–they can vary from mild to severe, fluctuate in intensity and
can sometimes disappear and reappear. Post COVID-19 condition can affect both adults and children,
regardless of the severity of their initial COVID-19 symptoms in the acute stage, although studies in
adults have reported that those who were hospitalized or needed intensive care during recovery areat
increased risk of experiencing longer-term effects
The World Health Organization estimates that 10-20% of people who had a COVID-19 infection will later
experience one or several of these symptoms past 12 weeks after their initial diagnosis and/or after
their symptoms first appeared. Based on the global evidence reviewed by PHAC, that proportion in
adults could be as high as 50%.
It is anticipated that post COVID-19 condition will have a long-term impact on public health in Canada.
The Government of Canada is actively monitoring the latest research and information related to the
long-term effects and symptoms of COVID-19, as well as engaging with academic experts and policy
makers from across the country, and internationally, to help inform public healthaction.
National Surveillance and Research
Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested approximately $250
million in more than 400 COVID-19 research projects. These projects span everything from diagnostics
and potential treatments to public health responses and communication strategies.
The CIHR will support additional research related to variants and other COVID-19 priorities through an
ongoing competition that will invest up to $119 million more in COVID-19 research.This includes
funding prospective studies that will help increase our understanding of the long-term outcomes of
COVID-19. These studies include the Canadian COVID 19 Prospective Cohort Study (CANCOV), which will
provide a comprehensive evaluation of early to 1-year outcomes in 2,000 patients with COVID-19
infection and their family caregivers. This study will be conducted in Quebec, Ontario, Alberta and
British Columbia.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration forInfectious Disease
Preparedness, an alliance of research funding organizations on a global scale that facilitates rapid and
effective research responses to support new, urgent scientific priorities related to COVID-19.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is maintaining a living systematic review of worldwide
studies on the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition, including the prevalence of the various symptoms
and sequelae, and the proportion of individuals reporting difficulties in being able to carry out usual
activities.The review is updated on a quarterly basis. The latest prevalence estimate of post COVID-19
condition among people diagnosed with COVID-19 is around 50%.Many of the included studies had a
small sample size and were assessed as having a high risk of bias. PHAC will continue to update this
systematic review quarterly to capture results from high-quality studies currently underway. The studies
reviewed by PHAC so far predate the last wave of infections associated with the Omicron variant. There
are currentlyno data available linking infections with the Omicron variant with longer-term effects and
post COVID-19 condition.
There is still a lot that we do not know about post COVID-19 condition in children. The prevalence of this
conditionin children is not yet well-established, with high variability in estimates being observed from
only a small number of studies. Evidence from a limited number of European studies have yielded some
wide-ranging results, suggesting the proportion of children with 1 or more symptoms 4 weeks or more
after the initial COVID-19 infection ranges from 2% to 58%. These estimates will become more precise as
more studies are conducted and new evidence emerges.
PHAC and Statistics Canada are currently developing a population-based survey on post COVID-19
condition, scheduled to be launched in February or March of 2022. This survey will address a key
evidence gap, as we currently do not know the percentage of the Canadian population experiencing post
COVID-19 condition.PHAC is also working on the development and implementation of other public
health surveillance activities with partners such as Statistics Canada, academic and professional
organizations and the provinces and territories. PHAC is also reviewing the evidence from countries that
have implemented large population-based studies with data collection related to Post COVID-19
condition. A recent population-based survey conducted in the UK reported a prevalence of Post COVID-
19 condition between 3.0-11.7%. The study was conducted among a sample of over 20,000 study
participants 2 years old and over, residing in private households who tested positive for COVID-19. Some
potential reasons for a higher prevalence rate observed in the PHAC systematic review compared tothe
prevalence estimates from the UK population-based survey may include.
• The majority of the population included in the PHAC review were adults, for which preliminary
evidence has shown to have a higher prevalence of long term effects due to COVID-19
compared to children.
• The UK survey was conducted in individuals in private households; whereas in the PHAC review,
studies did not exclude based on dwelling type;
• Because the UK study did not provide information on study participant characteristics, such as
whether they were hospitalized for acute COVID-19 infection, it is possible that the UK study
included fewer participants who required hospitalization for their initial COVID-19 infection,
unlike in the PHAC review where the majority of participantswere hospitalized; and
• The UK prevalence estimates, though based on a very large sample, only included participants
from the UK. The PHAC review included participants from multiple countries, across various
continents.
Additional research is also being undertaken to gain a better understanding of possible risk factors
associated with post COVID-19 condition and possible interventions to prevent the condition. Currently,
it is uncertain whether COVID-19 vaccination can prevent post COVID-19 condition. PHACis undertaking
systematic reviews on risk factors and prevention strategies in collaboration with the Alberta Research
Centre for Health Evidence, Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health and subject matter
experts, and in partnership with Canadians living with post COVID-19 condition. The initial findings will
be available in early 2022 and these systematic reviews will be updated regularly to capture new data
being published.A living systematic review on post COVID-19 condition care models is also being
conducted by the University of Sherbrooke, through funding from CIHR.This systematic review aims to
identify the best-available global evidence about care models, including pathways, and structured
clinics.
The evidence from worldwide and Canadian studies will help to determine the burden and urgency of
this public health priority, as well as what mitigation measures are needed to support the recovery of
those experiencing post COVID-19 condition. It will also help with anticipating and planning for longer-
term burdens on healthcare systems, patients and theirfamilies, and society at large.
Support for Canadians with Post COVID-19 condition
Canadians suffering from post COVID-19 condition who are unable to work because of their symptoms
may beeligible for support through Employment and Skills Development Canada’s Employment
Insurance program and the Canada Pension Plan Disability benefits.
The provinces and territories are responsible for the management and delivery of health care services
fortheir residents, including rehabilitation and treatment services for people with post COVID-19
condition. There are a number of public and private clinics that provide care to individuals with post
COVID-19 condition across Canada, with a clear focus on interdisciplinary care.
PHAC is also engaging with national and international experts involved in clinical and health services
research studies in order to inform public health decision-making and the development of evidence-
based clinical guidelines. PHACis also regularly updating the web content on Post COVID-19 condition
available onCanada.ca.
PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Issue
COVID-19 has highlighted new and existing issues that make it a challenge to collect, share, and use
health data for thebenefit of Canadians. 'Health data' includes public health, health system and
population health data. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report Pandemic Preparedness,
Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada create a pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy (pCHDS) to address foundational issues related to the collection, sharing and use of
health data in Canada. In his mandate letter released December 16, 2021, the Minister of Health was
tasked with working with the provinces and territories to create a world-class health data system for
Canada. To achieve this, the Government of Canada is following the advice of the Auditor General and
creating a pCHDS through federal, provincial and territorial partnership with advicefrom an Expert
Advisory Group.
Key Facts
• There are persistent and important gaps in data collection, sharing and use that cost lives and
negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making.
• These gaps reduce healthoutcomes for Canadians and contribute to health inequities.
Key Messages
• Reliable, timely and relevant health data are crucial to inform decision-making during public
health events and to improve health outcomes for Canadians in the longer term.
• The Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces, territories and Indigenous groups,
is developing a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy to improve Canada’s collection, access,
sharing and use of health data and lay the foundation for a world-class health data system.
• This work is being informed by expert advice and will assist Canada’s public health response to
COVID-19, equip Canada to deal more effectively with futurepublic health events, and achieve
better health outcomes for Canadians through thebetter use of health data.
If pressed on public engagement
• Canadians should have a say in how their health data is used, so consultation and engagement
are key for this work.
• Our Government will be engaging broadly on the strategy to hear Canadians’ views on how
health data can serve them better, both during and between public health events.
If pressed on privacy
• Our government knows that Canadians value the privacy of their health information and want it
to be appropriately safeguarded.
• Canadiansalso expect that their data would be used to inform public health measures, stimulate
research on new treatments and improve our health care systems.
• The person-centred approach our government is taking to strengthening health data collection,
sharing and use recognizes Canadians’ rights to have their personal information protected while
benefiting from the insights that can be generated by sharing it.
Background
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
Health data (which encompasses public health, healthsystem and population health data)
are collected by numerous organizations and governments. However, as SARS and COVID-19 have
demonstrated, there are persistent and important gaps in data collection, sharing and use that cost lives
and negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making. Overall,
these impacts reducehealth outcomes for Canadians.
In December 2020, the Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces and territories, began
developing a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report,
Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada
create a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (pCHDS) to address foundational issues related to health
data in Canada. The November 2021 Speech from the Throne underlined the importance of improving
data collection across health systems to inform future decisions and ensure the best possible health
results for Canadians. In the December 2021Office of the Chief Public Health Officer report, A Vision to
Transform Canada’s Public Health System, it was recommended that Canada create a world-class public
health system and noted that the pCHDS is an actionable idea to improve public health tools.The
December 2021 Mandate Letter for the Minister of Health acknowledged the need for a health data
system that is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected, and comprehensive. In the letter the Minister
was tasked with taking steps to create aworld-class health data system.
The goal of the Strategy is to identify commonly-supported, implementable solutions to address
persistent barriers to the use of critical health data. Once identified, and when supported by provinces
and territories, Canadians will bebetter served by their own health data, accelerating the
transformation towards person-centred health care systems and strengthening public health decision-
making during and between health emergencies.
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Engagement
Canadians should have a say on how their health data is used, therefore engagement is key for this
work. PHAC will be reaching out to stakeholders, Indigenous groups and the public to inform them of
the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) process of co-developing a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
and to seek their input on how health data can serve them better, both during and between public
health events.
Informed stakeholder consultations started in summer 2021 and continued into fall 2021. Further
engagement will be planned as the strategy evolves. In addition, a presentation to the Conference of
Deputy Ministers of Health is targeted for spring 2022.
Expert Advisory Group
A pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Expert Advisory Group (EAG) was established in fall 2020 to
provide advice and guidance to inform F/P/T co-development work. Specifically, the EAG provides advice
on:
• strategic direction for the use of health systems, population, and public health data to improve
the health of Canadians;
• principles toguide the creation, collection, storage, and use of data; and
• a practical and phased roadmap for the implementation of measures to sustainably address
areas of greatest opportunity and impact.
On June 17, 2021, the EAG published their first report describing the systemic barriers to effective
health data managment. Their second report, published on November 30, 2021, contains
recommendations on how to overcome these barriers and build a health data foundation in Canada that
optimizes the use of health data for better health outcomes and more effectivepublic health event
management.
While the report does not directly recommend the creation of a new health data agency, it does
highlight the need for stronger and more coordinated governance models and legislation to improve
health care delivery, health outcomes and public health response measures.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) Health Data Investments
PHAC is working directly with ISC to find alignment and synergies with Indigenous health data initiatives
announced in Budget 2021. Access to reliable and culturally relevant data on Indigenous peoples is
critical to building a complete portrait of Indigenous lived experiences, unmasking inequalities, and
ensuring delivery of effective policies and programs. Engagement on the pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy will enable alignment with Indigenous-led data strategies, which can further self-determination
by providing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation governments and organizations with the data they
need tosupport their communities.
REVIEW OF THE PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA’S RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada conducted a performance audit focused on whether the
Public Health Agency of Canada was prepared to respond to a pandemic.
Key Facts
• The Auditor General tabled this audit report to Parliament and publicly released it on March 25,
2021. In response, PHAC prepared a Management Response and Action Plan.
Key Messages
• There are many lessons wehave learned from COVID-19, in Canada and around the world.
• The Government of Canada’s response to COVID-19 evolved throughout the pandemic based on
the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert opinion.
• We will strengthen our pandemic preparedness in Canada, building on the lessons learned.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will incorporate learnings from the pandemic into its plans
and test them as appropriate. The provinces and territories will be critical in this work.
If pressed on the Auditor General’s report on PHAC’s preparedness
• The Auditor General recognized that the Public Health Agency of Canada rapidly mobilized,
adapted and responded to the evolving COVID-19 situation, and worked persistently to help
Canadians andrespond to their needs.
• Areas for improvement were identified to help us become better prepared for future health
events, including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration of border and quarantine measures.
• Work is already underway to respond to the recommendations from this audit:
o The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorialpartners to
build on the information sharing, management and technology improvements already
underway.
o The Agency has also restructured its border and travel health program to better respond
to the changing pandemic and increase its focus on compliance.
• Regarding early warning processes, the Agency will work to make further improvements to the
Global Public Health Intelligence Network, or GPHIN.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is responsible for preparing for a wide variety of potential
health emergencies, including but not limited to pandemics. The Office of the Auditor General (OAG)
identified several key elements of preparedness for improvement including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration ofborder and quarantine measures.
On emergency plans, recognizing that existing plans provided a framework to guide the current
response and thatimprovements are always possible, PHAC will incorporate learnings from the current
pandemic into its plans and future exercises to test and validate these plans, in collaboration with
provincial and territorial colleagues and key stakeholders.
PHAC hassimilarly committed to updating and testing the Health Portfolio Strategic Emergency
Management Plan and Health Portfolio Emergency Response Plan within two years after the end of the
pandemic, to enhance preparedness to respond to future public health threats and emergencies. In
updating and testing these plans, PHAC will work with provincial and territorial partners to reflect
shared responsibilitiesfor public health emergencies.
With respect to public health surveillance, monitoring and early warning processes, PHAC is taking
similar steps to respond to OAG recommendations and others. Specifically, the OAG report
recommended PHAC appropriately utilize its GPHIN monitoring capabilities to detect and provide early
warning of potential public health threats, and in particular, clarify decision making for issuing alerts.
PHAC has committed to a number of actions to address the recommendations for further improvements
to GPHIN, taking into account both the OAG audit report and the recommendations from the
Independent Review of GPHIN which include improving and streamlining the decision-making process
for the issuance of GPHIN alerts and other GPHIN products and processes.
Long-Term Funding for the Public Health Agency of Canada
Issue
To enable Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada (GC) was required
to make significant short-and medium-term investments to increase Public Health Agency of Canada’s
(PHAC) capacity as the lead federal Agency in the COVID-19 response. A PHAC renewal exercise, which is
already underway, will help inform longer-term financial needs.
Key Facts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) 2021-22 Main Estimates were$8,751.1 million
which represents a net increase of $8,109.3 million over the 2020-21 Main Estimates of $641.8
million. The main reasons for these increaseswere due to temporary funding to address the
COVID-19 pandemic, including: for medical research and vaccine deployment; to acquire
protective gear and medical equipment; surge capacity; border and travel measures and
isolation sites; and other critical capabilities. Funding for 2022-23 is expected to be in the same
range as 2021-22.
• The Economic and Fiscal Update 2021 announced an investment of $409 million in 2022-23 to
support ongoing COVID-19 pandemic response activities such as strengthened surveillance,
laboratory research, emergency management operations, and human resources capacity. This
builds on previous investments for the Agency’s surge capacity of $660 million, as announced in
the Fall Economic Statement 2020.
Key Messages
• We recognize the importance of ensuring that the Public Health Agency of Canada has the
resources required to sustain its pandemic operations and advance a broad range of public
health issues.
• We are working to ensure that immediate resourcing needs are addressed, while also examining
the level of resources needed over the long term.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is undergoing a renewal exercise that will help guide the
longer-term financialneeds of the Agency. It is focused on lessons learned and positioning the
Agency for the future.
If pressed
• The government is investing significantly to ensure that PHAC has the immediate funding it
needs to respond to the pandemic in the short-term.
• Many of these investments will continue to benefit Canadians into the future.
Background
Given the unpredictable trajectory of the pandemic, PHAC’s expanded role—and most of the new or
enhanced activities—is likely to be needed for the foreseeable future. Several recent internal and
external reviews have provided insights on activities that are essential undertakings of a highlyeffective
public health agency.
Since the start of the pandemic, the Agency has assumed new functions to support Canada’s pandemic
response, pushing it beyond its traditional mandate. While some of these new functions are time-
limited, others will need to continue for the foreseeable future. PHAC will not be in a position to snap
back to pre-pandemic operations, but will be poised to learn from the lessons of COVID-19.
Preparatory activity to support the renewal of the Agency has already begun. The PHAC renewal is a
rigorous exercise that will identify current and future public health needs and priorities. It will also guide
longer-term PHAC financial needs and funding requests. However, the renewal exercise will take time
andwill involve many stakeholders.
Long-term funding decisions for PHAC are anticipated to support the transformative change that many
experts have called for, both before and during the pandemic. Long-term stable funding would enable
PHAC to apply lessons from the pandemic, and tackle some long-standing issues, such as modernizing
systems to improve data interoperability, negotiating stronger data sharing protocols with provinces and
territories and strengthening the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile, among other priorities.
COVID-19 PROOF OF VACCINATION SUPPORT TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
Issue
As per the December 14, 2021 Fall Economic Statement, the Government is proposing to launch a
COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund to compensate provinces and territories for costs to implement a
COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program.
Key Facts
• In its 2021 election platform, the Liberal Party of Canada committed to “launch a COVID-19
Proof of Vaccination Fund to support provincesand territories who implement a requirement
for proof of vaccine credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public
spaces”.
• On October 21, 2021, the Prime Minister stated that “there will be a standardized proof of
vaccination certificate that as we said, we will be picking up the tab for at the federal level”.
• All provinces and territories across Canada have now implemented some form of domestic proof
of vaccination requirement within their jurisdiction (e.g. to enter certain non-essential
businesses or events, or for healthcare workers).
Key Messages
• Helping Canadians get safely back to the activities and interactions they value most is a priority
for the Government of Canada.
• As announced in the Fall Economic Statement,the Government is proposing to launch a COVID-
19 Proof of Vaccination Fund.
• The intent of the Fund is to compensate provinces and territories for costs to implement a
COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program, including coststo issue proof of vaccination
credentials to their residents, and to maintain these credentials as long as needed.
• The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories to support
the issuance of a standardized pan-Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential,
providing a secure way to prove one’s vaccination status.
• The standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential helps Canadians access businesses
and services in a safe and responsible way, protecting our communities and the economyfrom
the impacts of more restrictive public health measures.
Background
To date, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada has led the proof of vaccination credential
initiative for the Government of Canada with respect to international travel. The Public Health Agency of
Canada has contributed to the initiative by supporting proof of vaccination credential issuance by
provinces and territories, including the development of the standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination
credential. Provinces and territories, and in some cases, Indigenous communities and organizations, are
the custodians of public health data–including personal health information of residents.
Canada has developed and published a “pan-Canadian specification” that allows provinces and
territories to ensure their proof of vaccination credentials are digitally verifiable, follow a common look-
and-feel, have the same data fields, and are generally recognizable as proof of vaccination credentials
issued in Canada. This increases the likelihood that the credentials will be accepted as legitimate proof
of vaccination across Canada and at international borders, ensuring Canadians and others vaccinated in
Canada can access non-essential business, public spaces, and canresume travel internationally.
Since the end of November 2021, all provinces and territories have been issuing proof of vaccination
credentials consistent withthe pan-Canadian specification.
Proof of vaccination requirements
Proof of vaccination credentials are being used to support the implementation of vaccination mandates,
which aim to protect those that visit public settings and to control the transmission of COVID-19.
Scientific evidence shows that COVID-19 vaccines are highly effective at preventing hospitalization and
death,and also effective at preventing infection.
While emerging evidence may be attributed to a broad array of factors, proof of vaccination
requirements appear to at least initially increase vaccination rates in the jurisdictions where they are
implemented. For example, Alberta saw an approximate increase of 150% in first doses administered
compared to the week prior to the proof of vaccination announcement.
Saskatchewan reported a 100%-120% increase over the weeks following their announcement. New
Brunswick also experienced large increases in daily doses administered in the weeks following their
announcement (~50%) and implementation (~150%) largely driven by increases in first doses. An
approximate increase of 250% in first doses took place in New Brunswick following their proof of
vaccination implementation. Reviews in the U.S. also indicate that vaccine mandates are generally an
effective strategy forincreasing vaccination coverageamong health-care workers. In Québec, a policy
for health care workers implemented in some sectors of the health care system requiring vaccination or
regular testing has been associated with a rise in vaccine coverage from 50% to 90% for the first dose of
COVID-19 vaccines.
COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund for provinces and territories
A 2021 Liberal Party of Canada (LPC) platform commitment proposed a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination
Fund to support provinces and territories who implement a requirement for proof of vaccination
credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public spaces.
The LPC platform commitment was for a $1 billion fund; however, the Government is proposing a total
fund amount of $300 million. The $300 million amount reflects the Government of Canada’s estimate of
what provinces and territories have spent to issue proof of vaccination credentials, as well as anticipated
costs to maintain the credential programs as long as needed going forward (e.g. as long as proof of
vaccination is required for international travel and to support domestic public health measures).
Additional details will follow regarding the apportionment of the fund across provinces and territories,
and expectations associated with the receipt of funds.
Indigenous engagement
In addition to collaboration with provinces and territories, the Government has engaged with
Indigenous communities and organizations to ensure proof of vaccination credentials meet the needs of
Indigenous people. Since May 2021, a series of engagement sessions have been held with First Nations,
Inuit and Métis partners, including communities that are close to the U.S. border, and those involved in
frequent cross-border travel for cultural, work or familial purposes. Engagement will continue as
required as the standardized COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination rollsout across the country.
The objectives of this engagement were to ensure that Indigenous partners are part of the conversation
at an early stage, to provide informational updates, and hear considerations and potential issues that
may arise for these partners. Concerns expressed included: issues of equity, cross-border movement
(including Canada-U.S.), accessibility, data sovereignty / vaccination reporting gaps, international
recognition of Canada’s mixed-dose schedule and communications.
In order to ensureIndigenous community members can access the standardized COVID-19 proof of
vaccination credential, some Indigenous communities and organizations have done significant work to
incorporate data on Indigenous vaccinations into provincial and territorial vaccination systems. We will
work with provinces and territories to determine how this funding can effectively support costs incurred
by Indigenous communities related to proof of vaccination credentials.
VACCINE INJURY SUPPORT PROGRAM
Issue
TheGovernment of Canada has established a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program
(VISP). The program ensures that all people in Canada who have experienced a serious and permanent
injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after
December 8, 2020, have access to fair and timely financial support. The new VISP brings Canada in line
with a growing number of countries that have such programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
Key Facts
• Atotal of $75 million in funding has been earmarked for the first five years of the program.
• The actual overall cost of the program will be dependent on the volume of claims and
compensation awarded over time. To date, $32.3 million over 5 years is allocated to RCGT
Consulting Inc. for administration and claim payments. Funding will also be provided to the
government of Quebec for the continued delivery of its provincial vaccine injury compensation
program.
• Remaining funds will be made available to adapt to the demand for financial support.
Key Messages
• Health Canada authorizes vaccines for use in Canada on the basis of their demonstrated safety
and effectiveness at protecting against severe illness, hospitalization and death. Health Canada
and the Public Health Agency ofCanada continue to consider that the benefits of vaccination
with a vaccine approved in Canada outweigh the potential risks.
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring that Canadians who support public health
by being vaccinated are supported should they experience a serious and permanent injury as a
result of vaccination.
• The pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP) was launched on June 1, 2021,
and is being administered independently by RCGT Consulting,which oversees all aspects of
claims intake, assessment, and reporting. The program ensures people in Canada who
experience a serious and permanent injury after receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine,
administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020, have access to fair and timely financial
support.
• The province of Quebec is continuing to administer its existing provincial program for people
vaccinated in Quebec. Individuals vaccinated in all other provinces and territories are eligible
under thepan-Canadian program.
If pressed on timelines to process a claim
• As the independent third-party administrator of the VISP, RCGT Consulting oversees all aspects
of claims intake and assessment.
• Timelines for a determination of eligibility and supportwill depend on the nature and
complexity of the claim. To receive compensation through the VISP, a causal relationship
between the injury and the vaccination must be objectively determined.
• The causality assessment process requires the third-party administrator to retrieve all relevant
medical records from the province or territory or from the medical institution where the patient
received care. This process can take several months.
• Payments for those who have a serious and permanent injury from a vaccine will be retroactive
to the date of the injury.
If pressed on number ofclaims received
• The program is administered independently by RCGT Consulting. Periodic public reporting began
on December 15, 2021, and program statistics are publicly available on their website.
• As of their last reporting, 400 claims have been received by RCGT and fewer than 5 claims have
been approved. Due to privacy reasons, RCGT cannot disclose specific figures at this time due to
an insufficient number of cases.
• It is expected that RCGT will update program statistics on a bi-annual basis, occurring around
December 1 and June 1 of every year, with the possibility for earlier updates, as needed.
If pressed on timing of program launch
• The need for a vaccine injury support program was identified as a gap in Canada’s immunization
system and recognized as an area of importance by the Government of Canada, the provinces
and territories.
• The pandemic underscored the need to remedythis gap, especially as Canada was preparing to
launch the national COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
• The new program brings Canada in line with a growing number of countries that have such
programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
If pressed on the type of support available
• Eligible individuals may receive income replacement indemnities; injury indemnities; death
benefits; coverage for funeral expenses; and reimbursement of eligible costs, such as otherwise
uncovered medical expenses.
• Individuals who have experienced serious and permanent injury are eligible for support under
this program, consistent with Quebec’s vaccine injury compensation program.
Background
On December 10, 2020, the Prime Minister announced the creation of a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine
Injury Support Program (VISP). The program launched on June 1, 2021, and provides financial support to
people in Canada in the rare event that they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of
receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020.
The program will also provide death benefits and support for funeral expenses in the rare case of death
as a result of having received a Health Canada authorized vaccine.
Provinces and territories were given the option to create their own vaccine injury support programs
with federal funding. All, except Quebec, chose to participate in the national program. Quebec will
receive federal funding to continue the delivery of its existing program. In order to ensure equity across
the country, the parameters of the pan-Canadian VISP have been modelled on Quebec’s successful
regime, to the extent possible.
An open solicitation process took place in February 2021 to identify a third-party administrator for the
VISP. PHAC received four proposals. A six-member Review Committee comprised of experts from inside
and outside government in the areas of privacy, compensation programs, procurement, and medical
expertise was established to review these proposals. After a comprehensive review, RCGT Consulting
Inc.was selected and is administering the VISP independently from PHAC.
UPDATE ON mRNA VACCINE SUPPLY
Issue
What is the Public Health Agency of Canada doing to ensure there is sufficient mRNA vaccine supply to
complete current booster andpediatric campaigns for Canadians and to respond to COVID-19 variants
of concern?
Key Facts
• Canada’s vaccine acquisition strategy has evolved based on demand and scientific guidance and
will provide robust and flexible supply to meet a variety of potential needs over the coming
year.
• Canada has a sufficient supply of mRNA to meet the demand for 2022.
• Canada has agreements with Moderna and Pfizer for a combined supply of up to 100 million
mRNA doses for 2022 (55 million firm doses + 45 million doses in options) and up to 95 million
mRNA doses in 2023 with options to extend into 2024.
• In addition to providing booster vaccine doses, the agreements provide flexibility to procure
new second-generation COVID-19 vaccine formulations, such as those to protect against
mutations or variants of concern, and vaccines developed for younger populations, as they
become approved for use.
Key Messages
• Canada is well-positioned to meet the needs of Canadians with ample vaccine supply in 2022
and beyond.
• In 2020,Canada established advance purchase agreements with seven manufacturers to ensure
access to the best possible vaccine supply. This strategy has served Canada well in terms of
access to a significant supply of Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccine.
• With thecombination of vaccine supply in Canada, and upcoming supply, Canada has sufficient
vaccine supply to ensure all eligible Canadians have access to the primary series, boosters, and
pediatric doses.
• In 2022 alone, 100 million doses of mRNA vaccine will beavailable in Canada.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient mRNA doses to meet all
potential domestic needs until the end of 2023, including extra options in both 2022 and 2023,
and an optional year in 2024.
• We have built flexibility into these agreements to ensure that we can access new products and
formulations, which position us well to act quickly to implement pediatrics, boosters and
respond with variant-specific formulations as they become available.
• Canada also expects to on-board three new non-mRNA vaccines in 2022 (Novavax, Medicago,
and Sanofi) providing over 50 million additional doses.
If pressed on the growing demand for vaccines in the face of variants of concern like Omicron
• In the face of Omicron, Canada was able to on-board sufficient supply of both pediatrics and
boosters supply for the provinces and territories to expedite simultaneous vaccine campaigns.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada continue to work closely with provinces
and territories and Indigenous partners on challenges they are facing in their COVID-19
responses, including vaccine rollout.
If pressed on access to variant specific formulations of vaccines
• We continue to closely monitor progress made by vaccine manufacturers as they investigate the
effectiveness of their vaccines against Omicron and move forward to develop potential
Omicron-specific formulations.
• Current agreements already provide access to new formulations, including variant-specific
formulations that may be developed by vaccine manufacturers in the future.
• Future decision-making will be tied to scientific evidence and product availability while
leveraging our existing agreements, where possible.
If pressed on pediatric vaccine supply
• The Governmentof Canada and Pfizer agreed to accelerate the delivery of 5.8 million doses of
pediatric vaccine in December 2021 and January 2022 to provide first and second doses to all
eligible children in Canada aged 5 to 11 years old.
• All provinces and territorieshave now received their shipments and have begun administering
the vaccines to children.
• Current contracts will also ensure access to pediatric vaccines for the youngest children (6
months–4 years) as they become available and are approved for use.
Ifpressed on supply to provide a 3rd and possibly a 4th dose booster
• Canada has sufficient mRNA doses for all eligible Canadians who want a 3rd dose.
• It is too soon to know if a 4th dose will be required broadly. We are just beginning to receive
data onthe impact and durability of the 3rd/booster doses, which the Public Health Agency of
Canada and provinces and territories will continue to monitor closely and advise accordingly.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient doses of mRNA to provide 4th
doses in 2022, should they be required.
If pressed on booster supply for the 12-17 age group.
• At this time, Health Canada has not received a submission or clinical trial data from a vaccine
manufacturer for a COVID-19 booster shotfor people under 18 years of age.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization
continue to review the latest evidence on COVID-19 vaccines, including data on booster doses in
different populations and age groups.
• If required, Canada’s contracts provide sufficient doses of mRNA to provide boosters for
Canadians aged 12 to 17 in 2022.
If pressed on supply of non-mRNA vaccine
• Following an indication of demand for non-mRNA vaccines, the Government of Canada worked
with provinces and territories and manufacturers to ensure non-mRNA options were available
for those who cannot or will not have an mRNA vaccine.
• Canada currently has 168,000 doses of Janssen and 28,000 doses of AstraZeneca in storage.
• Novovax, Sanofi, and Medicago have all filed for regulatory approval. Should they be approved,
millions of additional non-mRNA doses will be made available by the end of 2022.
If pressed on Canadian manufacturing supply
• While our agreements have provided access to an abundance of supply, Canada has also
developed a Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy to address, in part, the security of
future vaccine supply.
• Canada has secured contracts with COVID-19 vaccine front-runners that are seeking to develop
and produce domestically such as Novavax, Medicago and Moderna.
Background
As of January 13, 2022, over 86 million doses have been distributed to provinces and territories, the
majority of which have been the adult formulation of the Pfizer/BioNTech Comirnatyvaccine
Canada has agreements with Moderna and Pfizer as follows (these numbers have been announced
publicly):
Year Pfizerfirm Modernafirm Total firmmRNA(options)
(option) (option)
2022 35M(30M 20M(15M 55M(45Moptions)
option) option)
2023 30M(30M 20M(15M 50M(45Moptions)
option) option)
2024 (60M (35Moption) (95Moptions)
option)
• In addition to providing booster vaccine doses, the agreements provide flexibility to procure
new second-generation COVID-19 vaccine adaptations, such as those to protectagainst mutations or
variants of concern, and vaccines developed for younger populations.
• Advance purchase agreements with Novovax, Sanofi, and Medicago are also expected to
provide millions of additional non-mRNA doses in2022 as they are approved and become available.
Use and Privacy Protection of Public Health Mobility Data
Issue
Public concerns surrounding the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) use of mobility data have
emerged in response to apublic posting of a mobility data Request for Proposal (RFP) on December 17,
2021, to access cell-tower/operator location data to assist in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and for other public health applications. This RFP has raised public concernsregarding individuals’ right
to privacy, and concern over the government gathering information on individuals.
Key Facts
• Anonymous and population-level mobility data analysis is needed to evaluate the effectiveness
of public health directives during thepandemic. By analyzing population movement data, we
can better understand the public’s responsiveness during lockdown measures.
• Analyses and findings from the mobility data have also been regularly shared with provinces and
territories as a supplementalsource of information to support policy decisions and evaluation in
their pandemic response.
• The data received was focused at the regional public health level and does not include any
individually identifiable or personal data.
Key Messages
● Reliable,timely and relevant health and public health data are crucial to inform policy and
decision-making during this pandemic, and more broadly during public health emergencies and
to improve long-term public health outcomes for Canadians.
● The Public Health Agency of Canada takes the privacy of individuals seriously and is ensuring
that no personal information wasasked for, or received, and noindividual or identifiable data is
contained in mobility data received by the agency.
● The Agency is aware that theOffice of the Privacy Commissioner is investigating complaints on
the Agency’s use of mobility data. The Public Health Agency of Canada has proactively provided
information to the Office of the Privacy Commissioner over the past year and a half on its useof
mobility data and will continue to cooperate fully with the investigation.
If pressed on user privacy
● The Public Health Agency of Canada engaged internal privacy and ethics experts to ensure the
Government of Canada’s use of mobility data follows bestpractices. The Agency also met with
the Office of the Privacy Commissioner on this initiative in April 2020 and in January 2022.
● The Request for Proposal requires that the contractor protect user privacy by only providing
secure, de-identified and aggregated data. This means all personal identifiers are removed
before the Agency receives it and the data represent a population of people and cannot identify
or track individuals using this data. The proposal also requires that individuals have the abilityto
easily opt out of their mobility data sharing programs.
● The Agency only considered vendors in the process who met the Government of Canada’s strict
security, legal, privacy and transparency requirements.
If pressed on Investigation
● The Public Health Agency of Canada is aware that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner is
investigating complaints on the Agency’s use of mobility data, has proactively provided
information to the OPC and will continue to cooperate fully with the investigation.
If pressed on secrecy or transparency
● This work has been made publically available on the COVIDTrends website as a means to
provide Canadians with local information on COVID in their communities with explanations of
how this data is used and privacy protectionsin place and also shared with provinces and
territories as part of its joint efforts on COVID-19.
Background
Mobility data is a useful tool to inform public health analysis. To date, the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) has used two types of mobilitydata: crowdsourced mobility data and operator based
mobility data (which is complementary to and used to verify crowdsourced data).
Early in the COVID-19 response, operator-based mobility data was provided to PHAC through
Innovation, Science, and EconomicDevelopment’s Communication Research Centre (CRC) in partnership
with Telus Mobility.
PHAC established a sole-source contract, which expired on October 8, 2021, with Telus Mobility for this
data in March 2021. PHAC also has an ongoing contract with Bluedot Inc. for de-identified and
aggregated crowdsourced data.
The data received from Telus was secure, de-identified, aggregated (i.e., not at the level of an
individual), and vetted for security, legal, privacy and transparency considerations byboth Telusand
PHAC.
This data helps to contribute to generate public health insights including the ability to estimate the
impacts of public health interventions and risk factors. This includes using mobility data analysis to
contextualize the public health situation over time, examining possible links between population
movement within Canada and propagation of COVID-19, measuring the effectiveness of public health
measures, and empowering Canadians with information to improve and protect their health.
Since September 2020, COVIDTrends, PHAC’s COVID-19 public facing dashboard, has provided Canadians
with a population movement indicator to raise awareness of mobility patterns in relation to possible
easement or tightening of public health measures within their healthregion. Mobility data isused to
support that indicator.
PHAC has been producing report summaries to look at how movement trends of the Canadian
population have changed over the course of the pandemic, including identifying new patterns to help
direct public health messaging, planning and policy development. These summaries have been regularly
shared with provinces and territories throughout the pandemic viathe Special Advisory Committee.
In early fall 2021, PHAC launched an internal survey to mobility data users. Survey results indicated users
find this data valuable and informative for COVID-19 situational awareness. Users also perceived the
scalable potential of this data to informother public health challenges.
PHAC is currently without a provider foroperator-based mobility data, limiting its ability to validate
analyses derived from the crowdsourced data. Rather than use a sole source mechanism, PHAC
launched a Request for Proposal (RFP) for its next partnership for
operator-based mobility data in order to increase transparency and align with the Government of
Canada’s “Open Data” initiatives.
An RFP was posted on theBuyandsell.gc.casite in December 2021. In order to ensure identity
protection, this RFP requires that a vendor supply data that has been de-identified and aggregated (i.e.,
not individualized) in a secure format that is vetted for security, legal, privacy and ethical considerations.
Ethics and consultations
In response to an internal request for a privacy analysis for the planned uses ofmobility data, PHAC’
Privacy Management Division (PMD) concluded in August 2020 that while the data is considered
sensitive, it does not contain personal information and therefore isnot subject to the Privacy Act.
In January 2021, internal consultation with the Public Health Ethics Consultative Group (PHECG) for
advice related to consent and ways to mitigate potential public concerns surrounding perception of
state surveillance provided an ethical analysis that outlined the need for PHAC to be clear aboutpublic
health goals, transparent,and to engage the public. PHACaccepted all recommendations. Due to the
priority of the pandemic response, DMIA was not able toconduct a public consultation.
In addition, since April 2020, PHAC has also met regularly with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
(OPC). As part of the briefings, the Agency provided OPC a very detailed presentation including data
types and pipelines, epidemiological uses, privacy and safeguards, as well as users opt-out options. In
addition,over the past 15 months, PHAC has also met with the OPC every two weeks to provide them
verbal updates on all our COVID files including mobility data. While the OPC was not asked formally for
written comments on the mobility data initiative, at no time didthey raise any concerns with PHAC on
the numerous occasions when it was discussed with them and the information provided.
January 6, 2022 was the most recent meeting with OPC representatives to describe the mobility data
project, associated RFP currentlyout for tender, the types of analyses performed to date, and future
plans to support public health.
For operator data, a number of security measures—at a contractor-level, at PHAC, and through CRC—
exist to preserve the privacyand integrity of mobility data:
● Contractors must have a secure platform with clear security protocols (e.g. two-factor user
identification), data that is anonymized (e.g. scrambled SIM), and ensures that precise locations
are not included (e.g. location of nearest tower only)
● Analyses performed within the platform use standard codes and protocols to ensure data is de-
identified.
● Prior to data extraction, anonymized user IDs are removed, data are aggregated to at least 20
devices at no smaller than census subdivision level (i.e. municipality), and measurements must
be transformed into percentages. This pre-processing of mobility data prevents tracking
movement patterns of individual users, including at the cell tower level.
● Exported, aggregated data are stored securely in the AWScloud, where automated reports are
created by CRC and sent to PHAC.
● Reports generated display population level trends within health regions (with no fewer than 20
devices) and all measurements are in proportions.
PROTECTION OFHEALTHCARE WORKERS
ISSUE
• What the government is doing to protect healthcare workers against harassment, particularly in
light of the pandemic?
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the incredible contribution that health care workers have
made and continue to make in Canada’s response to the pandemic.
• Yet, we have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have
been threatened and intimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely
unacceptable, and adds another heavy burden on health care workers who are working
tirelessly to keep us safe and healthy.
• Our government recently took action to protect health care workers, throughamendments to
the Criminal Code (under the former BillC-3), in order to ensure healthcare workers are safe
and free from threats, violence and harassment.
• All Canadians, and especially healthcare workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe
working environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
On December 17, 2021, Bill C-3, which amends the Criminal Code to enhance protections for health care
workers, those who assist them, and those accessing health care services, received Royal Assent.
Health care workers have long faced difficultworking conditions, including violence and threats of
violence in the workplace. This situation has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. High profile
public demonstrations have interfered with heath care workers and with the public accessing health
care facilities.
Taken together, the amendments affirm the federal government’s recognition of the importance of
protecting health care workers and those who assist them, and of ensuring safe access to health
facilities. At the same time, these changes respect Canadians’ freedom to voice their concerns and
protest in a safe and peaceful manner, and ensure workers’ freedom to take labour action, consistent
with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Intimidation and obstructing access offences
These amendments have created a specific intimidation offence to further protect health care workers,
those who assist them, and persons seeking health services. The new intimidation offence will address
circumstances where a health care worker, or person seeking health services, is subject to any
intimidating conduct. This could include threats, or other forms of violence, that are intended to
provoke fear, to interfere with the duties of a health care worker, or to impede a person from receiving
health care services.
The specific obstructing access offence prohibits obstructing any person from accessing health facilities.
This offence does not apply where a person is peacefully protesting or communicating information, such
as on a picket line outside a health facility, evenif that has a minor impact on the ability of others to
access the facility.
These offences are both punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment on indictment.
Depending on the degree of seriousness and circumstances of the alleged offence, the prosecutor will
have the option to proceed by indictment for more serious cases or by summary conviction for less
serious cases. The maximum penalty on summary conviction is two years less a day.
OMICRON VARIANT AND HOMELESSNESS
ISSUE/ QUESTION:
• What is the Government of Canada doing to protect people experiencing homelessness from
the Omicron variant?
SUGGESTED RESPONSE:
• One of the most important roles of our Government during this pandemic is to support
vulnerable Canadians, including those experiencing or at-risk of homelessness.
• Since March 2020, our Government has announced a total of $1.3 billion in additional funding
for Reaching Home to support communities in addressing the needs of people experiencing or
at-risk of homelessness in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.
• This funding goes to on-the-ground community organizations to support the implementation of
health and safety measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 among those who are homeless,
including in shelters.
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, we have taken a whole of government approach to
support the homeless-serving sector. For example, specific health guidance for the
homelessness sector was developed, and other measures implemented such as the creationof
Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites. The government also facilitated access to federal stockpiles of
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and rapid tests for vulnerable populations.
BACKGROUND:
CAEH and CHRC Statements:
• On January 14, 2022, the Canadian Alliance to End Homelessness (CAEH) issued a statement on
their website expressing their concerns with the effect that the Omicron variant is having on the
homeless serving sector, as well as on people experiencing homelessness. The statement is a call
to action aimed at all levels of government to effectively address the new pressures that the
Omicron variant is placing on the already overwhelmed shelter system.
• Similarly, on January 12, 2022, the Canadian Human Rights Commission (CHRC) issued a
statementon their website (and via Twitter) calling for government action to address the
concerning reports that extreme cold and the Omicron variant are threatening to overwhelm
homeless shelters across Canada. The statement highlights that homelessness is a pressing
human rights issue and calls on all levels of government to take action to fulfill the right to
adequate housing.
Reaching Home:
• As part of the National Housing Strategy, the Government of Canada announced an investment
of $2.2 billion over 10 years to prevent and reduce homelessness, and support a broader NHS
objective of reducing chronic homelessness by 50% by 2027-28. On April 1, 2019, the
Government of Canada launched Reaching Home: Canada’s Homelessness Strategy.
• Individuals and families experiencing or at risk of homelessness are at heightened risk of
contracting and transmitting COVID-19 due to underlying health conditions, increased need for
transience and reduced opportunities to self-isolate.
• As part of Canada's COVID-19 Economic Response Plan, the Government announced a total of
$394.2 million in additional funding for Reaching Home in 2020-21, to address the needs of
those experiencing homelessness in the face of the COVID-19 crisis by supporting measures such
as temporary accommodations and isolation centres to reduce shelter overcrowding. This
funding represented an increase of 178% compared to 2019-20 funding levels.
• On November 30, 2020, the Fall Economic Statement announced additional funding of $299.4
million in 2021-22 throughReaching Home to enable physical distancing, cleaning and other
emergency health and safety measures to prevent the spread of COVID-19 in shelters. Funding
will also help prevent at-risk Canadians from becoming homeless by supporting targeted
interventionsthat enable people to stay housed.
• On April 19, 2021, the Budget announced an additional $567 million over two years, beginning
in 2022-23 through Reaching Home to maintain the 2021-22 funding levels announced in the
Fall Economic Statement in responseto the pressures of COVID-19.
In addition to this incremental funding that was provided to the homelessness sector to help support
the community-level response to the Covid-19 pandemic, a special edition of the Reaching Home
Newsletter was developed in collaboration with Health Canada and Public Health Agency of Canada and
was published on December 23, 2021. This special edition of the newsletter included updated guidance
and additional resources of interest for the homelessness sector to help mitigate thespread of Covid-19
in Canada. These resources were also shared with all Reaching Home community entities on January 14,
2022. The Homelessness Policy Directorate (HPD) is continuing to work with the sector to stay informed
of emerging needs and ensure thatthese needs are transmitted to appropriate federal partners in a
timely manner.
With the help of the additional emergency funding and other complementary guiding measures for the
homelessness sector, communities have taken urgent action to try to reduce the spread of COVID-19
among those experiencing homelessness including efforts to reduce overcrowding in shelters, establish
isolation spaces and place individuals in hotels/motels. These efforts have been effective. Based on
ongoing information received from Reaching Home communities, available data on COVID-19 and media
reports, it appears that there were no large-scale outbreaks amongst those experiencing homelessness
thus far. The landscape is changing with the Omicron variant and the HPD will continue efforts to work
in collaboration with the federal partners to address this health crisis within the roles and
responsibilities of the federal government.
Below are the specific resources that were shared as part of the December 23,2021 Reaching Home
Newsletter:
Public Health Measures in Canada:
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has developed guidance in the context of the COVID-19
pandemic, and its potential impacts on people experiencing homelessness, including:
• Individual and community-based measuresto mitigate the spread of COVID-19 in
Canada–outlines public health measures that apply to congregate living settings, such as
shelters and community service establishments. This guidance was last updated in the summer
of 2021.
• Vulnerable populationsand COVID-19–contains guidance for organizations, staff and
volunteers that play an important role in helping to prevent at-risk populations from getting or
spreading the COVID-19 virus. This guidance was originally published in 2020 and was updated
in November 2021.
• To decrease community transmission of COVID-19, the Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program
(SVISP) targets individuals who live in housing that may be crowded or have insufficient space
for proper distancing from household contacts to self-isolate. The SVISP was launched in 2020,
and the first isolation site opened in Toronto in September 2020. The SVISP was developed to:
• Fill a gap in cities, municipalities, and health regions that are at risk of COVID-19
community transmission resultingfrom crowded housing conditions;
• Complement public health measures by the Provinces and Territories and municipalities
to support infection prevention and control through effective self-isolation; and,
• Address gaps in federal COVID-19 investments relating to existing isolation support
infrastructures for at-risk individuals.
• Coronavirus (COVID-19) Tips for Homeless Service Providers–On April 20, 2021, the Canadian
Centre for Occupational Health and Safety (CCOHS) released tips for employers who provide
services to people experiencing homelessness, including emergency shelters, unsheltered
homelessness, encampments, transitional housing, and other temporary situations.
• The document provides an overview of recommended controls to help reduce the riskof
exposure to COVID-19 in the workplace. It can also help workers, volunteers, clients, and visitors
to understand the responsibilities of the sector to help protect them from the spread of COVID-
19.
• Reducing COVID-19 risk in community settings: A toolfor operators–In August 2021, Health
Canada published a resource for operators of non-health carecommunity settings that takes
into account the specific needs ofdiverse groups, including thoseexperiencing homelessness.
• Community organizations can use this tool to identify different strategies that may help to lower
the risk of COVID-19 spread by assessing COVID-19 activity in their area, the physical features of
their settings, people who access their settings and the activities and interactions taking place.
• Personal Protective Equipment Resources and Government of Canada Donate (GCDonate): The
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile–The National Emergency Strategic Stockpile works with
Public Services andProcurement Canada’s Government of Canada Surplus (GCSurplus) program
to divest surplus personal protective equipment, such as gowns, surgical masks and hand
sanitizer.
• Key Strategies to Vaccinating Homeless Populations–In April 2021, The Royal Society of Canada
published a set of recommendations to help support vaccine uptake by people experiencing
homelessness. Recommendations from this study include:
• Communication guidance to address both intentional and unintentional non-adherence to
vaccine programs;
• Building and leveraging trustingrelationships with those experiencing homelessness;
• Key aspects of a vaccination campaign;
• How to provide post vaccination supports; and
• Specific population considerations.
• COVID-19 Rapid Testing Program for Community Organizations–The CanadianRed Cross has
partnered with the Government of Canada to help community organizations access COVID-19
rapid antigen tests and set up screening programs for their personnel.
• This program is for charities, non-profits and Indigenous community organizationswith at least
five (5) personnel (staff and volunteers) who work in close proximity to each other or have
direct contact with community members. It is available in British Columbia, Alberta,
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia and no reporting is required
for client screening.
• Rapid antigen tests for small and medium-sized organizations–The Government of Canada is
working with pharmacies to help small and medium sized organizations access COVID-19 rapid
antigen tests and setup screening programs for their employees. This initiative was announced
on August 13, 2021.
HC and PHAC Actions to Support Vulnerable Populations
• Health Canada has been providing rapid tests and masks to the Canadian Red Cross (CRC) for
non-profits and community groups for testing employees and volunteers in BC, AB, SK, MB, ON,
NB, NS
• As of December 19, the partnership with CRC was expanded to distribute tests to non-for-profit
and community partners’ clients, the people they serve
• Establishes a network of community partner distribution sites, e.g. United Way, YMCA / YWCA,
Boys and Girls Clubs, Foodbanks, Community Centres, others
• As of the end of 2021, close to 2M rapid tests [1,963,400] had been shipped to the CRC.
• 18M masks arealso being provided to the CRC for distribution to community partners.
• This is complementing provincial actions to provide tests and other supplies to homeless
shelters and other community organizations.
Additional Background Information
- The 18M masks (13M KN95 and 5M level 1 medical masks) are being provided by PSPC and
PHAC respectively, with the CRC receiving about 750K per week.
- A QP note from Employment and Social Development Canada / Infrastructure Canada, which
have a dedicated team leading government efforts on homelessness, is attached separately.
