Created: 2021-08-16T12:10:48.385889
Name: Standing_Committee_on_Health_(HESA):_Emergency_Situation_Facing_Canadians_in_Light_of_the_COVID-19_Pandemic
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/7dfe6228-2ec2-4266-8c99-dbb3a69da7a1/resource/8f271127-3e88-4898-a8d7-28182b3c1a05/download/hesa-disclosure-april-16-2021-en.pdf
Package ID: 7dfe6228-2ec2-4266-8c99-dbb3a69da7a1
Keywords: ['Parliamentary committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances on Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of the COVID-19 Pandemic
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Accomplishments Related to COVID
2. Adjusting Public Health Measures
3. Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy
4. Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research - MSM
5. Border Measures - General
6. Border Measures – USA
7. Bulk Imports
8. CHA Compliance
9. Support for COVID-19 Research
10. Clinical Trials - Exp. Pathways
11. COVAX Facility
12. COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
13. COVID-19 Variants
14. Cybersecurity
15. Dental Care
16. Diabetes
17. Drug shortages
18. Evolution of COVID-19 Science
19. Family Gender-Based Violence (FGBV)
20. GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network)
21. Health System Capacity (Hospital/Health Care System Impacts)
22. Health Transfers
23. HESA-Motion Production of Papers
24. High-Cost Drugs Rare Diseases
25. Homecare
26. Humane Use of Pesticides
27. International Issues
28. LTC Homes
29. MAID
30. Mental Health and Substance Use Tools
31. Modelling COVID-19
32. Multi-System Inflammatory Syndrome
33. NACI Recommendations for Delaying Second Doses and Interchangeability
of mRNA Vaccines
34. NESS Management and PPE Procurement
35. Opioid Overdose Crisis
36. Outbreak Monitoring
37. Pharmacare
38. PMPRB Amendments
39. PMRA Neonic Pesticides Aquatic Risk
40. PT Vaccine Allocations
41. Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity
42. Respirator Recall
43. Safety of AstraZeneca Vaccine
44. Self-Isolation Sites
45. Status of Vaccine Approvals
46. Suicide Prevention
47. Test Kits
48. Testing Capacity (Rapid Test)
49. Testing Certification
50. Vaccine Rollout
51. Vaccine Surveillance
52. Youth Vaping
ACCOMPLISHMENTS RELATED TO COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented situation with an equally unprecedented
response. Since Canada received its earliest warning of an illness originating in Wuhan, China at the end
of December 2019, the Government has been working collaboratively with provinces and territories as
well as leveraging international partnerships to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What are the key accomplishments related to the COVID-19 response in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
•The Government of Canada has addressed this unprecedented situation with an equally
unprecedented response.
•Canada has been working across federal, provincial/territorial, and municipal governments to support a
collaborative, whole-of- government response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•In support of mandatory quarantine, and those travellers who arrive symptomatic or without a suitable
quarantine plan, we stood up 13 designated quarantine facilities in 9 cities across Canada.
•There are 58 hotels providing Government of Canada authorized accommodations available to air
travellers while they await the results of their on-arrival tests.
•Canada has effectively leveraged domestic and international partnerships to share technical expertise,
exchange information, and learn from the experiences of other countries.
•This has helped us build a robust and agile response to the exceptional challenges that we are facing.
•None of these accomplishments would be possible without the strong partnerships that exist at all
levels of governments, across jurisdictions, with Indigenous partners and with key stakeholders, who are
equally invested in protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON SPECIFIC ACCOMPLISHMENTS
Border/Travel Measures:
•To reduce the risk of imported cases and transmission of COVID-19 and its variants, the Public Health
Agency of Canada has implemented significant border and travel measures informed by public health
science.
•Measures to date include:
o Entry prohibitions;
o Compliance and enforcement efforts;
o Mandatory quarantine;
o Pre- and post-arrival testing; and
o Government of Canada approved accommodations while air travellers await their test results.
•We have also enhanced screening measures at Canadian airports and, working with the Canada Border
Services Agency, established a public health presence at all points of entry – 4 airports and all land
border crossings.
•In support of mandatory quarantine, and those travellers who arrive symptomatic or without a suitable
quarantine plan, we stood up 13 designated quarantine facilities in 9 cities across Canada.
•There are 58 hotels providing Government of Canada authorized accommodations available to air
travellers while they await the results of their on-arrival tests.
•On receipt of a negative test result, travellers are allowed to continue to a suitable place of quarantine
to complete their quarantine period.
•Many of these changes have been advanced thanks to ongoing federal, provincial, territorial
collaboration and sharing of data and learning from border testing pilot projects implemented across
the country.
•For example, the new federal border testing regime has leveraged the capacity from service providers
already in place thanks to the success of provincial pilot programs in Alberta and Ontario, which
implemented testing on arrival at land and air borders.
Guidance
•We have developed clinical and public health guidance in partnership with provincial/territorial public
health authorities, Indigenous communities, stakeholders, and the general public on how to protect the
health and safety of Canadians and reduce the spread of COVID-19.
•We are also working closely with federal, provincial and territorial public health officials, and
Indigenous partners, to update the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for
Ongoing Management of COVID-19. This continues to serve as a roadmap to support public health
planning and management of COVID-19 in Canada.
FPT Engagement
•Since its inception, the Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) Special Advisory Committee on COVID-19
(SAC) has been the engaged on the FPT public health response to COVID-19 in Canada, striving for a
cohesive and evidence-informed approach to key aspects of the response across the country.
•The many contributions of the Committee include: a national approach to data collection and
surveillance, coordinated approaches to testing guidance, development of clinical and public health
measure guidance, risk communication products for the Canadian public, ongoing forward planning and
COVID-19 immunization planning, guidance and vaccine roll-out.
Specifically, we have worked with provinces and territories and other stakeholders to accelerate
diagnostic testing, rapid screening and genomic analysis capacity in order to detect cases of COVID-19,
and its variants, more quickly.
•We have established a coordinated approach to the bulk purchase and distribution of personal
protective equipment, testing supplies and medical equipment, to facilitate the right supplies getting to
the right places in Canada.
•We are also working with provinces and territories to procure treatments in order to provide COVID-19
patients access to safe and effective therapies.
•Further, in addition to a dedicated outbreak investigation team, we have established a Rapid Surge
Capacity initiative to support the needs of provinces and territories in responding to COVID-19
outbreaks, and mitigating transmission in hot zones where they have exceeded their own capacity.
Data and Surveillance
•We have enhanced our national approach to data collection and surveillance, to support the continued
monitoring of COVID-19 across the country.
•We are working with diverse partners to collect information on the impact and burden of COVID-19 on
racial, ethnic and Indigenous populations in Canada.
•We have extensively used modelling to illustrate possible scenarios to help us plan and time the right
combination of public health measures to slow the spread of COVID-19.
•We have adopted novel approaches to monitor for COVID-19 in communities, including monitoring
wastewater for detection and early emergence of the virus.
•We have developed COVIDAlert, a free COVID-19 exposure notification app that can alert you to
possible exposures before you have symptoms.
•We have also developed the innovative ArriveCAN mobile app to support data collection and sharing
for compliance and enforcement.
Vaccines
•In partnership with provinces, territories, Indigenous communities, and the private sector, the Public
Health Agency of Canada is supporting vaccine roll-out across the country by supporting vaccine
procurement, supplies, distribution, guidance on the prioritization of vaccines for key population, based
on Canada’s overall vaccination principles and strategy.
•The Government intends to provide a vaccine to every eligible person in Canada who wants one by the
end of September 2021.
IF PRESSED ON COMMUNICATIONS
•The Public Health Agency of Canada has been proactive and transparent in its communications with
Canadians.
•We have directly addressed the questions and concerns of tens of thousands of Canadians on various
aspects of COVID-19 since the beginning of January.
•We have also initiated new ways to connect with Canadians, including the Canada COVID-19 App, an
information phone line, and a centralized website.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians. The overall response to
the COVID-19 pandemic is based on the Federal/Provincial/Territorial Public Health Response Plan for
Biological Events, with the goal to support collaboration and engagement amongst
federal/provincial/territorial public health, health care delivery and emergency management
authorities.
ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
•The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), along with provincial and territorial partners, is continually
evaluating and adjusting the response based on the most recent evidence and the current
epidemiological situation. Current public health measures we have been practicing continue to be
effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
•How is the Government adjusting public health measures to address the current situation in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
•COVID-19 infection rates are on the rise in many communities in Canada.
•Public health measures have been shown to be effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19,
including variants of concern.
•Now more than ever, it is important for everyone, regardless of vaccination status, to continue to
adhere to recommended public health measures.
•Canadians can take action by:
oMinimizing the number of non-essential, in-person interactions with people from outside of
their immediate household; and
oKeeping these interactions:
as few, and as brief as possible; and
from the greatest physical distance possible.
•Even a single infected person with mild symptoms, or symptoms that are not yet showing, can start a
chain reaction of exposures and infections, both at private gatherings and in public settings.
•Everyone in Canada should apply a “layered” approach with multiple personal preventive measures
used at once to protect themselves and others.
•We are continually evaluating the impact of easing and re-instating public health measures, in
collaboration with our provincial and territorial partners, based on the most recent evidence and the
current epidemiological situation.
•Provincial and territorial governments make decisions about when to ease or reinstate restrictive
public health measures in their communities.
•The Public Health Agency of Canada, working with provinces and territories, has developed indicators
of readiness for easing restrictive measures (e.g., closures) in communities including:
o infection rates reduced to manageable levels,
o public health and health systems are able to respond to increasing numbers of infections in
the community, and
o measures are in place to reduce the spread of the virus to high-risk groups and settings
•We continue to use all evidence and models available on an ongoing basis to help us identify which
combinations of public health measures are most effective to help us control the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON PROVINCIAL/TERRITORIAL-SPECIFIC MEASURES
•Provinces and territories implement public health measures for their own jurisdictions.
•These measures may vary to reflect differences in pandemic activity across the country and between
regions within provinces and territories.
•In response to the varied epidemiological situations across Canada, we are seeing some health
authorities reinstating or easing public health measures, and providing tailored public messaging based
on local circumstances.
•Each province and territory will continue to make plans according to their COVID-19 transmission
realities.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF VACCINES ON LIFTING OF PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
•Vaccines are a valuable additional tool in our fight against COVID-19 in Canada.
•COVID-19 vaccination along with public health measures will offer the best protection from the spread
of COVID-19.
•All individuals should continue to follow recommended public health measures regardless of their
personal vaccination status or the level of vaccine coverage in their community.
•The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories to ensure that all
people living in Canada are being vaccinated as soon as possible.
•Canada’s COVID-19 vaccination approach is to vaccinate more people as quickly as possible for the
greater benefit of all Canadians. This is being done by prioritizing a first dose for as many people as
possible and then going back with the second dose of vaccine.
•By the end of September 2021, every person in Canada who wants to be vaccinated will have access to
a vaccine.
•The first vaccine dose provides good protection against COVID-19, including against severe illness,
hospitalization and death. This protection will get even better within 7 to 14 days after the second dose.
•As more people are vaccinated, decisions about adjusting public health measures will be made
depending on the spread of COVID- 19 in communities.
•As more evidence emerges, public health authorities will make appropriate adjustments to
recommendations on public health measures based on local circumstances.
IF PRESSED ON THE ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES IN RESPONSE TO SARS- CoV-2 VARIANTS
•PHAC is closely monitoring emerging COVID-19 variants.
•Current public health measures we have been practicing continue to be effective in preventing the
spread of COVID-19, including variants of concern.
•Now more than ever, it is important for everyone to follow public health measures to reduce the
transmission of COVID-19 and any variants of concern in communities.
•Individuals should apply a “layered” approach, using multiple personal preventive practices at once to
protect themselves and others from COVID-19, and any variants of concern in communities. This
includes:
o Minimizing the number of interactions with people from outside of your immediate
household; and
o Keeping these interactions as few, and as brief as possible, from the greatest distance
possible.
BACKGROUND
Public health measures (PHM) are the non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented by
federal/provincial/territorial and local public health authorities to control COVID-19 transmission. Some
of these PHM are personal preventive practices focused on helping individuals to protect themselves
and others, such as following advice of local public health authorities, staying home and away from
others if sick, wearing non-medical masks, physical distancing, hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette,
and self-monitoring. Public health authorities also aim to prevent transmission by undertaking testing
programs to detect and isolate cases, tracing people who have had a high-risk exposure to an infectious
case and quarantining them so they cannot transmit COVID-19 to others. Community measures such as
public education campaigns, restrictions on gatherings, and school, business and workplace measures,
help to protect groups and the community at large.
All PHM, including case detection and isolation, contact tracing and quarantining, and individual
personal preventive practices as well as community-based measures, need to be sustained in order to
maximize our ability as a society to control the spread of the virus over the long term.
Public health authorities will need to continue to rapidly identify and respond to outbreaks, including
the management of new cases of COVID-19 and their high-risk contacts, to reduce community-spread
and prevent large increases in case numbers and associated hospitalizations. It is important to consider
how to reduce the impact of seasonal respiratory infections, so that public health resources and health
care system capacity are not overwhelmed when dealing with COVID-19 cases occurring at the same
time.
A series of models are being used to identify the potential impact of different combinations of control
measures on infection rates in the Canadian population. On an ongoing basis, these models help to
identify which combinations of PHMs, applied with what intensity, are most likely to reinforce pandemic
control. The role of public adherence to these measures is a critical factor for ultimate effectiveness.
PHAC is continually evaluating the impact of PHM on the number of cases reported through surveillance
systems, and is adjusting guidance as needed in collaboration with provincial and territorial partners.
Community-based PHM are most effective when implemented as early as possible in response to
epidemiological triggers of concern (e.g. increases in unlinked cases). Therefore, preparations include
being ready to re-implement restrictive community PHMs by the provinces and territories or at the
municipal public health level. It is important to remember that it takes about two weeks before the
impact of PHM can be seen in our surveillance data. This is because of the time lapse between when a
person is infected, when they are tested and subsequently reported to PHAC as a confirmed case.
When adjusting PHM, it is paramount that a protective approach for those most likely to experience
serious illness due to COVID-19 be maintained throughout the pandemic.
Furthermore, jurisdictions have to balance the risks associated with spread of COVID-19 with the
unintended social and health consequences of restrictive PHMs, including among vulnerable groups.
PHAC, working with provinces and territories, has developed readiness criteria and indicators for easing
restrictive PHMs. These indicators were developed with a data driven approach to support public health
professionals and government decision makers in considering when to ease or reinstate PHM, taken into
consideration that thresholds and application of these indicators may vary based on local epidemiology
and level of restrictive measures already in place. Further, adjustments to restrictive PHM must be
considered in the context of risk associated with variants of concern (VOC), and the effect of increasing
vaccine coverage.
ADVERSE REACTIONS / VACCINE HESITANCY
SYNOPSIS
•Reports of a rare blood-clotting disorder following vaccination with Astrazeneca vaccine resulted in the
National Advisory Committee on Immunization recommending its use be paused in persons under age
55 years pending further analysis by Health Canada of this side effect. The U.S. has suspended the use of
Johnson & Johnson’s vaccine pending investigation of occurrences of this clotting disorder among a
small number of individuals.
•A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for protecting the health and safety of
Canadians, ensuring public confidence in the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting Canada-
wide immunization efforts. The Government of Canada is working closely with partners to monitor
vaccine safety.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Given recent reports of blood clots following use of COVISHIELD (the Serum Institute of India version
of the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine) and Johnson & Johnson vaccines, what is the Government doing
to ensure vaccine safety, including monitoring for adverse reactions to the COVID-19 vaccines?
• What is the Government doing to assure Canadians’ confidence in the COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is working with international vaccine regulators to assess vaccine safety data and will
take regulatory action, if required, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers.
• Pauses in the use of vaccines demonstrate that safety systems are working to ensure that any
potential safety concerns are immediately and thoroughly investigated.
• The benefits of the COVID-19 vaccines in use in Canada continue to outweigh the risks.
IF PRESSED …
• The Public Health Agency is reporting publicly every week on adverse events following vaccination,
and this transparent access to data supports vaccine confidence.
• As with all vaccines, Health Canada will take appropriate regulatory action if any safety issues are
identified. This could include warning Canadians about potential side effects, changing the
recommended use of the product, or even removing the product from the market.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are closely monitoring reports of rare but
serious cases of blood clots associated with low levels of blood platelets (i.e., thrombocytopenia)
following immunization with the AstraZeneca vaccine in Europe, and reports from the U.S. related to
Johnson and Johnson.
• PHAC has received a report of an individual in Canada who has experienced a blood clot with low
numbers of platelets following immunization with COVISHIELD (the Serum Institute of India version of
the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine). COVID-19 vaccine. This is the first reported case in Canada.
• These reports are very rare and it shows that Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring system works.
• Health Canada continues to work with international regulators to review data and evidence as it
becomes available.
• On March 29, the National Advisory Committee on Immunization and the Chief Medical Officers of
Health recommended that use of AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccines should be paused in adults under 55
years of age in Canada at this time.
• Health Canada authorizes vaccines for use in Canada based on a thorough, independent review of the
evidence and determined that it meets Canada’s stringent safety, efficacy and quality requirements.
BACKGROUND
Safety is a central consideration for any health product including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before they are authorized.
However, no health product is completely risk-free.
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
Safety data from clinical trials for the authorized COVID-19 vaccines showed that mRNA vaccines are
performing similarly to other vaccines with mostly mild or moderate adverse events.
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are mild
reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild headache), although
serious but very rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction).
It is important to note that though an adverse event may occur after immunization, it does not imply
that the vaccine must have caused the adverse event. As the WHO states: “The fact that a vaccine was
administered within a reasonable time period of the occurrence of an event does not automatically
suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, PHAC, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers. Manufacturers are required
to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the national regulatory authority, as well as submit
regular summaries of global safety information. This system has been enhanced to support the rollout of
COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness and sharing of information with partners, and public
reporting of adverse events.
To improve safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC, and Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network which provides weekly
reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities. Through its relationships with international regulators,
Health Canada also receives information about emerging safety signals in other jurisdictions.
Recent reports from Europe re: AstraZeneca and the US re: Johnson and Johnson
On April 13, 2021, US officials from the Centres for Disease Control and Prevention and the Food and
Drug Administration are recommending an immediate pause in the rollout of Johnson & Johnson's
single-dose COVID-19 vaccine, pending review of six adverse events involving blood clots (out of over 6.8
million doses administered). The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is currently
reviewing evidence on the Johnson & Johnson COVID-19 vaccine to provide advice on its use. Although
this vaccine has been authorized under interim order by Health Canada, it is not yet available in Canada.
Following European reports of rare but serious cases of blood clots associated with low levels of blood
platelets (i.e., thrombocytopenia) following immunization with the AstraZeneca vaccine, Health Canada
has issued additional terms and conditions on the authorization of AstraZeneca vaccines. In addition, the
National Advisory Committee on Immunization and the Chief Medical Officers of Health recommended
that use of AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccines should be paused in adults under 55 years of age in Canada
at this time. PHAC has received a report of an individual in Canada who has experienced a blood clot
with low numbers of platelets following immunization with COVISHIELD (the Serum Institute of India
version of the AstraZeneca
COVID-19 vaccine). COVID-19 vaccine. This is the first reported case in Canada. These reports are very
rare and it shows that Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring system works. Health Canada continues to
work with international regulators to review data and evidence as it becomes available.
Vaccine hesitancy
Addressing vaccine hesitancy is a longstanding priority for PHAC but with the arrival of COVID- 19, the
stakes are higher than in the recent past. Concerted effort is underway with a range of partners to
support understanding of, and confidence in, vaccine, address knowledge and research gaps, and
improve coverage data.
PHAC is working with diverse partners to better understand and address COVID-19 vaccine hesitancy.
For example, PHAC engages closely with communities who are more vulnerable to COVID-19 and may
have less trust in vaccination, including Indigenous peoples, Black Canadians and other racialized
communities. Additionally, to inform communication strategies and outreach to Canadians, PHAC has
convened a Vaccine Confidence Task Group, composed of experts across various disciplines, and is
working with behavioral scientists and undertaking public opinion research and social network analysis
to better understand the knowledge, attitudes, beliefs and decision-making behaviours of Canadians
regarding COVID-19 vaccines.
PHAC works to provide Canadians with accurate and up-to-date information on COVID-19 vaccines
through: weekly media technical briefings; the Canada.ca/covid-vaccine webpage and the toll free
information line; specialized training, clinical guidance, and information tools to support healthcare
providers; and a national public education campaign.
The Government of Canada is also addressing vaccine hesitancy through a number of funding
opportunities that will support community-level efforts to increase vaccine access, confidence and
uptake. Examples of these funding opportunities include the Immunization Partnership Fund and the
Vaccine Community Innovation Challenge, which were launched in recent months.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• I’m proud that our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from donating
blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral
period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration with
Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research
specific to reducing barriers to the donation of plasma.
• This research is ongoing. Health Canada remains open to assessing future changes to the MSM donor
deferral policy, including its elimination, provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
• To date, the department has not yet received a submission from the blood operators to eliminate the
deferral period in question.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor screening
requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada demonstrating
the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without this evidence, the
current screening policies cannot be changed.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
• This matter is presently before the court and further details of Canada’s legal position will be provided
to the court.
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
Canadian Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (H-Q) were created as arm’s length organizations
responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they
are required to make submissions to HC for any changes to their policies, such as changes to donor
deferrals. These submissions must include scientific data that support the safety of the proposed
changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before they can be implemented, but has no authority
to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed, except in extraordinary situations when safety
issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing nineteen (19) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are
under evaluation for MSM.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as Austria, China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other
countries, including the Netherlands, France and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain
and Italy there is no MSM deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as
having sex with more than one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have
adopted a 3-month deferral including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and
Australia (January 2021).
More recently, on December 14th, 2020, the UK accepted changes that lift the MSM blood donation
deferral based on recommendations by the UK-wide For Assessment of Individualised Risk (FAIR)
steering group. Changes are expected to be implemented in summer 2021.
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in response
to COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to encourage the restart of the Canadian economy while continuing to
prevent imported cases of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• Now is not the time to travel. Canada continues to advise against non-essential travel to and from
Canada until further notice.
• Canada has established robust border measures, including travel restrictions and pre-departure
testing, for travellers coming to Canada.
• These measures have been effective in helping to protect the health and safety of Canadians, while
continuing to allow essential workers to enter the country.
• The recently introduced enhanced testing and quarantine requirements, in combination with those
already implemented, will further reduce the risk of importation and transmission of COVID- 19 and new
variants of the virus related to international travel.
IF PRESSED ON NEW UPDATES TO THE BORDER MEASURES
• The requirement for travellers arriving by air to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test
taken within 72 hours, or a positive test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival, now applies to travellers
arriving to Canada by land as well, with some exceptions. For travellers arriving by land, the negative
COVID-19 molecular test result must be taken in the United States.
• Travellers arriving to Canada by land and air, with some exceptions, are also required to take a COVID-
19 molecular test when they arrive in Canada, and another toward the end of their 14-day quarantine
period.
• Travellers arriving by air, with limited exceptions, need to pre-book and stay up to three nights, at
their own expense, in a Government of Canada authorized accommodation at the location of entry
while they await the results of their on-arrival tests.
• On receipt of a negative test result, travellers will be allowed to continue to a suitable place of
quarantine to complete their quarantine period.
• All travellers are required to submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable
quarantine plan, electronically via ArriveCAN before crossing the border or boarding a flight.
• To limit possible exposure of COVID-19 to others, we have introduced more stringent criteria for
suitable quarantine plans to reduce risk of household transmission, particularly to those who work with
at-risk subpopulations.
IF PRESSED ON PRE-DEPARTURE AND PRE-ARRIVAL TESTING
• Pre-departure and pre-arrival testing are helping to reduce the number of travellers arriving in Canada
with COVID-19. This layer of protection is working together with our quarantine approach.
• The goal of these measures is to prevent the introduction of new COVID-19 cases in light of increased
infection rates and new variants of concern.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
• Travellers are responsible for arranging a suitable place to quarantine prior to their arrival in Canada.
• If no other suitable arrangements to quarantine are possible, individual travellers may be referred to a
federally designated quarantine facility, if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON SECURITY AT FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
• Government of Canada employees and security personnel are stationed within the Designated
Quarantine Facilities to ensure that entry and exit points are secure, as well as to support overall safety
and security within this controlled and monitored facility.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has recently increased the security presence at the Designated
Quarantine Facilities, enhanced security policies and procedures, and increased training to staff on
emergency protocols to support the overall safety of accommodated travellers.
• The Agency continues to support local police in any investigations.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH PROVINCES TO DATE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to collaborate with partners to digitize the collection of
health-related information from passengers pre-arrival through ArriveCAN.
• This allows traveller information to be shared quickly and securely with provinces and territories - so
they can contact travellers for public health follow-up - and with law enforcement to verify compliance
with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the RCMP, and provincial and municipal law
enforcement agencies to verify compliance with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order.
• Compliance verification visits by a third party contractor are now underway in all provinces.
• Officials provide information handouts at the border, and contact travellers throughout their isolation
or quarantine period to remind them of the requirements.
• If travellers cannot be reached, or appear non-compliant with isolation or quarantine requirements,
they are referred to local law enforcement for follow-up.
• Failure to comply with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order is an offence under the
Quarantine Act. Penalties could include up to six months in prison and/or $750,000 in fines. Tickets of
up to $3,000 per day may also be issued for non-compliance pursuant to the Contraventions Act.
• Violating other measures in the Quarantine Act, including exposing another person to serious disease,
can lead to up to three years in prison and/or $1 million in fines.
• The Government is engaging local police to urgently follow-up on cases of individual travellers who
leave the airport and do not comply with testing and quarantine measures. Travellers who refuse to
comply could face a fine of at least $3,000.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
• Public Health Agency of Canada’s Designated Officers are present at 31 Canadian points of entry that
receive international travellers.
• All international air travel to Canada is being directed to one of four airports (Vancouver, Calgary,
Toronto, or Montreal).
• As international travel resumes, the Public Health Agency of Canada will increase its public health
presence to 36 points of entry across the country.
• All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7 access to support from the Public Health
Agency of Canada’s Quarantine Officers through the remote Central Notification System.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S APPROACH TO TRAVEL ADVISORIES AND EASING OF BORDER MEASURES
• The Government of Canada continues to advise against all non- essential travel outside of Canada,
including all cruise ship travel, until further notice.
• We continue to evaluate the evolving COVID-19 pandemic to inform our travel advice to Canadians.
• As we explore a gradual approach to reopening international travel, we must consider:
o The capacity of our public health system;
o Provincial and territorial perspectives;
o Our capacity at the borders; and
o The epidemiological situation within Canada and in other countries.
BACKGROUND
The continued identification of new variants around the globe, with demonstrated increases in
transmissibility, has introduced new risks to manage.
Between February 3, 2020 and March 21, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 47 Emergency Orders
under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce risks from
other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce the
impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
On Arrival Testing, Mandatory Hotel Stays and Enhanced Quarantine
On January 29, 2021, the Government of Canada announced enhanced testing and quarantine
measures, in addition to the pre-departure testing requirement already in place. All air travellers to
Canada, with limited exceptions, will face additional costs, including a COVID-19 molecular test on
arrival, as well as a hotel stay when they return to Canada.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to
• submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan, electronically via
ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
• take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and
• take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
As of February 22, 2021, travellers arriving by air are required to reserve and stay in a government-
authorized accommodation (hotel) for up to three nights, at their own cost, while they await the results
of the COVID-19 molecular test they took on arrival, before completing the rest of their mandatory 14-
day quarantine period.
To ensure travellers’ awareness and compliance with quarantine requirements, the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) is working with security companies to help complete compliance checks for
travellers arriving in Canada. Employees of these companies were trained by PHAC and authorized as
Screening Officers under the Quarantine Act. These Screening Officers will visit travellers’ quarantine
locations to establish contact, confirm identity and confirm that travellers are at the place of quarantine
they identified upon entry into Canada.
Travel Advisories
The Government of Canada’s current travel advice to all Canadians is to avoid all non-essential travel
outside of Canada (Level 3) and to avoid all cruise ship travel (Level 3). Although this travel advice is not
binding on Canadians choosing to travel abroad, some travel insurance providers no longer cover travel
booked on or after March 13, 2020, when these advisories came into effect. Canada’s Travel Health
Notice was updated on January 6, 2021 to reflect pre-departure testing requirements, and on January
16 to reflect the countries with variants of concern.
Emergency Orders
Currently, the three emergency orders - the prohibition of entry from the United States (U.S),
prohibition of entry from countries other than the U.S., and the quarantine, isolation, and other
obligations order, are in place until at least April 21, 2021.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and provincial partners to
facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods and services, while continuing to
protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including recreation
and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with some
exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine ports,
and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers, including
quarantine officers, at 31 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
Testing is available on site at 16 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of March 4, 2021. At land
ports of entry with no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provided two take-home test
swabs kits to every traveller.
Testing Pilots
The Alberta Border Testing Pilot Program is suspended as of February 21, 2021 at 11:59pm EST. The new
federal testing program is utilizing much of the same infrastructure put in place for the voluntary
initiatives in Quebec and Alberta and build on the joint testing frameworks developed by provincial and
federal officials.
Security at Designated Quarantine Facilities
PHAC has enhanced our security presence at DQFs and has developed and enhanced policies and
procedures, and increased training to staff to prevent some escalating situations and emergency
protocols. We continue our efforts to engage Police of Jurisdiction.
Government of Canada employees and security personnel are stationed at designated quarantine
facilities to ensure secured, controlled and monitored entry and exit points. All travellers who must stay
in one of these facilities are provided with information that articulates the details of the quarantine
requirement, including a code of conduct and potential fines for non-compliant behaviour.
On March 29, 2021, a total of 3,532 air travelers were screened at the four airports. Between February
22 and March 29, 2021, a total of 110,638 air passengers have been screened at the four airports. As of
March 21, 2021, there have been 7,114 travellers have been lodged at a DQF since the start of the
COVID19 pandemic.
Enforcement
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement to ensure that travellers are abiding by the requirement
to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where compliance cannot be confirmed, PHAC
refers these travellers to the RCMP for compliance follow-up by local police. Maximum penalties for
failing to comply with an order under the Quarantine Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation and Other
Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to people who do not comply with the Quarantine
Act, with fines of up to $3,000 for different Quarantine Act offences (this does not apply in AB, SK and
the territories, as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the contraventions regime).
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person, while willfully
or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be liable for a fine of up to $1
million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
BORDER MEASURES – UNITED STATES
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put in place successive border measures in response
to COVID-19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to protect Canadians at the Canada/United States border?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada and the U.S. both have implemented public health measures in the form of a ban of
discretionary travel in the land mode.
• U.S. citizens are permitted to travel directly from the United States to Alaska and vice-versa for non-
discretionary purposes, such as going for work, and returning home.
• Some U.S. citizens are also permitted to enter Canada for work purposes, including to provide an
essential service, or for compassionate reasons, as specified under the Orders in Council.
• Canada and the U.S. have worked closely together to keep trade and the economy moving.
• U.S. citizens should not be taking the opportunity to travel within Canada for personal or discretionary
reasons.
IF PRESSED ON LAND ARRIVALS
• As of February 22, 2021, travellers arriving to Canada by land, with some exceptions, are also required
to take a COVID-19 molecular test when they arrive in Canada, and another toward the end of their 14-
day quarantine period.
• We continue to collaborate with partners in the United States to strengthen our border measures and
keep our countries safe.
IF PRESSED ON AIR ARRIVALS
• As of February 22, 2021, travellers arriving to Canada by air, with some exceptions, are also required
to take a COVID-19 molecular test when they arrive in Canada, and another toward the end of their 14-
day quarantine period.
• Travellers arriving by air, with limited exceptions, need to pre-book and stay up to three nights, at
their own expense, in a Government of Canada authorized accommodation at the location of entry
while they await the results of their on-arrival tests.
• On receipt of a negative test result, travellers will be allowed to continue to a suitable place of
quarantine to complete the remainder of their quarantine period.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINATED TRAVELLERS/SNOWBIRDS RETURNING TO CANADA
• At this time, proof of vaccination will not replace other border measures, including the requirement to
provide proof of a COVID- 19 test result. Individuals who have been vaccinated are still required to
quarantine on entry to Canada.
• A vaccine protects an individual from illness, but we need more evidence to understand if a vaccinated
person can still transmit the virus.
IF PRESSED ON TRAVEL TO THE U.S. FOR HEALTH CARE
• We recognize that quarantine requirements have a significant impact on Canadians who have just
received essential medical services or treatment outside of Canada.
Persons who receive essential medical services in another country are now exempt from pre-arrival and
pre-departure testing, testing on arrival, and mandatory quarantine requirements, provided certain
conditions are met and appropriate documentation is provided by a licensed health care practitioner.
• Additionally, the Chief Public Health Officer has issued an exemption for asymptomatic Canadian
citizens, permanent residents, or persons with status under the Indian Act who accompany a dependent
child, or an asymptomatic person requiring assistance, in accessing the essential medical services or
treatment.
BACKGROUND
Between February 3, 2020 and March 21, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 47 Emergency Orders
under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce risks from
other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce the
impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including recreation
and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with some
exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to
 submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan,
electronically via ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
 take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and
 take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
Testing is available on site at 16 land ports of entry. At land ports of entry with no on-site testing
capacity, Border Services Officers will provide two take-home test swabs kits to every traveller. Cross-
border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine
ports, and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers,
including quarantine officers, at 31 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
U.S. PROPOSAL TO ALLOW BULK IMPORTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FROM CANADA
SYNOPSIS
• On October 1, 2020, the United States published the final rule on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, creating a pathway for licensed U.S.
pharmacists or wholesalers to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for the Canadian
market. The rule could worsen the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada and put the health of
Canadians at risk.
• The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on November
27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help prevent bulk importation programs, such
as the one recently established by the U.S., from causing or exacerbating a drug shortage in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to safeguard Canada’s drug supply from U.S. bulk importation
schemes?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue to have access to the medicines they need is a top priority for our
Government.
• This is why, on November 27, 2020, I signed an interim order prohibiting certain drugs intended for the
Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of Canada, if that sale could cause or
exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed drugs for
Canadians.
• Canada’s drug market is too small to meet the demand for prescription drugs of both Canadian and
American consumers.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FOR CANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased drug prices for Canadians. The Government
of Canada is committed to improving Canadians access to, and the affordability of, necessary
prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with key partners
to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• This interim order respects international trade rules, and is not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributes to
millions of jobs in both countries and to increased North American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On October 1, 2020, the final rule for the U.S. regulatory proposal on the Importation of Prescription
Drugs was published. The rule came into effect on November 30, 2020, and creates a pathway for
licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored program approved by the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (US FDA), to import in bulk certain prescription drugs intended for
the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be FDA- and HPFB-approved drugs labeled for
sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The Canadian seller must be licensed by Health
Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a provincial authority, and must also be registered with the
FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import request to the FDA at least 30 days in advance of product
entry and arrival into the U.S. The program allows only a direct supply chain of one manufacturer, one
Canadian seller and one importer for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk.
On March 9, 2020, the Government of Canada submitted comments during the U.S. consultation
process to publicly document Canada’s opposition to the proposed rule, given that it is not deemed to
be an effective solution to high drug prices in the U.S. and that it could exacerbate drug shortages in
Canada. The comments also made it clear that the Government of Canada will take the necessary
measures to safeguard Canada’s drug supply.
President Biden has indicated support for importation programs as a solution to high drug pricing in the
U.S. States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription
drugs from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have already
enacted legislation to authorize such a program, and 16 other states have similar legislation in progress.
As of March 2021, Florida and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services for review and approval.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. Large industry players, representing 90-95% of pharmaceutical distribution in
Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this program. However, there is the
potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any industry uptake could have an impact
on the Canadian drug supply.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on November
27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help ensure that bulk importation programs,
such as the one recently established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage in Canada.
Under the interim order, certain drugs intended for the Canadian market are prohibited from being sold
for consumption outside of Canada if that sale could cause or worsen a drug shortage.
The interim order also authorizes the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or
drug establishment licence holder (DEL) that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate
an existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not in the scope of the interim order.
Health Canada will administer this interim order through compliance promotion, monitoring, and
verification activities. DEL holders who violate the terms of the Interim Order may be subject to
enforcement actions, which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or
the suspension or cancellation of the DEL.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure Canadians are not forced to pay out- of-
pocket for the medical services they need?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care services
based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt the lives of Canadians at an unprecedented level,
our universal health care system has been an enduring source of comfort.
• I take my responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face barriers
when accessing medically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK AND ONTARIO…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive health
services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal health
transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services (NB and ON)
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in
Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private
clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. NB was the last province with a private
abortion clinic where the province refused to provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act (CHA) and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack
of coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995,
without resolution.
When the Canada Health Act Annual Report 2019-2020 was tabled in Parliament in February 2021, some
media reports indicated Health Canada planned to levy a penalty of approximately $140K in March
2021. In fact, that was the deduction, which was levied in March 2020. The penalty levied against New
Brunswick in March 2021 was $64,850.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charged patients facility fees when
accessing insured surgical abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage
for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees
in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has
been clear with ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA,
and based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction was levied against the
province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and ON are working together to ensure these
barriers to access are eliminated.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, these amounts have
been reimbursed as the province has successfully eliminated the charges.
Charter Challenge in British Columbia (BC)
On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of BC released its decision in Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC
(Attorney General), which dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of BC’s Medicare Protection
Act and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private insurance for publicly
insured health care services. The decision is being appealed and will be heard in the BC Court of Appeal
June 14-18, 2021. Canada is participating in the appeal.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
While the elimination of patient charges in BC has been hindered by an injunction related to the Charter
challenge, the province has continued to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address these
charges. In recognition of BC’s ongoing efforts to eliminate patient charges, Health Canada has partially
reimbursed the amounts deducted to the province’s CHT payments to date.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy, which came into effect on April 1, 2020, is aimed at eliminating patient
charges for medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the
long-standing federal position that medically necessary diagnostic services are insured services,
regardless of the venue where the services are delivered.
Provinces and territories were given nearly two years’ notice that the Diagnostic Services Policy was
coming into effect, to give them time to align their health care systems with its requirements. Under the
Policy, provinces and territories will be expected to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Seven provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic
services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to quickly
find a vaccine and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and return to a more normal life.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the government doing to participate in this unprecedented international effort?
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the Canadian
research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working hand in
hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic.
• Since March, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $200 million in more
than 400 research projects, including 128 international collaborations, which focus not only on vaccines,
but also on other therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics.
• Our government is also investing an additional $144 million through CIHR to scale up research to
increase our understanding of persistent and emerging gaps and priority areas including variants and
provide decision makers with rapid guidance and evidence.
• In addition, our government is proud to support the creation of new research evidence to address the
mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Long-term care is also a priority for the next steps of the COVID-19 response and CIHR is collaborating
with partners across Canada to inform the implementation of promising interventions and policies
designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that CIHR will continue to support Indigenous communities as they lead
strengths-based and solutions- focused research that is bold and innovative, thanks to an additional $2
million investment in priority support from CIHR.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will continue to bring the evidence we need to help
Canada address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID- 19
and is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
Medical countermeasures funding accounts for 53 of the 100 projects funded for a total of $36.5M,
including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and clinical
management. The social and policy countermeasures funding accounts for 47 of the 100 projects funded
for a total of $17.7M, including research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health
response and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
CIHR subsequently launched the Sex as a Biological Variable Supplement funding opportunity to provide
additional funding to researchers, funded through the first rapid research response, to investigate
potential molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning observed sex differences in SARS-CoV-2 viral
pathogenesis and its associated immune response. This represents a total investment of $665K to 14
researchers to offset the costs associated with incorporating, comparing and analyzing male, female
and/or intersex biological samples, including cells, tissues and animals, into the proposed research
program.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures
against COVID-19. Building on the March 2020 investment, the majority of this investment enables
researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and social
countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
• Approximately $100M of this $114.9 million investment was allocated to the second COVID- 19 Rapid
Research Funding Competition. In collaboration with its partners, CIHR was able to support 153 grants
representing a total investment of $123.5 million. Twenty-two of these were funded in partnership with
the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, and focus on improving our understanding of COVID-19 immunity in
Canada, a $12.4 million investment.
• Approximately $10 million of the $114.9 million investment was allocated to CIHR’s COVID- 19 and
Mental Health Initiative. In collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada, this initiative supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. New knowledge
generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely
manner.
• This investment also secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials
responsive to WHO priorities to increase the understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines,
therapeutics, mental health supports and clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR – in partnership with PHAC - funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi- disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short- and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
Though vaccines are becoming available, support for research on treatment options and large clinical
trials must continue to ensure that these treatments are successful. CIHR is working tirelessly with its
partners to find ways to do this.
Further, medical countermeasure funds will also allow the Government of Canada, under the leadership
of CIHR, to set up a Centre for Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies Research that will lay
the groundwork towards more nimble domestic and global pandemic research coordination. The Centre
will allow CIHR to support real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the
research community and decision-makers alike, as well as to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
With a $1M investment through CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative, CRISM (a CIHR funded
network) produced national guidance documents to enable the development and dissemination of
national guidelines related to prescribing, dispensing, and delivery of opioids and other narcotics during
the COVID-19 pandemic to support people who use drugs.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR alongside national and
provincial partners including, Healthcare Excellence Canada, have invested $ 3.4M to support evidence-
informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice interventions and policies designed to
improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care.
On September 29, CIHR launched a funding opportunity to invest approximately $2 million in support
strengths-based, solutions-focused research that is bold, innovative, Indigenous community-led, and
that addresses the immediate, intermediate, and/or long-term consequences of COVID-19 and/or
informs future preparedness. This will provide research funding for Indigenous communities and
organizations and researchers of Indigenous ancestry in Canada who are responding to the unique
health and well-being needs of Indigenous Peoples as they relate to the COVID-19 pandemic. The results
are expected in spring 2021.
In October, CIHR completed an independent review of the Canadian International Surveillance Border
Study (led by McMaster Health Labs) which is part of the Government of Canada’s continued research
response to address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. In partnership with Health
Canada, $2.5M in funding is being provided to McMaster Health Labs to help determine the
effectiveness of an airport-based COVID-19 surveillance program.
Finally, building on the priorities from CIHR’s recent COVID-19 investments, CIHR will support projects
focused on emerging priorities. CIHR is launching several rapid response competitions to meet its
objectives. So far, this includes:
• The COVID-19 Knowledge Synthesis Network Funding Opportunity, to support collaboration and rapid
response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge and evidence across the full breadth of
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health measures, clinical management, health-
system arrangements, and economic and social impacts). This $1M investment was announced on
January 13, 2021.
• The Network of Clinical Trials Networks Funding Opportunity, to expand existing national and
international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on interventions to prevent, detect, manage,
and/or treat COVID-19. This $6M will be announced on January 20, 2021.
• CIHR is investing $14.3M to fund complementary initiatives aimed to support global efforts to address
SARS-CoV-2 variants, including:
o Providing supplementary funding for CIHR-funded COVID-19 researchers studying variants to
accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align efforts in this
field. This initiative represents an investment of $5.3M and was announced on March 26, 2021.
o Funding of a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research, or CoVaRR-Net. On March 26, 2021,
CIHR announced that CoVaRR-Net will be led by Dr. Marc-André Langlois from the University of Ottawa.
This national network will coordinate efforts of other networks and study how variants affect Canadians
from diverse communities and demographics. The research teams will collaborate with national and
international bodies such as the National Microbiology Lab, provincial/territorial public health labs, and
the Canadian COVID-19 Genomics Network that are tracking how SARS-CoV-2 is mutating.
• CIHR will also invest in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative way in consultation with
partners so that these investments strategically target key emerging research priorities and gaps that
best contribute to Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way. The first
Emerging COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities Funding Opportunity launched on March 3, 2021. The
total funding amount available for this and upcoming COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities
competitions is approximately $119M. The amount invested in this first competition will depend on the
number and quality, as assessed by peer review, of applications received.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has used agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID-19 clinical trials
and the review of COVID-19 vaccine and treatment submissions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has Health Canada done to facilitate and expedite access to COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of applications for COVID-
19 vaccine clinical trials and submissions for authorization, while maintaining its high standards for
safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• These measures have allowed us to authorize several clinical trials in Canada for COVID-19 vaccines, as
well as the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines, which are already being
administered to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while affording
protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and made
available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of March 2021, over 85 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in Canada.
These have included COVID-19 vaccine trials in children and pregnant women.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for sale in Canada,
regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license manufacturing
facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide advice on
upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that
these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
Authorizing products
The Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in Relation to
COVID-19 created a mechanism for the expedited review of treatments, while ensuring that a high level
of scientific scrutiny is maintained.
The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and vaccines
for Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign regulatory
authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related indications that were
not in the original authorization; and,
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of promising
COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their authorization in
Canada, if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and
quality.
In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate action,
including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required, to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
As of March 29, 2021, 13 submissions have been received under the interim order – including 7
treatments and 6 vaccines. Five of these vaccines and one treatment have been authorized, while the
others remain under review.
Clinical Trials
Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new vaccine are both safe and effective in human
beings, and Health Canada is also facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada, using the
Interim Order respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs related to COVID-19, which was
issued in May 2020.
The IO introduces regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical trials to take place
more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient participation across the country. The IO
helps to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as possible
COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtaining patient consent in light of COVID-19 realities;
• broaden the criteria for qualified health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator duties
at remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinical trial authorization.
Clinical trial applications are being reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
CANADA’S PARTICIPATION IN THE COVAX FACILITY
SYNOPSIS
• Canada is a strong supporter of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, a global
procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and timely access to COVID-19 vaccines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why is Canada participating in the COVAX Facility?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and timely
access to COVID-19 vaccines for participating economies.
• In September 2020, the Government of Canada committed approximately $220 million to the Facility
to procure up to 15 million vaccine doses for Canadians.
• To date, Canada has also contributed over $325 million to help COVAX procure and deliver vaccine
doses to priority populations in low- and lower-middle income countries as soon as possible, particularly
healthcare workers and high-risk populations.
• Through COVAX, Canada has access to a large, actively- managed portfolio of COVID-19 vaccine
candidates, diversifying and complementing the bilateral arrangements Canada has negotiated.
• Canada is expected to receive approximately 1.6 million doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine as its initial
COVAX allocation by the end of May. The first shipment of more than 300,000 doses is due to arrive the
week of April 5.
• These AstraZeneca doses are in addition to others secured through an agreement with Verity
Pharmaceuticals Inc./Serum Institute of India and Canada’s bilateral agreement with AstraZeneca.
• Health Canada is aware of recent very rare reports of blood clots with low levels of blood platelets
following vaccination with the AstraZeneca vaccine in Europe. No Canadian cases of these events have
been reported.
• Health Canada has been working closely with the EMA and other international regulators to assess
these reports and has taken action to confirm the benefit-risk profile of the Astrazeneca vaccines.
• Based on all of the evidence available internationally to date, Health Canada, along with other major
regulators such as the UK and the EMA have confirmed that, overall, the benefits of the AstraZeneca
vaccine continue to outweigh the risks.
IF PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF ASTRAZENECA DOSES CANADA WILL RECEIVE
• Global manufacturing and distribution of vaccines carries uncertainty.
• Canada’s indicative minimum allocation of the AstraZeneca vaccine through COVAX is approximately
1.6 million doses by the end of May.
• We expect additional doses of the vaccine to be made available in the second half of 2021.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN CANADA WILL RECEIVE ASTRAZENECA DOSES
• Deliveries of this allocation are expected to begin within the next few weeks and could be completed
by the end of May.
IF PRESSED ON THE ASTRAZENECA SUPPLY CHAIN
• These doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine will be manufactured at a Health Canada approved site in
South Korea.
IF PRESSED ON ASTRAZENECA VACCINE SAFETY-VERY RARE BLOOD CLOTS IN EUROPE
• Health Canada has been working closely with the European Medicines Agency and other international
regulators to assess recent reports of very rare cases of blood clots in people vaccinated with
AstraZeneca’s vaccine in Europe. No Canadian cases of these events have been reported.
• Health Canada has taken action to confirm the benefit-risk profile of the AstraZeneca vaccines.
• On March 29, Health Canada issued additional terms and conditions on the authorizations of the
AstraZeneca and Verity Pharmaceuticals/Serum Institute of India vaccines to require the manufacturers
to submit a detailed assessment of the benefits and risks of the vaccine by age and sex in the Canadian
context.
• This information will support the ongoing evaluation of these rare blood clotting events, and allow
Health Canada to determine if there are specific groups of people who may be at higher risk.
• Based on all of the evidence available internationally to date, Health Canada, along with other major
regulators such as the UK and the EMA have confirmed that, overall, the benefits of the AstraZeneca
vaccine continue to outweigh the risks.
• On March 24, the department updated the AstraZeneca vaccine labeling and issued guidance to
ensure that healthcare professionals and Canadians have the safety information they need.
 Health Canada has a robust monitoring system in place for vaccines. As of April 3, 2021 in Canada, the
provinces have administered over 470,000 doses of the COVISHIELD version of the AstraZeneca vaccine
so far, and Health Canada has not received any reports of these very rare events to date.
 As the COVID-19 vaccine rollout continues in Canada, Health Canada will continue to monitor the use
of all COVID-19 vaccines closely and examine and assess any new safety concerns.
IF PRESSED ON ASTRAZENECA DOSES COMING FROM THE SERUM INSTITUTE OF INDIA
 The Government of Canada continues to work very closely with officials from India to ensure that
promised doses from the Serum Institute of India continue to flow.
 At this point there are no indications that the two million doses scheduled to arrive in Canada from the
Serum Institute over the coming months will be affected.
 The Government of Canada, through the National Operations Centre, proactively communicates with
provinces and territories about any updates or changes to the vaccine delivery plans.
 None of our COVAX doses are currently being manufactured at the Serum Institute.
IF PRESSED ON WHY CANADA IS RECEIVING DOSES THROUGH COVAX
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism to support the development and equitable
distribution of safe, effective and accessible COVID-19 vaccines for all participating economies–both
high-income and developing.
• Canada has contributed over $325 million to ensure that COVAX is able to procure and deliver vaccine
doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare workers and high risk populations, in low and
lower middle income countries as soon as possible.
• With this support, the COVAX Facility has begun delivering vaccine doses to the world. This is a major
win for us all.
• In an effort to secure a diverse portfolio of vaccine candidates for Canadians, and as part of its vaccine
options chosen via COVAX, Canada selected the AstraZeneca vaccine candidate prior to having
established a direct, formal agreement with the manufacturer.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE NATIONALISM
• Canada is committed to global collaboration to end this pandemic. We have contributed over $325
million to secure and deploy COVID-19 vaccine doses for the COVAX Advanced Market Commitment
(AMC) for 92 low- and middle-income countries.
• The COVAX Facility is designed to provide timely access to vaccines for all participants, using an
equitable allocation framework to share scarce doses across countries so that all participants achieve a
measure of protection.
• To complement Canada’s participation in COVAX, we have secured bilateral agreements, recognizing
that the Facility is not designed to provide full coverage for any participants’ population.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SURPLUS VACCINE DOSES
• In December, the Prime Minister committed to Canada sharing surplus COVID-19 vaccine doses with
the world, should we receive more doses than necessary.
• We expect to have a better sense of any potential supply in excess of Canada’s needs, including
possible options through the COVAX Facility, as additional vaccine candidates are reviewed by Health
Canada for authorization, and as we confirm supply schedules and domestic deployment plans.
• Canada will work closely with our international partners, including other countries, Gavi, the COVAX
Facility, and vaccine manufacturers, to explore all possible options to ensure doses get to people around
the world who need them.
• As part of the $75 million announced in December 2020, Canada has provided Gavi up to $5 million to
establish a mechanism to manage the global sharing of vaccines if and when there is excess supply. This
mechanism for sharing will be part of the COVAX Facility.
BACKGROUND
COVAX Overview
• The COVAX Facility is a global pooled procurement mechanism for COVID-19 vaccines designed to
foster equitable global vaccine access to help end the acute phase of the pandemic. It is co-led by Gavi,
the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), and the World Health
Organization (WHO). The COVAX Facility is aiming to develop an actively managed portfolio of around 10
vaccine candidates to secure 2 billion vaccine doses for the world by the end of 2021.
• Canada has committed approximately $220 million to the COVAX Facility to procure up to 15 million
vaccine doses for people in Canada. Canada is also contributing over $325 million to ensure that COVAX
is able to procure and deliver vaccine doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare workers
and high-risk populations, in low- and lower-middle income countries as soon as possible.
Securing doses for Canadians
• Canada’s participation in COVAX is through an ‘optional purchase model’, providing flexibility to
ensure that any doses obtained through COVAX are well-aligned with doses obtained through bilateral
agreements. Canada’s Vaccine Task Force has been engaged to provide advice on which vaccines Canada
should select.
• On February 26, 2021, COVAX confirmed that Canada would receive 1,624,800 doses of AstraZeneca’s
COVID-19 vaccine as its initial COVAX allocation.
• Additional doses of the AstraZeneca vaccine could be made available through COVAX in the second
half of 2021.
• These doses would come in addition to the 2 million doses Canada has secured through an agreement
with Verity Pharmaceuticals Inc./Serum Institute of India and the 20 million doses Canada secured
through an advance purchase agreement directly with AstraZeneca.
Bilateral Advance Purchase Agreements
• The Government has already announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven leading
vaccine candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca (as well as the Verity
Pharmaceutical Inc./Serum Institute of India version of the AstraZeneca vaccine),
Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
• The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on it successfully completing clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to oversee the
coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys and immune system research that will tell us
how widely the virus has spread in Canada; provide reliable estimates of potential vulnerabilities in
Canadian populations; and provide details on infection-acquired and vaccine-induced immunity. At this
time, the results of these efforts indicate that the level of COVID-19 immunity remains very low across
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Why did the Government of Canada establish an Immunity Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada established the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to determine how
widespread COVID-19 infection is in the Canadian population with a $300 million investment for this
work over two years.
• Our understanding of the levels of immunity in our population and in groups at higher risk of infection,
such as health care workers and older Canadians, supports our public health response, will inform our
work in preventing the spread of COVID-19 and provide evidence to inform vaccine delivery.
• Now that vaccines are being delivered to Canadians, the COVID- 19 Immunity Task Force’s studies will
help us understand more about immunity in our population. Current levels of immunity in the general
population in Canada are still very low.
IF PRESSED
• The membership of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force includes partners from provincial and
territorial Ministries of Health, as well as experts from across the country.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is administering funding to support the studies recommended by
the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force.
• The Task Force is coordinating organisations across the country to contribute their testing results to a
“Sero-Tracker”, a web portal that summarises serological studies from around the world.
• Statistics Canada and Canadian Blood Donor organizations are contributing to the efforts of the
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities through nation-wide seroprevalence surveys.
• Studies of groups at higher risk of infection, such as health care workers, the elderly in Long Term Care
Facilities, children in schools, and inmates in correctional facilities are launching now to determine the
immunity levels in these vulnerable populations and the impacts of vaccine roll-out.
BACKGROUND
Serology Levels in Canada
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of large numbers of
people provide the data needed to understand the scale of infection in the Canadian population.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific groups can help to
direct proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or even disease- preventing
therapies should they become available, and inform targeted surveillance efforts to contain and stop
further outbreaks. Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec are conducting ongoing studies to assess
antibody levels from donor blood in all 10 provinces.
The Task Force website hosts a web portal called “Sero-Tracker”, which summarises serological studies
from around the world. Other organisations across the country are all actively contributing their testing
results to the larger national data.
To date, results from the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force funded studies and other initiatives indicate
that the levels of immunity in the general population in Canada are still very low, which is comparable to
data from other countries.
Government Initiatives
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19 serology surveillance and
targeted research studies, has been established to catalyze, support, and harmonize the design and
rapid implementation of population-based studies that will generate reliable first estimates of SARS-
CoV-2 immunity, overall and in vulnerable and unique populations across Canada.
The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force reflects key agencies of the Government of
Canada and includes representation from several provincial Ministries of Health as well as experts from
across Canada in matters related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology, infectious diseases,
public health, and clinical medicine.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website provides details of activities and findings, connects and
engages scientists within Canada and globally, and links with CanCOVID Network, a platform mandated
by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor to expedite communication and collaboration between the scientific,
healthcare and policy communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force engages various groups for input and advice, including an
Indigenous Advisory Circle, Federal, Provincial and Territorial Chief Medical Officers of Health, and the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Statistics Canada is contributing to the efforts of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities with its
November 2, 2020 rollout of the pan-Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey to measure SARS-
CoV-2 antibodies and collect other COVID-19 related health information.
COVID-19 VARIANTS OF CONCERN
SYNOPSIS
• Several COVID-19 variants of concern have emerged internationally. As of March 29, the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) is aware of three variants of concern present in Canada: the B.1.1.7 variant
(first identified in the United Kingdom), the B.1.351 variant (first identified in South Africa), and the P.1
variant (first identified in Brazil). PHAC, in collaboration with international partners, continues to closely
monitor COVID-19 variants.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada monitoring and addressing emerging COVID-19 variants?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is closely monitoring emerging COVID-19 variants of concern.
• We are aware of COVID-19 variants of concern circulating internationally, three of which have been
identified in Canada.
• We are participating in international efforts, including with partners at the World Health Organization,
to develop a standardized approach to assessing and grading COVID-19 variants.
• Reference frameworks continue to be refined as we build the knowledge base and better understand
the COVID-19 variants and their potential implications.
• Surveillance and research are ongoing, and we will continue to communicate information to Canadians
as our knowledge develops.
IF PRESSED ON VARIANTS…
• All viruses mutate over time, and the virus that causes COVID-19 will also naturally mutate (i.e.,
change the genetic material in the virus).
• Most genetic mutations have little to no impact on the characteristics of the virus. Scientists monitor
changes to viruses so that if a significant mutation is identified, we can adapt and respond to limit its
spread.
• The variant of concern first identified in the United Kingdom is the predominant variant of concern
circulating in Canada, with ongoing efforts at borders to identify the variants of concern first identified
in South Africa and Brazil.
• There is evidence to support that some of the mutations in the P.1 variant of concern (first identified
in Brazil) may affect its transmissibility and antigenic profile.
• A recent report from Brazil suggests that initial infection with a different strain of COVID-19 may not
provide immunity to a subsequent infection by the P.1 variant of concern.
• This observation further highlights the need to follow public health measures to prevent the spread of
COVID-19 regardless of previous infection or recent immunization.
• The B.1.427/ B.1.429 (California) lineages continue to be assessed. Canada is able to detect this variant
through sequencing, and continues to monitor it.
• The National Microbiology Lab (NML) is working with international partners to gather more
information about the newly identified Bretagne strain to inform the Canadian response as appropriate.
• We are closely monitoring a number of additional variants of COVID-19. Scientists in Canada and
around the world are evaluating these variants and their key mutations; until these assessments are
made, these are currently categorized as “variants of interest” rather than variants of concern.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACTS OF COVID-19 VARIANTS OF CONCERN…
• There is no conclusive evidence that the variants of concern identified in Canada to date impact
testing devices used in Canada.
• Vaccine manufacturers are investigating the impacts of these variants of concern on their vaccines.
• There are reports that certain types of vaccines may be less effective against the variants of concern
first identified in South Africa and Brazil. Current evidence suggests mRNA vaccines will continue to be
effective against B.1.1.7 (the variant first identified in the United Kingdom).
• More research is needed to confirm these early findings.
• Early data show the variants of concern first identified in the United Kingdom, South Africa and Brazil
are associated with increased transmissibility.
• We are aware of reports from the United Kingdom that the variant of concern first identified there
may be associated with an increased risk of death.
• We continue to monitor the emerging evidence with domestic and international partners.
IF PRESSED ON PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES…
• The public health measures we have been practicing continue to be effective in preventing the spread
of COVID-19, including the variants of concern.
• We need to maintain the strictest vigilance in our public health measures and individual practices.
• As efforts continue across Canada to increase overall vaccine coverage, public health measures remain
the foundation of the pandemic response.
• This will help to prevent these variants from re-accelerating the pandemic and making it much more
difficult to control.
• Until we learn more about the vaccine’s ability to prevent transmission, the Public Health Agency of
Canada continues to recommend a “layered” approach to public health measures and personal
preventive practices, with multiple measures used at once, as the most effective way of protecting
yourself and others, regardless of an individual’s vaccination status.
• We continue to use all evidence and models available to help us identify which combinations of public
health measures are most effective to help us control the pandemic, including the spread of variants of
concern.
• Federal, provincial and territorial governments will continue to assess the risk of COVID-19
transmission in communities, including variants of concern. Measures will be adjusted based on
emerging evidence as well as key epidemiological and other indicators.
• Each province and territory will continue to make plans according to the unique circumstances they
are experiencing within their jurisdictions.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER AND TRAVEL MEASURES…
• Since February 15, 2021 travelers arriving by land to Canada, with some exceptions, are required to
provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result within 72 hours of pre-arrival, or a positive
test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival.
• In addition, as of February 22, 2021, travelers arriving by land or air, with some exceptions, are
required to
o take a COVID-19 molecular test upon arrival and toward the end of the 14 day quarantine AND
o submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan before crossing the
border or boarding a flight
o reserve prior to departure to Canada a 3-night stay in a government-authorized hotel (for air
passengers)
IF PRESSED ON LABORATORY / RESEARCH WORK…
• The National Microbiology Laboratory collaborates with international laboratories to monitor and
assess emerging COVID- 19 variants of interest and of concern.
• The Global Health Security Initiative’s Lab network supports countries, including Canada, with access
to different COVID-19 strains for research and information sharing purposes.
• In April 2020, the Government of Canada contributed $40 million to support the creation of the
Canadian COVID-19 Genomics Network to help understand the genetic variations of the COVID-19 virus
as it evolves.
• The Network provides Canadian public health authorities with important genome sequencing data,
and also coordinates all COVID-19 genome sequencing efforts across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON VARIANTS OF CONCERN STRATEGY…
• On February 12, the Government of Canada announced an investment of $53 million in an integrated
Variants of Concern Strategy to increase our capacity to find and track variants of concern.
• This national strategy leverages existing laboratories and expertise to drive public health investigations
and take rapid public health action.
• This partnership involves the Public Health Agency of Canada's National Microbiology Laboratory,
Health Canada, Genome Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
• To implement the Strategy:
o The National Microbiology Lab is providing $20 million, and the Canadian COVID-19 Genomics
Network is providing $8 million, to increase genomic sequencing and real-time data sharing capacity.
o The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is also providing up to $25 million to increase our
understanding of emerging variants and provide decision makers with rapid guidance for drug therapy,
vaccine effectiveness, and other public health strategies.
• The Variants of Concern Strategy is part of our science and evidence-based response to the COVID-19
pandemic.
• As COVID-19 variants of concern continue to emerge, Canada will be prepared to detect, track, and
treat these new cases.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada is closely monitoring genetic variation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The
Canadian and global medical, public health and research communities are actively evaluating these
genetic changes to better understand the potential implications in terms of transmission, clinical
presentation and vaccine and therapeutics development.
“Variants of concern” are viruses that have a confirmed impact on the characteristics of the virus. A
variant is “of concern” when it is associated with :
• Increased disease spread;
• Increased disease severity;
• Decreased effectiveness of vaccines, treatments, diagnostics, or public health control measures.
Monitoring genetic variations combined with interprovincial and international spread of the virus will
become increasingly important when public health measures are slowly lifted and cross- border travel
resumes. Variants of COVID-19 are important to monitor for patterns of transmission (for example, in
different age groups), if more severe outcomes are observed, if diagnostic tests can detect the variants,
and whether vaccines and therapeutics will continue to be effective.
A detailed characterization of genetic variations can also help researchers to:
• understand the viral and host mechanisms leading to disease and recovery;
• understand how it spreads through populations and other potential hosts; and
• help identify suitable drug and vaccine targets.
As genetic variants become established in a population, they form a lineage (with a common ancestor
and descendants) that can be used to inform the origin of new cases. By comparing viral genome
sequences, scientists can monitor the spread of these established lineages in Canada. The genomic data
from identified cases can also provide additional evidence to identify related cases or matches in cluster
investigations, especially when contact tracing is not available or inconclusive.
To date, we are aware of several COVID-19 variants circulating internationally including variants of
concern first observed in the United Kingdom (B.1.1.7), South Africa (B.1.351), Brazil (P.1), as well as
other variants identified in Nigeria, Japan, and the United States. As of March 29, 2021, the B.1.1.7
variant has been reported in 112 countries, the B.1.351 variant has been confirmed in 76 countries, and
the P.1 variant has been identified in 35 countries.
In Canada, as of March 29, the B.1.1.7 variant has been identified in all Canadian provinces; the B.1.351
variant has been identified in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, and
Nova Scotia; and the P.1 variant has been identified in Ontario, British Columbia, Alberta and Québec.
While VOC outbreaks in Canada are primarily driven by the B.1.1.7 and B.1.351 variants, there is
evidence of outbreaks attributed to community transmission of all three variants of concern.
We are aware of a recent report from the United Kingdom that the variant of concern first identified
there may be associated with an increased risk of death. Two studies recently published in Nature and
the British Medical Journal found that cases with the B.1.1.7 variant of concern were associated with a
61% and 64% higher risk of death compared to cases with non-variant strains. We continue to monitor
the emerging evidence with domestic and international partners.
There are reports in the media on March 22, 2021, describing a B.1.214 or “spike insertion” variant,
presumably due to having an amino acid insertion in spike. There are multiple different categories of
mutations, including substitutions, deletions and insertions. Insertions are rarely seen mutations in
SARS-CoV-2, but otherwise aren’t any more concerning than the other types of mutations. The
prevalence of the variant, first detected in January 2020, is slowly growing in Belgium (currently at ~4%
prevalence), but there is no evidence of increased transmissibility or severity. There are no detections of
the B.1.214 in Canada.
The U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced the transition of the B.1.427/B.1.429
(California) from variants of interest to variants of concern on March 16, 2021. However, the UK
continues to define it as a variant of interest.
There is emerging concern that certain vaccines, including the mRNA vaccines, may have decreased
efficacy against the B.1.351 and P.1 variants of concern. On January 20, laboratory results indicated that
the Pfizer vaccine is likely to protect against B.1.1.7, as well as B.1.351. However, on February 2, a study
presented preliminary data that suggested the vaccine may be less effective against the B.1.351 variant.
On January 24, Moderna reported that early laboratory tests suggest antibodies triggered by the
Moderna vaccine can recognize and fight the new variants, but may potentially be less effective against
the B.1.351 variant (though still above the threshold that is thought to be protective); the company
noted that more studies are needed to confirm this is true for people who have been vaccinated. On
January 25, Moderna announced it is designing a booster shot to target the B.1.351 variant.
On January 29, Novavax reported that its vaccine candidate was more than 85% effective against the
background SARS-CoV-2, but noted decreased efficacy of less than 50% against the B.1.351 variant. On
January 30, Johnson & Johnson reported that a single shot of its vaccine was 66% effective overall in a
large trial across three continents; however, there were wide differences by region, and efficacy reached
57% in South Africa, where the B 1.351 made up 95% of the COVID-19 cases reported in the trial. The
Government of Canada signed advance purchase agreements with Novavax and Johnson & Johnson in
August 2020, though at this time, only Johnson & Johnson is approved for use in Canada (Novavax is
pending Health Canada authorization).
Research is ongoing regarding the impact of variants on the effectiveness of authorized drugs.
Preliminary results have shown that bamlanivimab (treatment) is expected to be rendered ineffective by
the B.1.351 variant and the B.1.427/B.1.429 variant.
On February 12, the Government of Canada announced plans to increase our capacity to find and track
variants in the country by investing $53 million in an integrated Variants of Concern Strategy. This will
help rapidly scale up our surveillance, sequencing and research efforts. This national strategy brings
together public health and genomic sequencing along with epidemiology, immunology, virology, and
mathematical modelling. Funding will expand upon existing public health networks to establish regional
clinical and public health teams to quickly identify and characterize variants of concern. Through the
Strategy, we will also standardize data sharing across Canada and facilitate the access of information on
the variants from national and international databases. The funding will also create a research network
to complement surveillance efforts and public health actions as part of an integrated team, and provide
key information on the biological relevance of the variants to inform public health decisions.
PROTECTING THE ROLLOUT OF CANADA’S COVID-19 IMMUNIZATION PLAN AGAINST CYBERSECURITY
THREATS
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is working to protect the rollout of Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan
against cybersecurity threats.
KEY MESSAGES
• The urgent need to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic has created a global environment of anxiety
and competition for vaccines and resources.
• Hostile actors are seeking to take advantage of this period of uncertainty, for instance to steal vaccine
research, disrupt supply and spread disinformation.
• Cybersecurity threats are also a concern with key partners such as the United States and the United
Kingdom. This is an issue affecting every major actor responding to the pandemic.
• The Government of Canada takes these threats very seriously.
• Embedded in the Agency’s National Operations Centre, Canadian Armed Forces logistics experts are
fully aware of the threats posed by hostile cyber activities. They are in communication with cyber
experts from Communications Security Establishment Canada as well as other partners in the security
community to monitor the cyber landscape.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada remains dedicated to delivering vaccines safely and securely to
destinations throughout Canada.
• Canadians can help fight disinformation and other cyber threats by consulting reliable sources for
their news and information, such as the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security website.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian health sector is considered a key critical infrastructure that needs to be protected against
disruptions, whether caused by national disasters or hostile activities. It includes research and
development; intellectual property; digital networks and health data; supply chain and distribution;
pharmaceutical drugs (such as therapeutics and vaccines); medical and protective equipment; and
healthcare buildings and infrastructure.
The concept of critical infrastructure refers to processes, systems, facilities, technologies, networks,
assets, and services essential to the health, safety, security or economic well-being of Canadians.
Disruption of critical infrastructure could result in catastrophic loss of life, adverse economic effects, and
significant harm to public confidence.
In the context of the pandemic, hostile actors can be expected to attempt to steal vaccine research,
interfere with the integrity of vaccine supply chains, and spread disinformation in an effort to destabilize
and divide. Social media platforms and readily available cyber tools enable hostile actors to broaden the
scale, speed, range, and impact of their interference activities.
American and British intelligence agencies have publicly expressed concerns about hostile activities
targeting COVID-19 vaccine research. The European Medicines Agency reports being targeted by
malicious cyber activity, and private information technology companies are witnessing similar online
hostile activities.
A community of practice around cyber security has been established within the health sector. It brings
together over 100 stakeholders on a weekly basis with the objective of enhancing our collective
resilience. As part of this forum, Communications Security Establishment Canada shares the latest cyber
threat information, including sensitive information drawn from the latest intelligence available.
As another example of many federal government efforts, last summer, Public Safety Canada, in
partnership with the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and the Public Health Agency of Canada,
developed the Canadian Cyber Security Tool. This tool enables health sector organizations to perform an
easy self-assessment to identify areas for improvement in their cyber security posture.
DENTAL CARE
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with Parliament on its study of national dental
care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know there
are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• My mandate letter highlights this Government’s desire to work with Parliament to study and analyze
the possibility of national dental care.
• Dental care is only one aspect of our commitment to improving health care for Canadians. The 2019
Speech from the Throne committed to work with provinces and territories to address health needs
arising from the pandemic, but also to improve access to primary care, set standards for long-term care,
address the opioid epidemic and implement pharmacare for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-62 FEDERAL DENTAL CARE PLAN
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and Minister of Health Mandate Letter both committed to support
Parliament in studying and analyzing the possibility of a national dental care program.
• The results of this work by Parliament would be helpful for determining the best approach for
identifying gaps, improving access to dental care, and determining a federal role in this area. The
Government looks forward to the outcomes of Parliamentary work on this issue.
BACKGROUND
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health both committed
the Government to work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of national dental care.
The 2020 Speech from the Throne is silent on this issue.
• In February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) agreed to undertake
a study on the development of a national dental care program, although the study never began during
the last session. On October 26, 2020, New Democratic Party Member of Parliament Don Davies
introduced a motion that HESA undertake a study on the development of a national dental care program
as an insured service for Canadians. Health Canada remains ready to support a study by the Committee,
should it decide again to undertake that work.
• In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental care
program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated that this
program would cost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3 billion to
clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually through 2024-
25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year, and decrease
to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
• During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified inequality and wasted
spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care avoidance due to cost results in preventable
oral health emergency room spending. The NDP planned to address this issue through a national,
income-based “Denticare” plan that would have provided free care for households earning under
$70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between $70,000 and $90,000.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental services
in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was publicly
funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based private
health insurance plans.
• Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care for all
residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select services for
groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
• Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for services
not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental services to Canadian
Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries, and some veterans and refugee claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of Canada’s
employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in 2020-21, which
is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not including the value
of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income tax system
provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical
expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
• Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
DIABETES
SYNOPSIS
• Diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or when
the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Uncontrolled or undiagnosed diabetes can lead
to serious complications and premature death. Those who have diabetes can take steps to control the
disease and lower the risk of complications. Canadians living with diabetes may be at greater risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our top priority is to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Our Government recognizes the
impact diabetes has on the health of Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.
• Our Government invests in research, prevention and early detection of diabetes. In 2018–2019 alone,
our Government invested over $48 million in diabetes research through the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research.
• We are also supporting community-based initiatives that aim to help Canadians reduce their risk for
chronic diseases, including diabetes, by promoting physical activity, healthy eating, and tobacco
prevention and cessation.
BACKGROUND
Approximately 3.2 million Canadians are living with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year. Healthy behaviours (e.g. healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of
type 2 diabetes and negative diabetes-related health outcomes. COVID-19 has demonstrated the
importance of preventing or delaying the development of chronic diseases, such as type 2 diabetes, as
people living with pre-existing chronic health conditions may be at greater risk of severe COVID-19
outcomes.
Government of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collection and analysis of chronic diseases
and their risk and protective factors; strengthens collaborations to better track disease trends and risks
and supports the development of prevention guidelines for primary care.
PHAC is supporting community-based initiatives through the Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund,
which invests approximately $20 million annually and leverages additional funding to promote physical
activity, healthy eating and tobacco prevention/cessation.
To help Canadians identify their risk of diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC developed CANRISK,
the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible to Canadians through partnerships with
Diabetes Canada, Loblaws, and others.
From 2014-15 to 2018-19, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), invested approximately $229 million in diabetes research.
This year (2021) marks the 100th anniversary of the discovery of insulin at the University of Toronto, by
the Canadian scientist, Dr. Frederick Banting. The Government of Canada is working with stakeholders to
celebrate this significant milestone. For example, in addition to a new Partnership to Defeat Diabetes
with JDRF, CIHR recently launched an initiative with key partners to celebrate the 100th anniversary of
the discovery of insulin.
On April 14, 2021, the World Health Organization and the federal government will co-host an event
(called ‘Summit’) to launch the WHO’s Global Diabetes Compact and build momentum to redouble
efforts to address diabetes as a public health problem worldwide.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health released its report on its study of diabetes
strategies. It is expected that the Report will be re-tabled in the House in April 2021.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173) designating the month of November as
Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal – Ontario) introduced Bill C- 237,
which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with stakeholders, to develop a national
framework designed to support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better
health outcomes for Canadians. The Government announced its support during the second hour of
debate in March 2021, and the Bill will receive third reading in the upcoming months.
DRUG SHORTAGES
SYNOPSIS
• The onset of COVID-19 created global supply chain challenges and increased demand for drugs used in
supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly in the context of COVID-19 critical
drugs, pose a risk to the health of Canadians.
• Health Canada collaborated with partners and took action early in the pandemic to supplement
existing supply and in certain cases avoid critical drug shortages. While some pressures still exist, the
supply and demand levels for many drugs are stabilizing.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is continuing
its surveillance activities and engagement with key supply chain players to mitigate impacts of any drug
shortages.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does not create drug
shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for the Government of
Canada.
• Significant efforts were made early in the pandemic to respond to drug supply disruptions. As a result,
the supply situation for many key drugs has been stabilizing.
• I have signed four Interim Orders to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages related to
COVID-19 and to safeguard supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient groups
and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to help prevent
and minimize the impact of shortages.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES…
• Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the impact of any drug shortages related to
COVID-19.
• Through this work, we have been able to secure additional supplies of needed drugs for Canada. For
example, we have worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of drugs
such as muscle relaxants, inhalers, and sedatives to support COVID-19 patients.
• While the supply and demand situation for many critical drugs is stabilizing, the need for vigilance
continues. As of April 15, 2021, we have been able to de-escalate 33 shortages from critical status, out
of a total of 47 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic. Active
monitoring continues and we will apply the lessons learned from early in the pandemic to strengthen
our response going forward.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SHORTAGES OF ARTHRITIS DRUGS USED TO TREAT COVID-19 PATIENTS
• The Government of Canada is taking steps to ensure Canadians have access to promising, safe and
effective COVID-19 therapies, which are essential to saving lives, reducing suffering and alleviating the
burden on health systems.
• The Government of Canada has secured access to some additional supplies of key drugs being used to
treat COVID-19 patients, including drugs also used to treat arthritis, to help protect supplies for all
patients who rely on these drugs.
• The Government of Canada will continue to closely monitor supplies of all drugs being used to treat
COVID-19 patients, and will take action with our partners to help mitigate the impact of any shortages.
IF PRESSED ON THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE…
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada has established a COVID-19
Critical Drug Reserve.
• The Critical Drug Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drug shortage
management efforts, and will function as a safety net by augmenting the supply of key drugs used in
treating patients with COVID-19 in Canada.
• Based on Canada’s experience to date, analyses, discussions with provinces and territories, as well as
the advice of health care experts, the Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals to
support patients with COVID-19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular
blockers.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care
professionals, and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages where possible and minimize their
impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors, practitioners, and the
federal government. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and
territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may
include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repeals and replaces the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 that the Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention and Alleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to COVID-
19
This interim order, made by the Minister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduces new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allows the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allows the Minister to impose or amend terms and conditions
on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduces new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
such as the one recently established by the United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in
Canada. The interim order also enables the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could
help Health Canada take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Drug Shortages
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of years, capacity
has been built up across governments, leading to a more coordinated and effective approach to mitigate
the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages, and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocating supply where it is needed most.
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve has been established, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives,
muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
EVOLUTION OF COVID-19 SCIENCE
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada recognizes the continually evolving evidence and understanding
related to COVID-19, and develops guidance and recommendations based on the best evidence,
Canadian and global experiences and public health practices.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How does the federal government evaluate emerging scientific evidence related to the COVID-19
pandemic, and how does it decide when to change guidance provided to Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s response efforts to COVID-19 continue to be guided by the latest science, evidence and
research through a collaborative effort from federal, provincial and territorial governments and
international partners.
• Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 will also evolve and be informed by new
scientific evidence, global data, expert opinion, experiences of other countries and analysis of what
would work best in Canada.
• Provinces and territories also develop guidance for their own jurisdictions which may differ, reflecting
regional circumstances in response to the pandemic.
• When we determine that a body of evidence has gained sufficient credibility, is relevant in the
Canadian context, and is accepted by the scientific community, we update our advice and guidance as
quickly as possible, often in collaboration with provinces and territories.
• The Government of Canada has developed funding programs to support the scientific research needed
to fill current knowledge and infrastructure gaps in Canada.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, and around the world, researchers are actively investigating all aspects of the novel
coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, causing COVID-19. Although our knowledge of COVID-19 is continually
growing, it is incomplete, and we will keep learning more as the science continues to evolve. Canada’s
public health advice will continue to be informed by and guided by science, which will help ensure the
health and safety of the Canadian population in the face of this unprecedented pandemic.
PHAC has organised a network of experts who closely follow the emerging scientific literature and the
experiences of jurisdictions to understand what is known about COVID-19. The evolution of knowledge
and pandemic experience is used to continually shape the COVID-19 response.
Surveillance systems have been developed to monitor the pandemic. Expertise across the agency has
worked to develop testing capacity, to model how COVID-19 may spread and evaluate the impact of
public health measures on the pandemic, to develop guidance for infection prevention and control and
mass vaccination based on the most recent information.
PHAC is an active participant in a number of expert groups and has developed strong linkages with FPT
partners and academia to harness the collective knowledge and experience most relevant to the
Canadian context. Canada’s guidance is developed and revised based on analysis of COVID-19 evidence,
global data, experiences of other countries and analysis of what will work best in Canada. Provincial and
territorial partners may also develop their own guidance which may differ depending on the specific
circumstances of the jurisdiction. There are dedicated scientists, epidemiologists and public health
experts across PHAC that are routinely scanning and assessing scientific data from around the world, to
assess its quality, relevance to Canada, and potential impact on guidance related to COVID-19.
PHAC liaises with international partners, including the World Health Organization (WHO). PHAC is an
active member of many WHO expert committees that are continually working to incorporate the newest
evidence and data in recommendations to public health decision-makers. Evidence is a central
component to Canada’s pandemic response. Thus Canada’s research and scientific communities have
been mobilized to advance research and technology development. Since March 2020, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has moved quickly in collaboration with key partners to invest more
than $200 million in almost 400 research projects, which includes over 128 international collaborations,
focusing on a diverse array of topics including vaccines, therapeutics, and transmission dynamics.
Furthermore, CIHR, in partnership with Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), is leveraging the existing
Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) to address the COVID-19 pandemic. CIRN has received
three directed grants to date. The first, for $997,683, is to coordinate the collection and analysis of
epidemiological and laboratory data to inform public health planning and decision making in regards to
Canada’s emergency response to COVID-19. The second provided $240,731 in funding for CIRN to
conduct research on the impact of legal frameworks on vaccination in Canada, which will help inform
the approach to potential COVID- 19 vaccines. The third, for $3.5 million, is to undertake urgent
research activities related to COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and to provide vaccine-related research
outcomes that will inform effective, equitable and timely COVID-19 public health decision-making.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
SYNOPSIS
Family violence, including all forms of intimate partner violence, accounts for roughly 40% of violent
crime reported to police. The emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic create additional risks for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families.
KEY MESSAGES
• Gender-based violence, including family violence, is a serious public health issue that can have lasting
impacts on both physical and mental health of Canadians.
• Our Government has invested nearly $200 million over the last five years to establish the Strategy to
Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence.
• We are also investing approximately $6 million annually in community-based projects that support the
health of survivors of family violence.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government has announced new initiatives that can help
reduce the risk and impacts of family violence; including funding for Kids Help Phone, shelters and
sexual assault services, income support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable
organizations.
BACKGROUND
The consequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short and long- term
mental and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs. These can include: behavioural
problems in children; drug and alcohol use and attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and
lack of stable employment in adulthood; and, depression and financial problems in older adults. In
addition, spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created increased risks for the health and safety of many vulnerable
Canadians, as children and families face increased stress, and may have difficulty leaving abusive
relationships or accessing support or prevention programs.
One-third of Canadians reported that they were very or extremely concerned about family stress from
confinement, and 8% of Canadians reported that they were very or extremely concerned about the
possibility of violence in Canadians homes. Among people over the age of 50, 6% reported increased
verbal and physical conflict during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additional data collected in Fall 2020 will be analysed to clarify the degree to which Canadians are
personally experiencing violence during confinement.
New Government Initiatives, announced between March and October 2020, that will help address
pressures on vulnerable families in the context of COVID-19 include:
• $7.5 million investment to Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis support for children
and youth;
• $100 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
• multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and families, including the
enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence, PHAC is investing
more than $8 million per year ongoing to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child
maltreatment, and equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to survivors.
Supporting the Health of Survivors of Family Violence
In addition to these new investments to prevent gender-based violence, PHAC invests over $6 million
per year to support the health of survivors of family violence, through guidance and training for
professionals, and through the delivery and testing of health promotion interventions for survivors.
These projects are measuring their impact on health outcomes such as anxiety, depression and Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Family Violence Initiative
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative (FVI), which brings together 12 departments
and agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family violence. On behalf of the FVI, PHAC
hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a web-based source of current information on family
violence for health professionals and the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to supports and
services available in each province and territory.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH)
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the unintended consequences of COVID-19 on
concerns of violence in the family and parenting challenges. The analysis will seek to estimate the
prevalence of concerns of violence among the population in Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and
compare prevalence in the previous year, while also identifying those groups that may potentially have a
higher risk of these concerns than the general population.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family relationships
and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts surveillance on family violence; and supports analysis to
understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
SYNOPSIS
• In 2020, the Minister of Health announced the External Review Panel to examine the Public Health
Agency of Canada’s Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). On February 28, 2021, the Panel
provided the Minister with an interim report on its work. The report was made publicly available March
20, 2021.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the Government of Canada doing to respond to concerns about Canada’s Global Public Health
Intelligence Network?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to scientific excellence, and I am committed to improving
Canada’s early warning system for potential emergencies – including pandemics.
• That is why, last year, I announced that the External Review Panel would undertake a review of the
Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) at my request.
• The panel’s interim report was released on the Canada.ca website on March 20, 2021.
• The External Review Panel will provide recommendations and advice through a final report, expected
in late spring of this year. The final report and recommendations will also be made public.
• The Auditor General released a report on the Public Health Agency of Canada’s pandemic response on
March 25, 2021, and included recommendations to improve the Agency’s ability to respond to similar
health events in the future.
• I am committed to addressing recommendations in the report, as well as the final recommendations of
the GPHIN External Review, to improve Canada’s early warning system that informs public health action.
• Recommendations from both of these reports will help inform decisions and improvements to the
Government of Canada’s public health intelligence and surveillance so that Canada is well-positioned to
detect and respond to future public health events.
IF PRESSED FOR DETAILS ON THE INTERIM REPORT
• The interim report, which includes a look at the past and present state of GPHIN, highlights the Panel’s
approach and work to date on this review.
• The report confirms that GPHIN was not shut down. GPHIN provided early warning of COVID-19 to
Canadian public health professionals, and continues to operate as Canada’s event-based public health
surveillance system.
• I appreciate the panel identifying the key areas of focus for their work.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to support the External Review Panel and provide
any information they need to complete their final report.
• I am committed to addressing recommendations in the final report, expected this spring, to improve
Canada’s early warning system that informs public health action.
IF PRESSED ON THE ISSUANCE OF ALERTS
 At the onset of the pandemic, GPHIN performed its key function of providing early warning within
Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to use GPHIN as Canada’s global event-based
surveillance system, relying on the full scope of its capabilities to provide early detection and
warning of potential public health threats.
 The issuance of alerts will be examined as part of the independent review.
BACKGROUND
GPHIN: KEY FACTS
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public health agencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance. GPHIN requires a free subscription from eligible
users. GPHIN is a significant contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic Intelligence
from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
 a professional multidisciplinary team of life science analysts conducting rapid risk assessments to
detect public health threats; and
 an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing to
facilitate the work of the analysts.
Every day, GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of, on average, 7,000 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese)
sourced from open event based surveillance to validate and assess the data for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report published each morning. This report goes directly from GPHIN to
Canadian public health practitioners at the federal, provincial and territorial levels, including senior
management at PHAC and other government departments.
In August, 2020, the Minister of Health requested an external review of the global public health
surveillance system. This review was established to consider:
 the capabilities and effectiveness of the existing system;
 the system’s role in detecting and informing the Public Health Agency of Canada’s response to COVID-
19 and in global and domestic public health surveillance;
 opportunities to improve the system; and
 the future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next generation of
intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of Canada is well
positioned to respond to future public health events.
Panel members, Margaret Bloodworth, Dr. Paul Gully, and Dr. Mylaine Breton, were selected based on
their expertise in public health, governance, health security, and intelligence.
On March 20, 2021, the External Review Panel’s interim report was made publicly accessible on the
Canada.ca website.
The interim report provides a comprehensive overview of GPHIN and clearly states that, while areas for
improvement exist, GPHIN’s actions did not hinder Canada’s knowledge of or subsequent action in
response to COVID 19. The report highlights the Panel’s approach and work to date on this review,
which includes a look at the past and present state of GPHIN, from its creation in the 1990s to its current
operations. The report provides an overview of GPHIN’s structure and functions, and GPHIN’s initial
detection of what would become the COVID-19 pandemic.
The report also points to where the Panel plans to focus attention as it begins to develop
recommendations, such as:
 The operational context, role and mandate of GPHIN;
 Governance structures that support GPHIN;
 Partnerships and flows of information between GPHIN and stakeholders, domestically and globally;
 Lessons learned from COVID-19 and opportunities to improve the system; and
 Advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems and the future of surveillance
tools.
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
entitled Covid-19 Pandemic: Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance and Border Control Measures. This
included an audit of PHAC’s and Canada Border Service Agency’s pandemic response. The report notes
that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC quickly mobilized and adapted
its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potential public health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed.
 PHAC officials confirmed that by the end of December 2019, other international sources had already
shared news of the virus and therefore it was unnecessary for GPHIN to issue an alert.
 GPHIN did issue daily reports about the new virus to Canadian partners (including federal, provincial,
and territorial public health officials) starting on December 31, 2019, and thus performed its key
function of providing early warning within Canada.
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after which the
number of alerts decreased significantly.
 PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of and response to
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert reporting.
 In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure was
put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
In response to the Auditor General’s recommendation, and in anticipation of the anticipated final
recommendations from the GPHIN External Review Panel, PHAC will make further improvements to
GPHIN including the alert process.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care system,
such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about the health care system’s
capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health care system?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is making investments that are helping provincial and territorial health
systems respond to the virus.
• The Government has introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in direct support to
provinces and territories for health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination roll-out.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are ready for
future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term care,
home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500 million in
support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance use, or
homelessness.
• The federal government is ready to respond to provincial and territorial requests for assistance, e.g.,
with health human resource support and the facilitation of mobile health services capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health system capacity
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and territories to
track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital beds and medical
equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under different
modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support from the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
 We know that in some cases, our systems are already severely stressed, despite efforts to put in place
extra capacity.
 That is why governments are very carefully balancing public health restrictions with available capacity
and careful tracking of resource use in hospitals (like intensive care bed use), and why the Government
of Canada stands ready to provide additional support should it be needed (for example, through field
units).
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase system capacity and meet
projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically
reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and online
screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is also
complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also running training
exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
• While provinces and territories continue to protect health system capacity for COVID-19 patients, they
have been reintroducing previously postponed services (e.g. elective surgeries and procedures) to avoid
increasing backlogs and to address them where possible. Some estimates suggest that it could take up
to 24 months to address the backlogs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing to
mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for Canadians experiencing
challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative care –
who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some of the
costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’ gradual
return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential services
to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
• a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid sick leave with
access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemic and to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testing supplies and
supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE and
medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as maintaining the
readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing a new Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces and
territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and control to
protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
 Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
 Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work with provinces and territories to set new, national
standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions;
 Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
 Continuing to respond to Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations responding
to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19 context; and
 Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond to COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-19
outbreaks and other large-scale emergencies.
Support for Health Care and Vaccinations
 On March 25, 2021 the Government introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in direct
support to provinces and territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
 The proposed funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system
pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing the backlog of
medical procedures, patient care, and access to primary care put on hold due to the pandemic.
 The legislation also includes a one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, to the
provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
SYNOPSIS
• Minister Hajdu’s 2019 mandate letter from the Prime Minister indicates that the government will
continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare and renew
health agreements. This work will include ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams,
setting national standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and palliative care. Since
then, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and Fall Economic Statement has confirmed these priorities,
also committing up to $1B for safe long-term care, and to working with PTs to set new national
standards for long-term care. This is in addition to supplemental investments to the Canada Health
Transfer announced in March 2020 and a commitment most recently through Bill C-25 to provide
provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-
up to the CHT. This commitment and new investment build on the bilateral agreements that are in place
and will be renewed in 2022 to support improved access to home and community care and mental
health and addiction services.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to support provincial and territorial health care systems in
Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why our
government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
 On March 25, 2021, our Government committed to provide provinces and territories with an
additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer
to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support
vaccine roll-out.
 This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19 billion
Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
 In fall 2020, given the toll that COVID-19 has taken on those living in long-term care facilities, our
government further committed to up to $1 billion to support safe long-term care.
 Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
 Through this work, our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in
order to improve health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE LETTER COMMITMENT ON PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
• There are almost 90,000 physicians in Canada, a record number, but access to care is still an issue for
some Canadians.
• Our Government is committed to engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, health
professionals and experts to help make sure Canadians can access primary health care when they need
it.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
• Our Government will provide provinces and territories with over $43 billion in 2021-22 through the
Canada Health Transfer, totalling over $235 billion over the next 5 years.
• The Government has also introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in direct support to
provinces and territories for health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination roll-out.
This includes a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are ready for
future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term care,
home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500 million in
support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance use, or
homelessness.
• In addition, targeted funding in Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion in new targeted funding over 10
years to provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health
and addiction services.
• Since then, our government has made additional commitments to support provinces and territories in
areas where resources are most needed and more recently targeted support has been announced for
virtual care of 150 million and safe long-term care of over $1 billion.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of Quebec, and
continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services bilateral
agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home and
community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of asymmetrical
federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and territories
for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $9.7 billion to Quebec in 2021-
22.
• Quebec will also receive $902.4 million as part of its share of the $4 billion, one-time top-up to the
CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING
• The Government of Canada has consistently emphasized the importance of Canadians seeing results
for the investments in mental health and home care.
• In the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles, federal, provincial and territorial Ministers of
Health agreed to work collectively to develop a focused set of indicators to measure progress and report
to Canadians.
• In 2018, Ministers of Health agreed to a set of pan-Canadian indicators to measure progress. The
Canadian Institute for Health Information began reporting on the first of these indicators on annual
basis in 2019.
• In addition, provinces and territories have also included program- specific indicators in their bilateral
agreements.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE
• In fall 2020, our Government committed up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care Fund, to help
provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection prevention and control.
• Provinces and territories are expected to use this investment to undertake priority activities, including
hiring additional staff (such as personal support workers) or topping up wages, infrastructure
improvements and readiness assessments for infection prevention and control.
• As a condition of funding, provinces and territories must provide a detailed plan, similar to what has
been provided for home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS for Bilateral Agreements
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend those agreements to flow funding for the
Safe Long-term Care Fund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in funding
starting in 2022-23.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion, an increase of $28 billion from $42 billion in 2020-21, or from its
current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called for the CHT to grow by an annual
escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand on March 25th.
On March 25, 2021, the Government tabled Bill C-25 in Parliament, which will provide provinces and
territories with an additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT
intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by waves one and two of the
pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to support Canada’s COVID- 19 immunization plan.
Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is
in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that also provided one-time funding of $500 million through
the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
Federal Commitment to the Health Accord (now referred to as the Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities):
In 2015, the Government committed to engage with the Provinces and Territories (PTs) to develop a
new Health Accord, including a new long-term agreement on funding. The Government also committed
to work jointly, and with Indigenous leaders, to explore areas of shared priority that will improve the
health of Indigenous Peoples.
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services as follows:
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, for better home and palliative care, and $1 billion over 4
years, starting in 2018-19, to address critical home care infrastructure requirements; and,
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, in support of mental health initiatives
This funding is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs. It
provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of
the Canada Health Act, which are: universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public
administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate renewal of these agreements in 2021- 22 for the remaining five years (2022-23
to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will continue to
work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare. This work will include
ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams, setting national standards for mental health
access, and supporting home care and palliative care.
Safe Long-term Care:
The Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care
Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Virtual Care:
On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
HESA MOTION ORDERING THE PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE GOVERNMENT’S
RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
SYNOPSIS
• On October 26, 2020, the House of Commons adopted a Motion ordering that the Standing Committee
on Health undertake a study of the COVID-19 emergency situation. The motion contains six parts related
to the production of documents on the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN), testing,
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and vaccines.
• To date, documents have been released to the Law Clerk in seven batches: on December 7, 2020,
December 15, 2020, January 6, 2021 and January 20, 2021, February 4, 2021, February 18, 2021 and
April 9, 2021.
• The Law Clerk tabled rounds of documents on December 16, 2020, January 20, 2021, January 29, 2021,
February 5, 2021, February 19, 2021, February 26, 2021, March 12, 2021 and March 26, 2021.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Since the December 7, 2020 deadline, we have only received a small volume of pages of relevant
records from the health portfolio. Why hasn’t the department complied with this order yet and when
are you going to provide us the material requested?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government committed to providing Members of Parliament with the thousands of requested
documents as quickly as possible so that the Health committee can undertake its important,
independent work on studying Canada’s response to the COVID- 19 pandemic.
• My Portfolio is working hard to respond to this Motion while continuing its crucial work to respond to
the pandemic that is still severely impacting Canadians.
• The health portfolio has produced more than 22,600 pages to date.
 Our work continues as we review thousands of additional pages that include sensitive information
requiring redaction.
IF PRESSED ON PROCESS FOR REVIEW
 We have completed the collection of documents related to the Motion for the Health Portfolio. This
represents hundreds of thousands of pages.
 We have released the maximum number of relevant documents as quickly as possible.
 Experts in the public service are now reviewing documents to protect national security information,
Cabinet confidences, solicitor-client privilege, and other sensitive information through a rigorous and
consistent process.
 Our work continues.
IF PRESSED ON RESOURCES REQUIRED TO RESPOND TO THIS MOTION
 In addition to the exceptional work that PHAC and Health Canada staff are undertaking in response to
the pandemic, a great effort is also underway in response to this motion.
 We will continue to comply with the order of the House of Commons to provide documents to the
office of the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel in a timely manner as they become available.
IF PRESSED ON TRANSLATION
 The Government’s goal is to provide documents as quickly as possible to the Law Clerk to support his
mandate from this House to review and table documents that respond to the Motion adopted in
October.
BACKGROUND
A motion adopted by the House of Commons on October 26 2020 directs government departments to
produce to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health, certain documents relating to the
Government of Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to this Motion, the Health Portfolio, including Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, have contributed nearly 17,300 pages of
documents to the Law Clerk as of April 9, 2021.
The pages released to date include a wide variety of documents such as, communications products,
meeting agendas, briefing decks, terms of reference for committees, and Global Public Health
Intelligence Network daily reports.
The response to this Motion involves 16 departments, including Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada (ISED); Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC); Health Canada; the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC); National Research Council (NRC); Treasury Board Secretariat; and
Department of Justice.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
SYNOPSIS
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life- threatening. With
few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices which pose significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500
million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, this includes working with willing provinces, territories and stakeholders to establish a national
strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement and the Speech from the Throne referenced a rare diseases
strategy, which was previously included as a commitment in Budget 2019. Why has the Government not
delivered on this strategy while Canadians with rare diseases desparately wait?
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the cost
of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces, territories
and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare
diseases.
• We also held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on March
26th, 2021. Canadians - especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers - were
invited to provide their views on the national strategy by participating in a public town hall or
completing the online questionnaire.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up to $500
million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. The recent
Fall Economic Statement highlights the Government’s continued commitment in developing a national
strategy.
• Our Government has also been working with key stakeholders to improve access by encouraging the
development and availability of drugs for rare diseases for Canadians. In 2019, 16 of the 35 new drugs
Health Canada approved were drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work toward
delivering a national strategy by 2022-2023, starting with a comprehensive engagement process in late
2020 and continuing into early 2021.
• The virtual engagement has now concluded. A What We Heard report summarizing key themes and
feedback that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement will be published in spring 2021.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are unavailable for
sale in Canada. There have been approximately 150 drugs accessed through the program for the
treatment of rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH…
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing rare
diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an important
role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases Research
Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding research in
areas related to rare diseases.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
• Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are
often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
• Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
• Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
public health care system.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare
diseases.
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to protect consumers
from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for
governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could
result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
• Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug
plans, through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
• Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical
trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where
criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs
that are unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the
treatment of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on high cost drugs for rare diseases,
including on new drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national
strategy.
• To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
high-cost drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partners for federal funding for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs.
affordability vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also
help manage expectations around the limits of federal funding.
• In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials
to establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national
strategy.
• A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and is continuing in early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries.
• As of 2017, this international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for
rare diseases.
Home Care
SYNOPSIS
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-term
care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is some evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the first wave of the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care
This situation increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
• In light of COVID-19, the federal government is taking additional actions to help people stay in their
homes longer while working alongside the provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the government doing to ensure that Canadians have access to quality home care services
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over ten years directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• To support Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada and
provincial/territorial governments also reached a $19B Safe Restart Agreement, which includes $740
million in funding to support our most vulnerable populations, including incremental infection
prevention and control measures to protect those receiving home care and palliative care, and those in
long-term care.
• In the 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government committed to take additional action to help
people stay in their homes longer and to look at further targeted measures for personal support
workers, who do an essential service helping the most vulnerable in our communities.
• Our government will continue to take any action it can to support seniors while working alongside the
provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• In the Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada committed to fund up to $1 billion for a
Safe Long-Term Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people from COVID-19 and support
infection prevention and control in long-term care and assisted living facilities. This is in addition to $740
million provided through the Safe Restart Agreements for provinces and territories to improve measures
to control and prevent infections in home care, long-term care, and palliative care facilities and services.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to help
prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care. This guidance was developed
through the National Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control and endorsed by the Pan-
Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to support provinces and territories to increase
the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home care
settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
COVID Impacts on Home Care
The Canadian Institute for Health Information has highlighted the following impacts COVID-19 has had
on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March 2020.
This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home Care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and June
2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement.
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, and lay out the initiatives that
each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from hospitals into
community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care and
services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow clinicians
to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician model for
integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training specific
to First Nations continuing care needs
Pesticides Used to Control Problem Animals (Strychnine, Compound 1080, and Sodium Cyanide)
SYNOPSIS
• In the interest of seeking Canadians’ views and input on the humaneness of pesticides used to control
predators, Health Canada published a consultation document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest Control
on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation period ending April 18, 2019.
• Health Canada received over 4000 responses, many of which revealed a lack of awareness of federal
and provincial roles and responsibilities with respect to pesticide regulation, wildlife management and
animal welfare, and the high degree of restriction placed on the use of these products.
• On January 29, 2021, Health Canada published a consultation summary outlining the comments
received, as well as an information note to better inform Canadians on the strict label conditions that
must be followed, as well as the federal/provincial/territorial roles and responsibilities regarding
pesticide regulation, wildlife management and animal welfare.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Will the Government of Canada take immediate action to end the use of strychnine, Compound 1080,
and sodium cyanide for killing wolves, and other predators?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety and the concerns of citizens very seriously.
• The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by provincially
authorized personnel in Alberta and Saskatchewan.
• These products are used as a last resort to protect endangered species, people living in remote
communities, and livestock.
• Health or environmental concerns raised during consultations on the use of these three predacides are
being taken into consideration in the current re-evaluation of these products, which was initiated in
January 2021.
BACKGROUND
• In Canada, pesticides are regulated under the Pest Control Products Act administered by Health
Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA). Health Canada published a consultation
document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation
period ending April 18, 2019.
• At this time, Health Canada will not take steps towards incorporating humaneness considerations into
the pesticide risk assessment framework. There are currently no internationally recognized science-
based parameters to evaluate the humaneness of pesticides, and no new information on this topic was
brought forward through the consultation process.
• To address concerns raised by Canadians through this consultation, Health Canada published an
information note in late January 2021 to improve awareness of federal and provincial/territorial roles
and responsibilities with respect to wildlife management and animal welfare, improve awareness of
predacide use restrictions and scenarios, as well as improve awareness of the legal requirements that
must be followed when using such products, and the systems in place for reporting incidents (such as
non-target animal deaths).
• In January 2021, Health Canada initiated a re-evaluation of strychnine, Compound 1080 (sodium
monofluoroacetate), and sodium cyanide as a cluster, based on the similarity of the use pattern and
toxicity profile. Information submitted during the humaneness consultation period relevant to the re-
evaluation (i.e., with respect to possible health or environmental risks) will be considered. This re-
evaluation will also take into consideration information related to non-target animal incident reports.
• There is another ongoing write-in campaign to the Minister of Health regarding the use of predacides
on large mammals. Health Canada is responding on behalf of the Minister to letters received with
Canadian addresses.
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to
global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 I have been engaging with my G7 counterparts on a regular basis to share information on public health
measures, to learn from others’ experiences and best practices and to identify possible joint actions
to tackle this pandemic.
 Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international counterparts, including the European Commission,
France, Germany, the United States and the United Kingdom, to discuss our respective COVID-19
responses. These discussions are valuable opportunities to learn from each other and strengthen our
domestic and international responses.
 Technical program staff within my Health Portfolio also regularly engage with their international
counterparts to exchange information and best practices to inform and enhance our response.
 Canada looks forward to continued engagement on global health issues with all relevant partners as
we fight the current COVID-19 pandemic and chart a path forward to strengthen our collective
capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to future health emergencies.
IF PRESSED on Implication of New Regulations Reducing the Number of Exemptions under EU Vaccine
Export Transparency Mechanism
 The recent announcement made by the European Commission reduces the number of countries
exempt from their Vaccine Export Transparency Mechanism. The decision now takes into account a
number of factors, including reciprocity and proportionality. Given that Canada is not currently
producing vaccines and has vaccination rates comparable to those in the EU, this should not affect
Canada at this time
 Canada is continuing to monitor the situation and is working closely with its partners in the European
Commission to express our concerns. To date, Canada’s vaccine shipments have continued to receive
authorization for export.
IF PRESSED on the U.S. Relationship with the WHO and PAHO
 Canada remains strongly committed to constructive engagement in multilateral institutions, including
the WHO and PAHO, which are essential to help us accomplish together more than any one country can
do alone.
 We will continue to work with other Member States to ensure that the WHO and PAHO are strong,
accountable, transparent and well-governed institutions.
 We welcome the decision by U.S. President Joe Biden to reverse the U.S. withdrawal from the WHO
and their recommitment to multilateralism. We look forward to working with the new U.S.
administration on a range of issues, including on how to strengthen the WHO’s work in global health
emergency preparedness and response.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
 I look forward to working with the Biden administration, including my counterpart, the new Secretary
of the Department of Health and Human Services, to fulfill the commitments set out in the Prime
Minister’s Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership.
 Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work with their counterparts
at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Health and Human Services, to strengthen
our efforts to control the pandemic, collaborate on public health responses, and build resilience against
future outbreaks.
IF PRESSED on Allegations of Undue Chinese Influence in WHO
 We have valued the WHO’s global leadership and coordination during this pandemic, and have
confidence that the organization is working with all Member States, for all Member States.
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest in making it a strong, accountable,
inclusive and well-governed institution, whose actions and recommendations are guided by Member
States, and the best available science and evidence.
 We will continue to actively participate in oversight and accountability review processes.
 As the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve around the world, Canada will continue to work closely
with its international partners, including the WHO and China, to reduce risks to Canadians and the global
community.
IF PRESSED on Joint WHO-China mission on the origins of SARS-CoV-2
 Canada is fully committed to supporting the WHO in its scientific work, and welcomes the report on
the WHO-convened Global Study of Origins of SARS-CoV-2: China Part.
 The work of this joint WHO-China mission and its follow-up represent a key opportunity for
international scientific collaboration to advance global health security.
 We know that pinpointing the origins of SARS-CoV-2 will be a long-term endeavour. We must learn as
much as possible about the origins of the virus that causes COVID-19, as this understanding could help
prevent future pandemics.
 We are concerned, however, by reports that the independent experts on the mission did not receive
timely and complete access to data.
 That is why Canada joined the U.S. and 12 other countries in issuing a joint statement that reaffirms
the importance of transparency, openness and collaborative scientific inquiry for investigating outbreaks
of unknown origin, such as SARS-CoV-2.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global response
 As highlighted in the Resolution adopted at the World Health Assembly in May 2020, Canada supports
a comprehensive review of the global response.
 We welcome the work of the Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and Response, which is
leading an impartial and independent evaluation of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, and look
forward to reviewing their recommendations when they are released in May. We are pleased that a
prominent Canadian, Dr. Joanne Liu, is contributing her significant global health expertise and
experience.
 Canada will continue to engage in this review process – and with the global community – to identify
important lessons learned from this pandemic. This includes pressing State Parties to meet their
obligations under the International Health Regulations (i.e. the sharing of timely, accurate and
sufficiently detailed public health information).
IF PRESSED on our working relationship with the WHO
 As a founding member, Canada is a strong supporter of the WHO. Canada engages with the WHO to
advance domestic and international health priorities, share Canadian expertise on health issues, and
protect the health of Canadians and people around the world.
 The WHO has a critical role in the COVID-19 response as the key global public health body. Canada
values the WHO’s leadership and coordination role in the COVID-19 response, including their role
overseeing the International Health Regulations, driving collaborative global research efforts towards
new vaccines and effective treatments, working with all actors to address shortages of critical medical
supplies and personal protective equipment, and supporting the most vulnerable countries in their
preparedness and response efforts.
BACKGROUND
Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19,
which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S. Canada
has also participated in various G20 discussions on ways to strengthen our collective capacities to
prevent, prepare and respond to future health emergencies. Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s
impact across sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers are engaging regularly with their
international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs, Agriculture and Employment.
In addition, technical staff of the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) have engaged with their
counterparts in a variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally (e.g., World Health Organization
(WHO), U.S. Centres for Disease Control Global Health Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network (GOARN)), to exchange information and best practices that have informed and
enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Research and Development
Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role in establishing the
WHO global research and innovation roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is also supporting the Canadian
Treatments for COVID-19 Trial (CATCO), which is contributing to the WHO SOLIDARITY trial to find
effective treatments for COVID-19. CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Diseases (GloPID-R), which
continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-moving collaboration that is needed across a multiplicity
of players domestically and internationally.
Global Equitable Access to COVID-19 Health Technologies
Canada co-hosted the Coronavirus Global Response launch event in May 2020 in support of the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A) – a global collaboration between governments, scientists,
businesses, philanthropists and global health organizations to accelerate development, production, and
equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. Canada has pledged a total of $940
million to support ACT-A’s goals and is also a member (represented by Minister Gould) of the Facilitation
Council for the Accelerator, which provides support for its work through political leadership, advocacy,
and mobilization of additional resources.
Within ACT-A, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) and
the WHO are leading a pooled procurement mechanism for the purchase of COVID-19 vaccines called
the COVAX Facility. This pools the resources of economies to make advanced purchase agreements for a
number of vaccines. The Facility includes both low- and lower-middle income countries, whose
purchases are financed by official development assistance through the COVAX Advanced Market
Commitment (AMC), and upper-middle and high-income countries who self-finance their own purchase
of vaccine doses for domestic use. The Facility is a strong multilateral mechanism that supports timely
access to vaccines for all participating economies.
In September 2020, Canada signed a binding commitment to participate in the Facility through an
optional purchase agreement that could see Canada acquire vaccine doses through the Facility for up to
20% of the Canadian population. Canada has committed an additional $325 million to the COVAX
Advance Market Commitment for vaccine procurement, distribution, and delivery for low and middle-
income countries. By joining, Canada is contributing to collective efforts towards a safe, effective, and
affordable COVID-19 vaccine, in line with the Prime Minister’s commitment to help ensure that once a
vaccine is developed, it will be produced at a scale and cost accessible to all countries. As of December
15, 98 high-income economies have joined the Facility; alongside the lower-income countries eligible to
participate in the COVAX AMC, there is a total of 190 economies that will benefit from the COVAX
Facility.
On December 18, 2020, the Prime Minister confirmed Canada’s commitment to share potential surplus
COVID-19 vaccine doses with the world should Canada receive more than necessary. International
pressure continues to build for high income countries who have started domestic vaccine roll out to
support equitable access goals by sharing doses or taking other actions to support increased supply.
Global Vaccine Supply Issues
In response to delivery delays by AstraZeneca and a temporary reduction of Pfizer/BioNTech’s vaccine in
the EU, the European Commission (EC) announced on January 25, 2021, the proposal of an export
transparency scheme, whereby all companies producing vaccines against COVID-19 in the EU will have
to provide early notification whenever they want to export vaccines to countries outside of the EU. The
proposed scheme would not restrict exports, but would make companies file a notification in advance of
its exports to non-EU countries. The proposed mechanism appears to be quite different from the export
authorization scheme, such as the temporary measure the EC adopted in March 2020 to restrict the
exports of personal protective equipment (PPE) from the EU. Such scheme required early notifications
to be assessed against supply/demand considerations and an export authorization to be granted by
Member State authorities. It is unclear whether the EC would impose such restrictions, particularly if it
believes the EU is being unfavourably treated with respect to supply. Canada is seeking further
information on the timelines for the EC’s proposal and details for its implementation. There could be an
interim measure while Member States are consulted on the potential adaptations and scope of the
mechanism and future steps. It was noted, however, that humanitarian efforts would not be affected by
this.
World Health Organization (WHO)
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the WHO, averaging over $70
million annually for the past 10 years in assessed and voluntary contributions to support the work of the
organization.
The WHO has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the COVID-19
response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their preparedness and response efforts.
Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and evidence-based guidance during this rapidly evolving
pandemic. With the Region of the Americas at the epicenter of the pandemic, Canada continues to
support the WHO regional office of the Americas (PAHO) in its critical coordinating and technical role in
responding to the health challenges that the region is facing.
On January 20, 2021, President Biden reversed the previous administration’s decision to withdraw from
the WHO and committed to resuming regular engagement and fulfilling its financial obligations to the
organization. On January 21, 2021, Dr. Anthony Fauci delivered a special address to the WHO Executive
Board expressing the renewed U.S. commitment to multilateralism, diplomacy, gender equality, sexual
and reproductive health and rights, and global health.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
Canada has consistently expressed support for an independent, comprehensive review of the global
response, which would consider the actions of all actors and partners, including the WHO, undertaken at
an appropriate time.
At the 73rd session of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2020, Canada co-sponsored a
resolution on COVID-19 that called for an independent, comprehensive review of the WHO-coordinated
international health response to COVID-19.
As follow up to the resolution, the WHO Director General announced in July 2020 the creation of the
Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPR), co-chaired by former New Zealand
Prime Minister and UNDP Administrator Helen Clark, and former President of Liberia, Ellen Johnston
Sirleaf. Canadian physician and former president of MSF International, Dr. Joanne Liu, was selected as
one of the eleven panelists by the IPPR co-chairs in September 2020. At the 148th meeting of the WHO
Executive Board in January 2021, the IPPR co-chairs provided an overview of their interim findings,
stressing that a “course correction is needed now”. They pointed to a number of failings which require
action, including: the failure to prepare adequately for pandemic threats; preparedness metrics that did
not correspond with country responses; and, inadequate data and tools for rapid detection and
response. The IPPR is expected to present its final recommendations to WHO Member States in May
2021.
The Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health Emergencies
Programme provides oversight and monitoring of the development and performance of the Programme,
and is expected to provide their next report and set of recommendations at the 74th World Health
Assembly in May 2021, as a complement to the findings and recommendations of the IPPR. Dr. Theresa
Tam is a member of the IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity and exercise their
responsibilities with full regard for the paramount importance of independence.
Joint WHO-China COVID-19 Origins Study
On January 14, 2021 a team of WHO-convened international experts began an investigation into the
zoonotic origins of COVID-19. The joint international team was comprised of 17 Chinese experts and 17
international experts from ten countries (no Canadians), The full report of the Joint WHO-China mission,
released on March 30, 2021, concludes that of the four hypotheses explored, introduction to humans
from an animal host (likely a bat) via another intermediary host was the most likely scenario. Notably,
the report’s conclusions acknowledge significant data gaps, particularly on potential source animals,
location and linking that information to epidemiological studies. In the WHO Press Briefing that followed
the release of the report, the WHO Director General confirmed that the international team had
encountered difficulties in accessing raw data and that all four hypotheses were still under
consideration, with future studies required.
Following the release of the report, Canada joined the US, UK, Australia and 10 other countries to
release a joint statement that expressed concerns about the delays in the mission and the lack of access
to complete, original data and samples. The statement reaffirms the importance of transparency,
openness and collaborative scientific inquiry, for investigating outbreaks of unknown origin such as
SARS-CoV-2.
Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership
On February 23, 2021, following their introductory virtual meeting, Prime Minister Trudeau and U.S.
President Joe Biden released their joint “Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership”. The
Roadmap includes several joint commitments grouped within six priority areas: Combatting COVID-19,
Building Back Better, Accelerating Climate Ambitions, Advancing Diversity and Inclusion, Bolstering
Security and Defence, and Building Global Alliances.
Under “Combatting COVID-19”, the leaders committed to defeating the virus and supporting global
affordable access to vaccines, including through support for the COVAX facility. The statement
emphasizes the need to collaborate on public health responses and build resilience against future
outbreaks, and recognizes the importance of urgent global action to advance global health security and
counter biological threats. The leaders agreed to work to strengthen the WHO and PAHO, and leverage
existing platforms such as the North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza (NAPAPI) and the
Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), to build global capacity for future pandemic preparedness and
response. They also agreed on the importance of a transparent and independent evaluation and analysis
of the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.
The Roadmap recognizes the importance of taking a coordinated science-based approach to border
policies, and includes a commitment to strengthen the US-Canada Action Plan on Opioids. The leaders
also agreed to prioritize the provision of adequate support and services to individuals facing mental
health challenges or addiction. While there is no specific mention of medical supply chains, the
statement notes that two leaders have launched a strategy to strengthen overall Canada-U.S. supply
chain security.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Health Portfolio Operations Centre, more
than 65% of COVID-19 deaths in Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities (with a proportion
varying from 0% in smaller provinces and territories, to 55% in ON, 75% in QC, and 86% in Nova Scotia).
Eighty-one percent of the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (54%) and Ontario
(27%). Even residents of facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation and
reduced services.
• The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted longstanding challenges in supportive care, including gaps in
infection prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, testing, and visitation policies. On March 31,
2021, the Health Standards Organization (HSO) announced that they, along with the Standards Council
of Canada (SCC), and Canadian Standards Association (CSA Group), are collaborating to develop two new
complementary National Standards for Long-Term Care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the federal government doing about working with provinces and territories to develop
national standards in LTC?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic has tragically highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in Canada’s
LTC system.
• The federal government has committed to taking any action it can to support seniors, working with the
provinces and territories.
• In the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, we committed up to $1B through the Safe LTC Fund to help
provinces and territories protect people in LTC and support infection prevention and control through a
range of activities such as making improvements to ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up
wages.
• To help the LTC sector share learnings and strengthen pandemic preparedness, we provided $6.4
million to Healthcare Excellence Canada to support LTC facilities across the country. Over 1,000 facilities
are participating in the program.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Throughout the pandemic, the Government of Canada has prioritized protecting vulnerable Canadians,
including those in LTC and supported provinces and territories extensively. The Government of Canada
has:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to work with
the provinces and territories to ensure LTC has access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to prevent
twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff having
already received at least one dose.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to urgent
needs.
• Invested in the LTC+ initiative carried out by Healthcare Excellence Canada to provide direct support to
facilities for pandemic preparedness.
• Accelerated training for personal support worker interns to address critical labour shortages in LTC
facilities and home care.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the wages
of low- income essential workers, which could include front line workers in hospitals and LTC facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories to address
the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick- start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Committed to working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize those who
neglect seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
BACKGROUND
Third-party standards development process
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care, and the health infrastructure and environmental design
of long-term care facilities.
Speech from the Throne
In the September 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government of Canada committed to taking any
action it could to support seniors. These commitments included:
• Working with the provinces and territories to set new national standards for long-term care so that
seniors get the best support possible.
• looking at further targeted measures for personal support workers, who do an essential service
helping the most vulnerable in our communities; and
• Working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize those who neglect
seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
Fall Economic Statement
In addition to the $1B in funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilities across Canada. The goal is
to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks. Participating
teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to training sessions and materials,
and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training up to
4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-thirds
during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher than
normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar recommendations
and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for the improvement for LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy, improved
pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Healthcare Excellence Canada (formerly the Canadian Foundation for
Healthcare Improvement (CFHI) and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI)) released a report in
summer 2020 outlining promising practices in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term
care and retirement homes prepare for possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate their effects:
• Preparation;
• Prevention;
• People in the workforce;
• Pandemic response and surge capacity;
• Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and,
• Presence of family.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Vaccination campaigns in long-term care facilities and seniors’ residences have significantly reduced the
number of outbreaks in congregate living settings. As of March 31, 2021, the number of outbreaks and
cases in the most affected provinces, ON and QC, have been sharply reduced since the peak in January
2021. The majority of PTs are not reporting any active outbreaks in long-term care facilities.
Several provinces and territories have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities,
including Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of
the ongoing investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On September 24, CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly funded LTC homes
offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of these facilities can be public or private.
Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory. Overall, 54% of
LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (28% for-profit, 23% not-for-profit and 3% no breakdown) and
46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was transferred to the
province in April 2016. VAC now supports about 4,000 Veterans in over 1,150 provincially and privately
owned and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an enhanced level of
services and specialized programs for veterans.
Since 2007, Revera Inc. is a wholly-owned operating subsidiary of the Public Sector Pension Investment
Board (PSPIB), an independent Crown corporation established under the Public Sector Pension
Investment Board Act in 1999 and is registered under the Canada Business Corporations Act.
The PSPIB operates at arm's length from the federal government – i.e., it is not part of the federal public
administration. Its business affairs are managed by an 11-member Board of Directors, and investment
decisions are informed by a governance model outlined in the PSPIB Act.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – PASSAGE OF BILL C-7
SYNOPSIS
• Bill C-7 An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying) received Royal Assent on
March 17th, 2021. In response to the 2019 Superior Court of Québec’s Truchon ruling, the new MAID
legislation removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order
to be eligible for MAID. It also includes additional safeguards for these new types of requests, as well as
the following short-term commitments:
• That a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent (i.e., by April 16th,
2021). This review will address (but will not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature minors,
advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians
with disabilities.
• That the Ministers of Justice and Health initiate an independent expert panel tasked with making
recommendations by March 17th, 2022 (within one year of Royal Assent) on protocols, guidance and
safeguards for MAID for persons suffering from mental illness.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, what is the Government going to do to ensure safe
implementation of the law?
KEY MESSAGES
• The new law introduces significant changes in Canada’s framework for MAID. These changes arise
from a Court decision and the views of Canadians expressed through public consultations and debated
fully in the House of Commons and the Senate.
• We recognize that the changes to the MAID regime present new challenges for provincial and
territorial governments and practitioners as they work to ensure safe, sensitive and consistent
interpretation and application of the law in health systems across the country.
• The Government will be working closely with provincial and territorial governments, medical experts
and other stakeholders over the next year and beyond to support the safe implementation of Bill C-7.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that other important issues related to MAID remain to be
explored.
• As set out in the legislation, a parliamentary review of the MAID legislation will consider areas such as
the eligibility of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, palliative care and the protection of
Canadians living with disabilities.
• The Government will do whatever is required to support this work.
IF PRESSED ON THE TOPIC OF MAID FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS…
• The Government of Canada recognizes the concerns and the challenges associated with allowing MAID
for individuals suffering solely from mental illness.
• That is why the new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests
where mental illness is the sole condition. This is accompanied by a requirement to initiate an
independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards that would be applied to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness
• Minister Lametti and I will work together to set up the expert panel that will undertake this work. A
final report containing the panel’s conclusions and recommendations will be completed within the year.
• Parliamentarians will then have another year to consider whether additional safeguards should be
legislated, and it will provide professional regulatory bodies and associations with the information they
need to develop appropriate guidance and resources.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL C-268: PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT…
• The Criminal Code already provides significant protection for health care professionals in relation to
MAID.
• The current legislation explicitly states that nothing in the MAID legislation compels a health care
provider to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in dying.
• This is not changed in the new legislation.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new law responds to feedback from over 300,000 Canadians, experts, practitioners, stakeholders,
provinces and territories, provided during the January and February 2020 consultations. It is also
informed by the testimony of over 120 expert witnesses heard throughout Bill C-7’s study by the House
of Commons and the Senate.
During the period of suspension of the Truchon ruling (Sept 11, 2019 to March 17, 2021), Quebec
residents meeting all eligibility requirements (other than a reasonably foreseeable natural death) were
able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their request for MAID
considered. A total of 19 Quebec residents received exemptions during this period (in addition to the
two plaintiffs Jean Truchon and Nicole Gladu).
The new MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to be
eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural death
is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months, and
requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date to
receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to provide a
more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
As outlined in the previous legislation, the 2016 law was to be referred to one or more Parliamentary
Committees by June 2020, but this did not take place as a result of the pandemic. The new legislation
requires that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent (i.e., by April
16th, 2021). This review will address (but will not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature minors,
advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians
with disabilities. The Parliamentary Review must be undertaken by a Joint Committee of both Houses of
Parliament; this committee must submit its report to Parliament no later than one year after the start of
the review (i.e., by April 16th, 2022).
MENTAL ILLNESS: SUNSET CLAUSE AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW
The new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests where mental
illness is the sole condition. The sunset clause is accompanied by a legislative requirement that an
independent review be initiated to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. Individuals with a mental illness would be required to
meet all other eligibility criteria including those that define a grievous and irremediable medical
condition. A report containing the conclusions and recommendations of the independent review must
be provided no later than 12 months after the day Bill C-7 comes into force (i.e., by March 17th, 2022),
and made public very shortly thereafter.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID require the federal Minister of Health to produce an annual
report of MAID data. The first report, released on July 24, 2020, covers data collected under this
reporting regime for the 2019 calendar year.
This report indicated that, in 2019, there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID, accounting for 2.0% of all
deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This represents an
increase of 26.1% over 2018 numbers, with all provinces experiencing a steady year over year growth in
the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all data sources are considered, the total number of
medically assisted deaths reported in Canada from the enactment of federal legislation to December 31,
2019 was 13,946.
Importantly, it also found that the majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.1%) were reported to have
received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access palliative care services
before receiving MAID, the majority (89.6%) would have had access to these services according to the
reporting practitioner. Similarly, 89.9% of persons receiving MAID deemed to require disability support
services received them.
Health Canada is currently analyzing data from the 2020 calendar year to prepare the second annual
report, which will likely be released in spring 2021.
Federal reporting regulations setting out requirements for physicians, nurse practitioners and
pharmacists came into force in November 2018. Under that reporting regime, data is collected on all
written requests for MAID and its provision.
CHANGES TO DATA COLLECTION
Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, Health Canada will be amending the regulations to align
with the revised eligibility criteria and safeguards as well as other data collection requirements set out in
the new legislation. Bill C-7 requires that data be collected with respect to race or Indigenous identity
and disability. Expanding the MAID monitoring regime in this way will help demonstrate the presence of
any inequalities or disadvantages based on these or other characteristics in the provision of MAID. In
amending the MAID monitoring regulations, the Government will consult with a broad range of
stakeholders, including groups representing persons experiencing inequalities, to help identify the
appropriate information that needs to be collected and how collection can be undertaken in a way that
is respectful, inclusive and does not impose an unreasonable burden on clinicians who are legally
obligated to provide the data.
BILL C-268 PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT
Bill C-268, the Protection of Freedom of Conscience Act, proposes to amend the Criminal Code to create
two hybrid offences to protect the conscience rights of healthcare providers in relation to MAID: (1) an
offence prohibiting the use of violence or threats of violence, coercion or intimidation to compel a
healthcare professional to participate, directly or indirectly, in the provision of MAID; and an offence
prohibiting firing or refusing to employ healthcare professionals because they refuse to take part in
providing MAID.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The Government remains committed to increasing access to mental health and substance use
resources and supports for Canadians whose regular services are not accessible.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address the increased stress, worry, and anxiety that Canadians are
experiencing due to COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• COVID-19 continues to create stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians, particularly those who
do not have access to support networks. That is why the Government has launched a new online portal
that provides access to mental health and substance use supports.
• Wellness Together Canada is the first national program of its kind, providing 24/7 access to free and
confidential evidence- based tools and resources.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals across the country can access supports ranging from
self-assessment, self- guided programming, and peer support, to confidential sessions with social
workers, psychologists and other professionals.
• Wellness Together Canada supports existing provincial and territorial services, and does not replace
them.
• All services are available in both official languages, and phone counselling sessions are supported by
instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and dialects.
• To date, the Government of Canada has invested $68M in Wellness Together Canada.
• Wellness Together Canada adds to the suite of virtual tools, such as the Canada COVID-19 mobile app,
ensuring that Canadians have access to information, resources, and other supports during this difficult
time.
• The Government will continue to promote Wellness Together Canada, so that more Canadians are
aware of the free supports and services available to them.
• As part of the Safe Restart Agreement, $500M was also provided directly to provinces and territories
for immediate mental health and substance use service needs.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of
distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• As of March 30, 2021 over 1.1 million individuals across all provinces and territories have accessed the
Wellness Together Canada portal in over 3.4M web sessions since launch in April 2020
• Approximately 40% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than usual
male engagement
• Approximately 45% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an age group
that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services
• There are essentially no wait times for supports within the portal, including for counselling
• For phone sessions, 89% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 86% of texters
were highly satisfied with the service
• Based on a client feedback survey, 24% indicated they have no other options for support, if not for the
portal
IF PRESSED ON THE COMPETITIVE BIDDING PROCESS THAT HEALTH CANADA UNDERTOOK TO AWARD
THE CONTRACT FOR WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• Health Canada with Public Services and Procurement Canada launched a competitive process to
provide funding through a targeted request for proposals (RFP).
• A targeted approach was necessary due to the scope and complexity of services required and the
urgency to provide mental health and substance use supports to Canadians during COVID- 19.
IF PRESSED FOR INFORMATION ON THE CONSORTIUM OF ORGANIZATIONS MANAGING WELLNESS
TOGETHER CANADA
• Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers, leaders
and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via phone,
text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-based
mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
• Wellness Together Canada receives support from additional partners and stakeholders, such as
Greenspace, Bell Let’s Talk, Canada Health Infoway, Mental Health Commission of Canada, Canadian
Psychological Association, and Medavie.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION...
• The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health information legislation and standards to maintain
the security and confidentiality of personal information.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for families who may be especially vulnerable to
stress given the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
• Our Government is quickly mobilizing efforts to develop and disseminate reliable and timely public
health resources to help families, including parents caring for children with Autism Spectrum Disorder,
navigate through these difficult times.
• Our Government also recognizes that the mental health of young people is particularly vulnerable
during these difficult times, and that access to needed supports are often limited.
• As part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is
providing support to young people via phone, text and live chat.
• We are also investing an additional $7.5M in Kids Help Phone to support their ongoing services for
youth, as a leader in responding to the needs of young Canadians.
• In addition to these actions, the Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to
provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access, which
includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONT LINE WORKERS…
• Health care workers and other front line personnel are an important population for Wellness Together
Canada. That is why the portal features a dedicated text line for front line workers that provides
immediate access to supports.
• In addition, the portal features Program Navigators that can assist front line workers and other
Canadians in accessing portal resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal based on client feedback to ensure an
inclusive portal experience, tailored to meeting the needs of varying age groups and diverse
populations.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, which includes 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness, which provides Indigenous peoples
with access to immediate mental health counselling and crisis intervention.
• The portal also supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote areas,
facing stigma or financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
 For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
 There is also a dedicated phone line for Program Navigators that can assist with finding resources on
the portal
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF…
 Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to 24/7
counselling by phone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals with the grief they
face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Address Impact Of Covid-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Increasing Mental Health System Capacity
Health Canada has invested $68 million in Wellness Together Canada, a free 24/7 portal for mental
health and substance use supports. An amendment had been finalized that will augment supports, and
expand the portal’s reach and capabilities in needed areas.
• The initial $25M funding for the portal was part of the $240.5M investment (described below) to
increase access to virtual services and digital tools to support Canadians’ health and well-being during
COVID-19:
• $25M for Wellness Together Canada
• $15M to support the growing family of digital products that includes the Canada COVID-19 app
• $200M to expand virtual care services across Canada in partnership with provinces, territories
and other federal partners, such as Canada Health Infoway.
• An additional $43M was allocated to Wellness Together Canada through the 2020 Fall Economic
Statement, bringing the total investment in the portal to $68M to date.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500M targeted immediate mental health
and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce, targeted
programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the pandemic by
providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is currently leading a COVID-19 and Mental Health
Research Initiative in collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. This work is
guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and
substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will
inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is providing $21 million over five years to the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis Services Canada. This
service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained
responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing stigma,
disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release
in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived- experience.
COVID-19 MODELLING
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture. Modelling is used for
planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The Government uses data and modelling to
guide Canada’s response to COVID-19, and to help inform public health and policy decisions to control
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic. Some provincial and territorial public health authorities are also
conducting their own modelling to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19 related cases and
deaths to aid in their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and provincial
governments?
KEY MESSAGES
• Modelling is one of the tools that supports planning our response to the COVID-19 pandemic. We use
models to illustrate possible outcomes to help us to plan the right combination and stringency of public
health and individual measures to slow the spread.
• Longer-range forecasts combine real-life case data together with our knowledge of how the virus
behaves to show what could happen in different scenarios. For example, increasing or decreasing public
health measures.
• Current modelling, as well as our experience with this pandemic to date, underscores the need to
follow all recommended public health measures to bring the pandemic under control as new variants
continue to spread.
IF PRESSED…
• Data shared with federal officials by the provinces and territories supports national COVID-19 models.
Provinces do their own modelling to reflect their unique situations.
• The methods used by the Public Health Agency of Canada to develop national models are being
published in peer-reviewed journals, and the models are being made publicly available via the National
Collaborating Centre for Infectious Diseases.
• Many factors contribute to regional differences in the epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
• These include differences in the timing and patterns of community spread, changes in laboratory
testing practices, and differing timelines for the introduction of a range of public health measures.
• Restrictive closures last year and into the beginning of this year began to control the COVID-19
pandemic.
• Relaxing public health measures and the increasing spread of new variants have contributed into a
resurgence in many jurisdictions.
• Recent modelling predictions accurately forecasted the resurgence now being seen in many
jurisdictions and it is clear that we need stronger measures to combat variants of concern that are
driving rapid epidemic growth in many areas of the country.
IF PRESSED on Modelling
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s latest modelling takes into account a number of factors,
including the impact of public health measures and increased transmissibility of variants of concern.
• The modelling presented on March 26th does not account for vaccination for a number of reasons,
including the expected low proportion of our population that will be vaccinated during the forecasted
period. Vaccination will be considered in future models as more Canadians are vaccinated.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) regularly uses data to update models for guiding public
health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates in the short-
term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing of public health measures to
control the pandemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic models. Forecasting
models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in Canada to estimate forward on how
many new cases might be expected in the coming week.
Dynamic models use case data and the knowledge of how COVID-19 is transmitted, from the emerging
literature. Dynamic models permit a longer-term view based on our knowledge of how the virus behaves
– this helps us to visualize potential pandemic growth scenarios and impacts of control measures that
mitigate growth over time.
Different models are being used for different purposes. Detailed models are being used to model the
public health measures needed to control the pandemic, with and without transmission of more
contagious variants of concern, and to model what measures are needed during the roll-out of vaccines.
A different model is being used to provide longer-range forecasts, with non-variants as well as with new
variants of concern. This model uses a simplified method to account for changes in public health
measures. So far, it does not account for vaccination given our uncertainty of how the vaccines perform
at preventing infection, and the expected low proportion of the population that will be vaccinated
during the period of the forecast. Vaccinations will need to be considered as greater proportions of the
population are vaccinated.
Multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) temporally linked with COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a rare but potentially serious illness that is
temporally associated with COVID-19. Clusters of MIS-C were first reported in the United Kingdom in
April 2020 and cases have since been reported in North America, Europe, and worldwide.
In Canada, provincial and territorial public health authorities have been reporting MIS-C cases to the
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) since July 2020. As of March 30, 76 cases reported were either
COVID-19 positive or epidemiologically linked to a lab confirmed COVID- 19 case. The number of COVID-
19 positive cases reported has been highest in the past several months, aligning with a peak in COVID-19
cases reported in children and youth in December and early January. Because MIS-C is a post-viral
infection syndrome, it is expected that case numbers may remain high in the weeks following a high
incidence of COVID-19.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
• Multi-system inflammatory syndrome in children is being reported in Canada and abroad, and we are
working with our provincial and territorial public health partners and our network of pediatricians to
support detection of cases and care of children.
• We are advising Canadians to contact their healthcare provider if their child shows symptoms of
COVID-19 infection or of multi- system inflammatory syndrome, such as fever, gastrointestinal illness or
their child seems very unwell.
• We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable information about COVID-19 to prevent the
further spread and to protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
BACKGROUND
Multisystem inflammatory syndrome in children (MIS-C) is a rare but potentially serious illness that is
temporally associated with COVID-19. Clusters of MIS-C were first reported in the United Kingdom in
April 2020 and cases have since been reported in North America, Europe, and worldwide. In Canada,
provincial and territorial (PT) public health authorities have reported a total of 172 cases that meet
clinical/syndromic criteria for MIS-C, of which 76 were linked to COVID-19.
Symptoms
Reported symptoms include persistent fever, inflammation, poor function in one or more organs, and
other clinical and laboratory features not attributable to other infections. Many affected children
worldwide require hospitalization and some require intensive care. To date, nearly all reported cases in
Canada were hospitalized, and a third (38%) required Intensive Care Unit (ICU) admission. The majority
of the cases have recovered. No deaths have been reported in Canada.
Linkage to COVID-19
Many children with multi-system inflammatory syndrome (MIS-C) did not test positive for COVID-19.
Globally, nasal tests for the COVID-19 virus were often negative, however, blood tests for antibodies
were sometimes but not always positive. While the tests themselves may have had varied accuracy, the
fact that patients who tested negative for COVID-19 virus and sometimes test positive for antibodies
suggests that inflammatory complications were delayed, occurring when the virus was no longer
detectable on nasal swabs.
Clinicians in Canada are aware of this syndrome and must maintain a high index of suspicion to identify
cases. The cause of MIS-C is unknown. It is suspected an immune response to COVID-19 activates an
inflammatory process in genetically susceptible children. However, other mechanisms are also possible.
The global pediatric medical community is rapidly studying this issue. Canada and PHAC have
representation on the WHO expert group that is now looking at this issue.
Overall, children experience less severe COVID-19 disease than adults. However, even young people can
have serious outcomes or potentially death, so it is important that everyone take precautions to prevent
infection.
Surveillance
As part of the response to the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC monitors for MIS-C activity in two different
ways:
• most provincial and territorial public health authorities report all cases of MIS-C to PHAC; the reporting
is bi-weekly.
• the Canadian Pediatric Surveillance Program (CPSP), a collaboration between PHAC and the Canadian
Paediatric Society
As of March 30, 2021, 172 MIS-C cases were reported to PHAC by the PTs public health authorities; 69 of
these cases tested positive for COVID-19 (via RT-PCR, antigen test, or serology) and an additional 7 cases
were epidemiologically linked to a laboratory confirmed COVID-19 case. Note that data are preliminary
and are subject to change as PHAC receives updates on cases. Twelve of thirteen PTs are actively
participating in national reporting at this time.
Since July 2020, when MIS-C became reportable to the WHO, cases reported from PTs that meet the
WHO’s preliminary case definition have been reported to PAHO on a bi-weekly basis.
CPSP data are currently being used to support some PTs with their MIS-C reporting.
Federal Role
PHAC continues ongoing monitoring, intelligence gathering and international engagement to inform
Canadian public health action. Canada also continues to collaborate with federal, provincial, and
territorial partners to share information about COVID-19 in Canada. PHAC has a number of systems in
place to monitor community spread and severe outcomes related to COVID-19 in pediatric populations.
NACI’S RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE USE OF COVID-19 VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization provides recommendations on the use of
authorized COVID-19 vaccines, including extended dose intervals, to support provinces and territories in
planning vaccine rollout in Canada.
KEY MESSAGES
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends an interval of up to four
months between the first and second doses of COVID-19 vaccines, when vaccine supply is limited. NACI
recommends providing the second dose as soon as possible after all eligible people have received their
first dose.
• Provincial and territorial governments use NACI’s advice in their decisions on how they will implement
COVID-19 immunization programs to bring the greatest benefits to the people of Canada.
• NACI continues to monitor the evolving evidence and real-world data, including vaccine effectiveness
against variants of concern, and will update its recommendations if needed.
IF PRESSED…
• NACI’s guidance is advisory in nature. Provincial and territorial governments are ultimately responsible
for determining how to use authorized vaccines in their jurisdiction.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with provincial and territorial governments – which
have the responsibility for planning and implementing COVID-19 vaccination programs in
their jurisdictions – to allocate, distribute and administer vaccines as efficiently, equitably and
effectively as possible.
• In the context of rolling vaccine supply, the recommendation to extend intervals up to four months
between doses is based on an extensive review of clinical trial and real-world use data that show
good levels of protection for the first two months after the first dose.
• Extending dose intervals up to four months will optimize early vaccine rollout and population
protection. It will allow many more people to gain protection against severe COVID-19 outcomes
since they will receive the first dose of an effective COVID-19 vaccine earlier.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts in the
fields of pediatrics, infectious diseases, immunology, pharmacy, nursing, epidemiology,
pharmacoeconomics, socials ciences and public health, which provides independent advice to the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) on the optimal use of vaccines in Canada.
NACI is providing Recommendations on the Use of COVID-19 Vaccine(s), including recommendations on
extended dose intervals, to help inform the ethical, equitable and effective roll-out of COVID-19 vaccines
in the context of staggered authorization and supply of vaccines.
As regulator, Health Canada rigorously evaluates safety and efficacy data from clinical trials before
authorizing vaccines, but does not dictate practice of medicine or make recommendations on how the
vaccines should be used in different age groups and sub-populations for public health impact.
NACI’s recommendations complement regulatory indications with real-world context, including the
availability of other vaccines in Canada, and with information on public health strategies based on
available and evolving evidence. NACI may make recommendations that are broader or narrower than
the conditions of use approved by the regulator.
NACI’s guidance is advisory in nature, as immunization program planning and delivery decisions fall
under provincial and territorial responsibilities. Provincial and territorial governments will ultimately
consider their unique needs and circumstances when planning and implementing immunization
programs.
Extended intervals
In February 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Chief Medical Officers of Health from
across the country asked NACI to revisit their dose interval recommendation, given new real-world
evidence of the protection of one dose of COVID-19 vaccines and the need for jurisdictions to
implement vaccine intervals beyond six weeks.
In response to this request, NACI thoroughly reviewed all available evidence regarding efficacy (clinical
trials), effectiveness (real-world use) and duration of protection of the first dose of COVID-19 vaccines,
including in subpopulations (e.g., older adults). NACI also assessed the impact of extending the interval
between the priming (first) dose and boosting (second) dose on the immune response; the impact of
extended dose intervals on variants of concern; and the population-level impacts of rapidly providing
more people with a first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.
On March 3, 2021, NACI released a rapid response recommending that in the context of limited vaccine
supply and ongoing pandemic disease, jurisdictions should maximize the number of individuals
benefiting from the first dose of an effective COVID-19 vaccine by extended dose intervals of all
authorized two-dose COVID-19 vaccines up to four months. Due to the urgency for jurisdictions to
consider implementing extended dose intervals, the rapid response statement contained a shortened
rationale.
On April 7, 2021, the full advisory committee statement explaining NACI’s rationale for the
recommendation, including updated detailed evidence summaries and references, was published.
NACI’s recommendations have not changed since the March 3 Rapid Response publication.
The recommendations are based on:
o Clinical trial evidence that demonstrates very good vaccine efficacy from the first dose;
o New real-world evidence that suggests good vaccine effectiveness against symptomatic disease and
asymptomatic infection, and very good effectiveness against hospitalization, including among older
populations (there is currently no evidence that this protection decreases over time);
o Mathematical modelling, which demonstrates that accelerating vaccine coverage by extending dose
intervals would have substantial population-level benefits by reducing symptomatic disease,
hospitalizations and deaths while there is limited vaccine supply;
o Knowledge of vaccines, which indicate that a longer interval between the first and second dose
generally results in a better immune response after the second dose;
o Experience with other multi-dose vaccines, which suggests that protection from the first dose of a
vaccine series can last six months or longer, while second doses extend protection even longer;
o Public health principles of ethical decision-making, including equity, feasibility and accessibility,
which favour extending intervals, especially while cases of COVID-19, hospitalizations, and severe illness
and deaths are high, and faster progress towards population protection will help to protect vulnerable
populations; and
o NACI’s expert opinion that within a global pandemic setting, reducing the risk of severe disease
outcomes in the majority of the population and decreasing transmission in the community will have the
greatest public health impact.
The second dose of COVID-19 vaccine should be given up to four months after the first dose. Second
doses should be offered as soon as possible after all eligible populations have been offered their first
dose. Jurisdictions may choose to shorten the interval between the first and second dose in specific
populations based on local epidemiology, local vaccine supply, public health considerations and
emerging data. In situations where informed consent included assumptions about second dose timing, it
is the jurisdictions’ prerogative to consider offering second doses at shorter intervals for those who
provided consent to vaccine timing prior to this recommendation.
The impact of extending the interval between doses on variants of concern is unknown. However, there
is currently no evidence that an extended interval between doses will either increase or decrease the
emergence of variants of concern. COVID-19 mRNA vaccines and the AstraZeneca vaccine have shown
promising early results against variant B.1.1.7, first detected in the United Kingdom. As effectiveness of
the first dose against other variants of concern is emerging, ongoing monitoring will be conducted.
NACI will continue to closely monitor the evidence on effectiveness of an extended dose interval, as well
as vaccine effectiveness against variants of concern, and will update its recommendations as needed.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
AND MEDICAL DEVICE PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
• The global COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an initial unprecedented shortage of personal protective
equipment (PPE), medical equipment, and supplies. To support the needs of Canada’s frontline
healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination with the provinces and territories,
launched a significant bulk procurement and bolstered the pandemic stockpile, engaging a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers both internationally and through the Government of
Canada’s domestic “Call to Action” to increase domestic production.
• As a result of these efforts, the Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving shipments on a daily basis
by air, land and sea, and Canada is now successfully producing Made- in-Canada PPE, medical
equipment and supplies to address the urgent needs of frontline workers, and the safety of Canadians at
large.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare workers with the PPE
required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of COVID-19?
• What is the Government of Canada doing to prepare for resurgence and/or mass vaccination
campaign scenarios?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada is continuing to receive a steady supply of PPE with shipments arriving daily, which are rapidly
allocated to provinces and territories.
• As of March 15, Public Services and Procurement Canada has confirmed contracts for a variety of PPE,
medical equipment and supplies including:
o over 187.7 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95 respirators; FFP2);
o 450 million surgical masks;
o 60.3 million face shields;
o 1.5 billion pairs of gloves;
o 150 million protective gowns; and
o 40 thousand ventilators.
• We allocate PPE and supplies based on an 80/20 formula, with 80% being allocated to provinces and
territories to distribute within their jurisdiction and 20% to replenish the inventory of the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile. This formula was developed in consultation with provinces and
territories.
• In response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories, we are also deploying
PPE, medical equipment and supplies from the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS WORKING TO SECURE A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY
OF PPE IN CANADA
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Health Canada, provinces and territories to review
the supply and demand of PPE, medical equipment and supplies, based on worst-case epidemiological
scenarios, to determine maximum needs.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada are also continuing to work with provincial and
territorial partners to identify supply gaps and ongoing procurement needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE MADE-IN-CANADA VENTILATORS
• As part of the Plan to Mobilize Industry to fight COVID-19, contracts were awarded to five Canadian
suppliers for the procurement of ventilators.
• Current modelling suggests an oversupply of ventilators. The Government of Canada is currently
working with manufacturers to reduce volumes.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorial governments to develop
an allocation strategy for these ventilators.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will also be retaining an inventory of ventilators in the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile to meet future needs of the healthcare sector.
IF PRESSED ON CAE VENTILATORS
• All medical devices received by the Public Health Agency of Canada undergo a quality assessment
process. If a deficiency is identified, the affected units are returned to the manufacturer for further
assessment, repair or replacement as appropriate.
• Health Canada continues to monitor the safety, quality, and effectiveness of all medical devices for use
in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and territories
(PTs) can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters and other
public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items
such as: medical equipment and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and
blankets.
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of the frontline health care response to
COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach of interdepartmental
coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, National
Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the Department of National Defense, Public Services and
Procurement Canada (PSPC), Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Canada (ISED).
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to be able to respond in a reasonable manner to the
most common emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement
and management of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• It provides surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient; and
• It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health emergencies, for example, costly
and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
PHAC acknowledges that the pandemic created unprecedented demand for certain types of supplies.
Canada, like most countries, is applying the lessons learned from the COVID-19 outbreak to our
stockpiling strategies and considering all options going forward to ensure that the most effective
stockpile practices are implemented and maintained.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and warehouses strategically
located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved from nine warehouse locations across Canada
to six. An independent assessment indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’
role as timely surge capacity support.
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS has added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 1 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while obsolete and expired
supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
NESS Funding
In 2010-11, the ongoing annual base funding for the NESS, including salary and operating costs was $5.6
million. By 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS was reduced to $3 million. Additional funding
has historically been provided to the NESS through internal reallocation decisions and incremental
funding decisions through which PHAC has received funding linked to specific purchases, such as a four-
year investment in medical countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began in 2015-16.
More than $5.8 billion has been invested in the NESS since the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Canada for the procurement of PPE, medical equipment and supplies and for logistics and warehousing.
PPE Procurement, Domestic Capacity Building and Distribution
At the beginning of the pandemic, PHAC led a bulk procurement process of PPE, medical equipment and
supplies on behalf of the federal government and PTs. This bulk procurement was to support the large-
scale effort to combat COVID-19 and was agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health. PHAC allocated bulk
procured PPE using an 80/20 formula: 80% is distributed to PTs on a per capita basis and the remaining
20% replenishes the NESS inventory, including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada to support
the requirements of First Nations on reserve.
Products from the bulk procurement continue to arrive daily at NESS warehouses and are rapidly
allocated to PTs to support healthcare workers across the country. In parallel, PHAC is bolstering its
stockpile of PPE and medical devices so that it can respond, when needed, to the surge capacity needs
of PTs above the allocation they receive from the bulk procurement process.
Procurement and distribution of PPE for other government departments is led by PSPC.
In addition to original bulk procurement efforts, ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian
industries to increase domestic manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce
equipment and supplies including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role, conducting
technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of Canada technical specifications
for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell website.
Access is further facilitated by Health Canada, by expediting regulatory approvals of products through
the Interim Order (IO) for Medical Devices signed by the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. On
March 1, 2021, Health Canada introduced Interim Order No. 2 respecting the importation and sale of
medical devices for use in relation to COVID-19, which replaced and repealed the first Interim Order. As
the regulatory authority, Health Canada also continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
medical devices for use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as provinces and
territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada. Manufacturers and importers are
also required to notify the Minister of Health of medical device shortages considered critical.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-19 and working
with companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
Health Canada is also modelling PPE, medical equipment and supplies, and supply and demand at
provincial and territorial, as well as pan-Canadian levels, to understand and plan for possible pressure
points across different sectors of the economy and to inform future procurement plans of PPE, medical
equipment and supplies.
In addition, the government is also exploring opportunities for more environmentally conscious federal
PPE, medical equipment and supply procurement.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers and manufacturers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before distribution to PTs. If
PHAC cannot account for the quality of equipment, it is not distributed to PTs for frontline healthcare
response. This process is supported by testing capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with suppliers to address
issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers in the future once issues are
identified.
Health Canada continues to monitor authorized medical devices for safety and effectiveness after
authorizing them for use in Canada. If concerns arise, Health Canada takes appropriate action to protect
the health and safety of Canadians.
KN95 Respirators
On May 8, 2020, the CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators received by the
Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out of China, 8 million did not meet
the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1
million met specifications, and 1.6 million were pending testing results. The number not meeting
specifications has since increased to approximately 10 million. PSPC has suspended shipments from this
supplier and is pursuing the appropriate recourse on behalf of PHAC. Where possible, supplies that do
not meet specifications are subsequently assessed for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19. Each has
been contracted to provide made-in-Canada ventilators (for a total of up to 38,520): FTI Professional
Grade (FTI), CAE, Canadian Emergency Ventilators/Starfish, Vexos and Thornhill Medical.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Updated information and modelling
indicate that Canada has successfully secured an appropriate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet
its potential needs.
As of March 25, 2021, the Government of Canada has successfully secured 27,689 ventilators. Thanks to
the efforts of our suppliers and based on latest modelling estimates, Canada now has more ventilators
than would be needed in a worst-case COVID-19 resurgence scenario. As a result, PSPC and PHAC are
working with the manufacturers to identify opportunities to reduce the volumes.
CAE Ventilators
CAE is one of five companies contracted by the Government of Canada to domestically manufacture
ventilators. While the company initially received authorization from Health Canada under the Interim
Order in June 2020, Health Canada and PHAC identified quality issues associated with the initial
shipment of ventilators delivered in July 2020. Health Canada required CAE to issue an amendment to
address issues identified. Further to the amendment submitted by CAE, Health Canada authorized the
CAE Air 1 version 1 on September 28, 2020. CAE also submitted an application for the CAE Air 1 version
2, which Health Canada authorized on November 18, 2020.
PHAC has identified concerns with ventilator quality and reported observations to Health Canada for
regulatory consideration. In December 2020, Health Canada requested and assessed information from
CAE relating to their quality system. The review concluded CAE has an adequate quality management
system in place.
In January 2021, PHAC reported issues with backup power modules within the CAE ventilators. Health
Canada’s assessment of this issue is ongoing.
OVERDOSE CRISIS
SYNOPSIS
• The overdose crisis continues to be a serious and unrelenting public health threat. Tragically, the
COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions across the
country reporting increases in overdose deaths and harms. In addition, people who use drugs are also
facing additional barriers and risks related to the toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to
health and social services, including life-saving harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government addressing the overdose crisis in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s recent history.
• Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated long-standing challenges regarding substance use
and the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose deaths and
harms.
• Our government has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis using a public health-focused
approach, guided by our federal drug strategy – the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy. We
continue to support efforts to improve access to treatment services; increase access to harm reduction
services; strengthen enforcement to help reduce the toxic illegal drug supply; increase awareness and
prevention efforts; and, build the evidence base through investments in research and surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
frontline service providers and people with lived and living experience to advance solutions to save lives
and help reverse this national public health crisis while recognizing that problematic substance use must
be treated as a health condition.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19-SPECIFIC MEASURES…
• The Government of Canada has taken swift action to address the unique challenges posed by the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have taken urgent action to enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use and avert the harms associated with the increasingly toxic
supply of street drugs and challenges associated with accessing treatment and harm reduction services.
• For example, we removed regulatory barriers to make it easier for people with substance use disorder
to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for overdose prevention sites to be
established rapidly in temporary community shelters and other locations.
• We have also provided $500 million under the Safe Restart Agreements with Provinces and Territories
to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and protection of people experiencing challenges
related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
• Recently, we announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of naloxone kits and opioid
overdose response training to support communities across Canada that have been particularly affected
by the opioid overdose crisis.
• To build on significant funding provided in Budget 2018 and Budget 2019, our Government provided
an additional $66 million over two years to support community-based efforts in responding to substance
use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19 context.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those struggling with
substance use lead fulfilled lives.
• That is why we have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and facilitated
their prescribing and dispensing through regulatory amendments; supported the development of clinical
guidelines for injectable opioid agonist treatment; and encouraged the provinces and territories to
increase their uptake of these evidence-based treatments.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has also provided $150 million in Budget 2018 through the
Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based treatment
services.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• The evidence is clear, harm reduction measures help reduce harms and save lives.
• That is why we have funded innovative pilot projects for safer supply models as an alternative to the
toxic illegal drug supply; have passed the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act to provide legal protection
for people who seek emergency help during an overdose; have exemptions in place for 37 operating
supervised consumption sites; and have increased access to naloxone, including to remote communities
and isolated First Nations and Inuit communities and to the sector serving individuals who are
experiencing homelessness.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention efforts, including awareness
building.
• That is why we have invested in prevention campaigns to engage youth and young adults on the facts
of substance use, expanded public awareness around opioids and the harms of stigma via public health
campaigns; supported school-based approaches that enhance student well-being to prevent
problematic substance use amongst youth; and supported the development of opioid-prescribing
guidelines and treatment guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our government is aware that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous illegal drug
supply, resulting in tragic increases in overdose-related deaths across the country.
• For this reason, we have taken a number of actions to reduce barriers to providing people who use
drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply. For example, we
have issued exemptions to pharmacists, and eased restrictions on the transportation of controlled
substances, to make it easier for people to access the medications they need during the pandemic.
• In addition, the Government of Canada is providing funding to support safer supply projects in British
Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The evaluation of these innovative projects
will continue to build the evidence base and support the scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• International and Canadian evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save
lives.
• These sites reduce risk of overdose death and of transmission of infection. In addition, they provide
access to other health and social services for people who use drugs, including opportunities to access
treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territories, service providers, people with lived and living
experience, and other stakeholders to take appropriate measures to maintain and expand access to
supervised consumption services in communities that need them.
IF PRESSED ON ENFORCEMENT/TOXIC DRUG SUPPLY…
• Our government recognizes that the toxic illegal drug supply is the leading cause of opioid overdose
harms and deaths, and law enforcement must support a public health response.
• That is why we have worked with domestic and international partners to reduce the illegal fentanyl
supply; equipped border agents with tools to intercept fentanyl; and, worked with private sector
partners to address money laundering of the proceeds of fentanyl trafficking.
IF PRESSED ON DECRIMINALIZATION…
• Our Government recognizes that substance use is first and foremost a health issue.
• We have lost too many Canadians to drug overdoses, and an increasing number of stakeholders are
saying criminalizing personal drug possession is hurting, not helping.
• We are looking at ways to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system and
towards health and social supports, such as supervised consumption sites and drug treatment services.
• The Public Prosecution Service of Canada has issued a directive to only pursue charges for possession
of illegal drugs in the most serious cases. In addition, recently announced amendments to federal drug
laws in Bill C-22 would further support actions to treat simple drug possession more as a health issue,
rather than as a criminal one.
• We will continue to work with other levels of government and stakeholders to help save lives and
better support the needs of people who use drugs during this crisis.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH AND SURVEILLANCE…
• Our government recognizes that in order to have an effective response to the ever-changing crisis, a
strong understanding and evidence-base is required to make informed and timely decisions.
• That is why, we have collected and published data on opioid-related deaths and harms; used
modelling to show how the opioid overdose crisis may change as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
conducted rapid knowledge synthesis; and, developed a range of guidance documents to support
evidence-based interventions.
IF PRESSED ON THE SECTION 56 EXEMPTION REQUEST FROM THE CITY OF VANCOUVER AND BRITISH
COLUMBIA THAT WOULD DECRIMINALIZE THE PERSONAL POSSESSION OF DRUGS…
•Health Canada is working with the Province of British Columbia and the City of Vancouver. We will
continue our work to get Canadians who use substances the support they need.
• Health Canada is committed to carefully reviewing any request for an exemption under the Controlled
Drugs and Substance Act on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential benefits and risks to
the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE’S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CRIMINAL CODE AND
THE CONTROLLED DRUGS AND SUBSTANCES ACT (BILL C-222, INTRODUCED FEBRUARY 18, 2021)…
• This Bill represents a step forward in treating substance use as a health issue and addressing systemic
issues in the criminal justice system that disproportionately affect Indigenous peoples and Black
Canadians.
• The Bill would require police and prosecutors to consider alternative measures - including diverting
individuals to addiction treatment programs, giving a warning or taking no further action - instead of
laying charges or prosecuting individuals for simple possession of an illegal drug.
• We understand that many stakeholders are continuing to call for full drug decriminalization.
• We remain committed to saving lives and better supporting the needs of people who use drugs during
the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• Our government recognizes the close links between people who live with pain, substance use and the
overdose crisis.
• That is why we created the Canadian Pain Task Force to better understand these links and to identify
potential actions to better prevent and manage chronic pain in Canada.
• As a complex and largescale public health challenge, chronic pain requires multiple and diverse
approaches to change. Health Canada will continue to work with our partners to explore such
approaches and next steps.
• We have also invested over $175M in pain-related research through the Canadian Institutes for Health
Research and close to $15M in funding for 12 initiatives focused on improving opioid prescribing
practices and pain management through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP).
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 19,355 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and September 2020. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the crisis
with as many as 82% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2020 (January to September)
involving fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with
death most common among males and individuals aged 20 to 49 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing increased risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Available information indicate at least five provinces and
territories have observed record-breaking numbers of deaths in April to September 2020.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be the
most impacted region of the country. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,724
illegal drug toxicity deaths, a 75% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally, in February
2021, there were 155 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths, representing the largest number of
suspected deaths eve recorded in the month of February. This number represents a 107% increase over
the number of deaths occurring in February 2020 (75) and an 11% decrease from the number of deaths
occurring in January 2021 (174). Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people in BC have also
surged, almost doubling between January and May 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. In 2020,
Alberta also experienced a 61% increase in opioid overdose deaths among First Nations people, as
compared to the same time period in 2019.
Other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar trends. Ten provinces and territories (ON, AB,
SK, MB, QC, NB, PEI, NL, YK, and NWT) are also reporting increases in toxicity of the illegal drug supply,
overdose deaths and/or emergency department or medical service (EMS) calls.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of nearly
$700M to address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products and tools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statement (December 2020) to help support community-based
organizations responding to substance use issues address the additional challenges posted by the
COVID- 19 pandemic. In March 2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the
distribution of naloxone kits and opioid overdose response training to support communities that have
been particularly affected by the opioid overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving
health outcomes of their residents.
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action to make it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for frontline service
providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
OUTBREAK MONITORING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is working with provincial, territorial and international partners to detect
signals and investigate transmission patterns to closely monitor the emergence and spread of COVID-19
in communities across Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the federal government monitoring new outbreaks of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of continued outbreak monitoring.
• Multiple data sources are used to monitor the current situation in Canada, including daily case
information by province and territory, and any developing outbreaks.
• Provinces and territories share data with the Public Health Agency of Canada, which are analyzed daily
to monitor patterns of transmission.
• We continue to use early warning systems to collect and exchange timely information on illness
clusters in Canada and internationally.
• The Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence platform is also facilitating the secure, timely
exchange of information between local, regional, provincial, territorial and federal public health officials
related to events of public health concern.
BACKGROUND
Outbreak monitoring and response is part of the core work of the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC). Existing initiatives are based on many years of epidemiological expertise and include both
technological solutions as well as communication channels. Initiatives include:
• Public Health Alerts (PHA), administered and distributed by the Canadian Network for Public Health
Intelligence (CNPHI), facilitate secure, timely exchange of information between local/regional,
provincial/territorial (PT) and federal public health officials regarding events of public health concern.
• FluWatch is an online health surveillance system that helps track the spread of influenza and influenza-
like illnesses across Canada and is an important part of Canada's national influenza surveillance
program.
• The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) scans publicly available information in order to
give early-warning of illness clusters in Canada and internationally.
• Outbreak intelligence is gathered via “web scraping” (in-depth scanning) of PT websites/press releases
and media coverage, and information is assessed daily by epidemiologists.
• A new system for standardized, routine reporting of outbreaks from PTs to PHAC is in development.
These initiatives have been leveraged to effectively monitor and respond to this pandemic. This includes
collecting granular and near real-time data, and the use of new and complementary data streams.
Engagement with PTs
PHAC works closely with PTs to monitor and respond to outbreaks. PTs report case level data to PHAC,
which are analyzed on a daily basis in order to monitor epidemiological trends for early detection of new
patterns of transmission.
PHAC also supports PTs with the management of outbreaks of national concern. PHAC is called upon by
PTs to investigate and to provide additional technical expertise or specialized skills as required. This
includes deployment of personnel (including field epidemiologists and public health officers) to support
the investigation of outbreaks.
PHAC provides ongoing national coordination and federal leadership for multijurisdictional COVID-19
outbreaks, or complex single jurisdiction COVID-19 outbreaks. Since early May 2020, PHAC has been
involved in the investigation of a number of multijurisdictional or complex outbreaks, including:
• industrial worksite outbreaks;
• outbreaks associated with social gatherings;
• agricultural sector outbreaks; and
• outbreaks amongst those in communal living settings and institutions.
PHAC is promoting rigorous epidemiologic investigations of COVID-19 outbreaks in Canada in order to
respond more effectively to these outbreaks and to increase our understanding of COVID-19
transmission dynamics and risks, and is developing guidance for epidemiologic investigation of COVID-19
outbreaks.
From a national perspective, there is considerable interest in monitoring case clusters and outbreaks
related to COVID-19, especially during the winter respiratory illness season. PHAC, in collaboration with
PT partners, produced guidance on outbreak investigations in schools to support a systematic approach
to outbreak responses in this setting.
Defining an “Outbreak”
The purpose of the “outbreak” definition is to trigger management activities (e.g., an investigation of the
source, and implementation of measures to control spread). The definition of an outbreak of an
infectious disease is contextual – it is typically defined as the occurrence of disease cases in excess of
what is usually expected. As COVID-19 is a novel disease, the threshold required to initiate public health
management activities is low; in other words, every case detected remains of public health interest and
triggers active prevention and control activities.
Outbreak definitions for COVID-19 may differ across PTs depending on settings. PTs have varying
definitions of outbreaks for different settings, typically with a minimum of 1-2 cases occurring in a
setting within a certain period of time. In closed populations or settings with vulnerable individuals (e.g.,
correctional facilities, long-term care facilities, shelters), there tends to be a lower threshold, where only
one confirmed case may be needed to declare an outbreak.
To ensure consistent terminology is applied in national COVID-19 surveillance and monitoring activities,
PHAC and PTs developed a definition for a “multijurisdictional COVID-19 outbreak”. A multijurisdictional
COVID-19 outbreak is one that:
• occurs in more than one Canadian province or territory;
• occurs in Canada and involves another country/countries; and/or
• the management of the outbreak involves multiple PT or international public health agencies or
authorities.
PHARMACARE
SYNOPSIS
• In February 2020, the NDP introduced Private Member’s Bill C-231 to implement single- payer
universal pharmacare, as well as a motion that passed with Government support in March 2020. On
February 24, 2021, Bill C-231 was defeated at second reading.
• In Budget 2019, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and the Fall Economic Statement, the Government
committed to implement national pharmacare, beginning with the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency,
a national formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare program?
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on the
table.
• We have done more than any government in a generation to lower drug prices.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working together with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to implement national universal pharmacare so that Canadians have the drug coverage
they need.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for high-cost drugs for
rare diseases in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders and the public.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the cost
of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces, territories
and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare
diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
• We have already taken action to improve access and affordability of medicines. For example, we
modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will save Canadians billions
over the next decade.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
• On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
• On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with
Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders
through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12,
2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national
universal pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
• Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing effectiveness
and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more consistent
coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access
to the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support the creation of a Canada Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne and Fall Economic Statement.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its mandate to
protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will
result in billions of savings for governments and private payers over the next 10 years. However, the
brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
• On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that maintained most of the
regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information On
December 18, 2020, a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the
Attorney General of Canada. These decisions are currently being appealed.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published amendments to the Patented Medicines
Regulations (‘Amendments’) to provide the PMPRB with new tools and information needed to protect
Canadians from excessive prices of patented medicines.
• On October 23, 2020, the PMPRB published its final Guidelines to operationalize the Amendments.
• As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to challenge all stakeholders, the coming-into-force date of the
Amendments has been delayed by an additional six months, from January 1, 2021 to July 1, 2021. This
delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations and familiarize
themselves with the final Guidelines.
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry have challenged the Amendments in Court, and have
expressed concerns that they could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to
medicines. The Courts ruled to maintain most of the Amendments, but struck down the collection of
confidential rebate information. The rulings are currently the subject of an appeal by the applicants and
cross-appeal by the Crown.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why does the Government insist on continuing with the amendments to the Patented Medicines
Regulations when it impacts Canadians’ access to new medicines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains committed to increasing the affordability and accessibility of prescription
drugs, including patented medicines, to improve the health of Canadians and better meet health care
system needs.
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices negatively
affect the ability of patients to access new medicines. These regulatory amendments will help Canadians
to afford the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are launched in
major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are well below those in
Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Norway are examples of this.
If Pressed on the Coming-into-Force Date
• The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demands on the pharmaceutical industry and we are mindful
that all stakeholders continue to be challenged with the current situation. For that reason, the
Government delayed the coming into force of the amendments by another six months—until July 1,
2021.
• This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations introduced by
these Amendments. A delay will also provide industry more time to familiarize themselves with the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines which were published in October 2020.
If Pressed on the Access to COVID-19 Patented Medicines (Drugs and Vaccines):
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines and
medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its final Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to specified
patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-wide effort
to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19 diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry and Drug Access
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing over the
next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the Canadian
market for products.
If pressed on impact on pharmaceutical investments in Canada
• Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical industry investments, while having
considerably lower prices than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times more investment
dollars than Canada despite prices being 20% less.
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian economy,
innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation ecosystem in
Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the Canadian
market for products, and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade agreements.
If pressed on recent litigation
• The Government of Canada is pleased that the courts have upheld the majority of the Amendments.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to these regulatory amendments and as the matter is
still before the court, no further comments will be made.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines Consultation Process
• The PMPRB made revisions in response to the significant stakeholder feedback it received, and
published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force, the PMPRB initiated a consultation on two
consequential adjustments to their Guidelines and published its decision on March 17, 2021.
• The PMPRB has published all written submissions it received during its consultations with stakeholders
and the public on the draft Guidelines and consequential adjustments.
BACKGROUND
• The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the
government, reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian
market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions, or hold public
hearings to determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of
excess revenues.
• The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire into any
matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada
Gazette, Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of
patented medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020 and
published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed twice in response to the
increased demands and challenges on industry stakeholders due to COVID-19. On March 29, 2020,
stakeholders were informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021, and most recently, the
coming-into-force date was delayed further to July 1, 2021. These delays provide additional time for
stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final
Guidelines.
In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, on January 15,
2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definition of Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB is developing a comprehensive Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
(GMEP) to assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any future adjustments required to ensure that
they are working as intended. The GMEP will be used to monitor four different areas: impact on prices,
impact on access, impact on the ecosystem and impact on PMPRB processes.
• The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information.
• On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently
needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating
that special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against
COVID-19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim
Orders will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the
federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is refelected in
the PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
NEONICOTINOID PESTICIDES – AQUATIC RISK
SYNOPSIS
• On March 31, 2021, Health Canada released final special review decisions related to aquatic organisms
for two neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Previously, Health Canada consulted
publicly on a proposal to cancel all outdoor uses of both of these pesticides. Over 47,000 comments
were received, as well as a substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water
monitoring data. In order to protect aquatic insects, in these final decisions, Health Canada will be
cancelling some uses of clothianidin and thiamethoxam, and introducing additional mitigation measures
and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered. A final re-evaluation decision on a third
neonicotinoid pesticide, imidacloprid, is targeted for later this Spring.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Neonicotinoids are affecting the environment. Why has the Government delayed this decision, and not
proceeded with a complete ban?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-based
scientific decisions.
• Health Canada reviewed more than 47,000 comments, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data that were received on the aquatic risks of
neonicotinoids.
• In order to protect aquatic insects, Health Canada will be cancelling some uses of clothianidin and
thiamethoxam, and introducing additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses
that remain registered.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the situation and take action if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA – WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES – IS TAKING
A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSURE FROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR:
• Health Canada has concluded that a complete ban on neonicotinoid pesticides is not warranted.
• As part of the public consultation on its decisions, Health Canada received more than 47,000
comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces. As
well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from various
sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound, science-
based, final decisions regarding the risks to aquatic insects from the use of these two neonicotinoid
insecticides in Canada.
BACKGROUND
NEONICS AND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
• On November 23, 2016, Health Canada proposed to phase out all agricultural uses of imidacloprid due
to unacceptable aquatic risk. This proposed decision led to a special review on the aquatic risks of two
other neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. At the time, concerns were identified by
Health Canada from available scientific information that these two pesticides were frequently being
detected in aquatic environments in Canada at concentrations that could pose a risk to aquatic insects.
• Health Canada consulted on proposed special review decisions on risks to aquatic insects for
clothianidin and thiamethoxam in the Fall of 2018. This review proposed the cancellation of all outdoor
uses based on risks to the aquatic environment, similar to the previous consultation on imidacloprid.
Health Canada then reviewed the more than 47,000 comments that were received via the consultation,
as well as a substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data
from various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities.
Approximately 65% of the water monitoring information considered in the special reviews was new
since the publication of the proposed decisions.
• The final special review decisions related to aquatic insects for clothianidin and thiamethoxam,
originally targeted for fall 2020, were delayed until March 31, 2021 due to the unprecedented volume of
information received during consultation and the challenges of COVID-19.
• In order to protect aquatic insects, Health Canada will be cancelling some uses of clothianidin and
thiamethoxam, and introducing additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses
that remain registered. A final re-evaluation decision on imidacloprid is targeted for later this Spring.
NEONICS AND BEES
• On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluations of the neonicotinoid
pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. The implementation timelines outlined in the
thiamethoxam decision were challenged by several organizations in proceedings against the Minister of
Health. The Federal Court dismissed the application in December of 2019.
• The special reviews for squash bees are currently ongoing. Health Canada plans to complete the
proposed special review decisions related to squash bees in 2021.
NEONICS AND HUMAN HEALTH
• Based on data reviewed for the proposed cyclical re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, the
assessment did not identify human health concerns. Additional data received following publication of
the proposed decision are currently being assessed, along with consideration of the proposed interim
decision on neonics by the United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
• All available information will be considered in Health Canada’s ongoing cyclical re- evaluations of
clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Health Canada is expecting to publish the proposed cyclical re-
evaluation decisions of clothianidin and thiamethoxam in Spring 2022.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• The US EPA expressed similar concerns regarding aquatic insects in their preliminary ecological risk
assessments of the neonicotinoids in 2017. The EPA published a proposed interim decision for
acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, imidacloprid, and thiamethoxam on January 30, 2020. It contains
new measures to reduce potential ecological risks, particularly to pollinators, and to protect public
health. A final decision from the US EPA is expected later in 2021.
• The European Union voted to prohibit all agricultural uses of neonicotinoids except in greenhouses.
This measure came into effect on December 19, 2018. This decision was driven by unacceptable risks to
bees and other pollinators. Emergency use is permitted in some European countries.
• Health Canada cannot speak to the decision-making process in other countries with regards to
neonicotinoids. Each country takes into account its own legislative requirements, policies, and scientific
analysis before making a decision. In Canada, pesticides are allowed on the market only after a full
scientific analysis is completed based on Canadian use, and the risks are found to be acceptable as per
the requirements of the Pest Control Products Act.
PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL VACCINE ALLOCATIONS
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to securing and deploying a sufficient supply of safe and
effective vaccines for all persons in Canada.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada worked with the provinces and territories and Indigenous communities to develop a vaccine
rollout strategy that focuses efforts, in the context of a limited initial vaccine supply, on protecting those
at greatest risk of severe illness, hospitalization, or death.
• To date, the Government has distributed over 10.5 million doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna and
AstraZeneca vaccines to provinces and territories, and federal partners.
• We are continuing to work closely with provinces and territories and with our Indigenous partners to
ensure that as supply increases so does their capacity to administer vaccine to Canadians.
• We want to assure Canadians that we are working in close collaboration with the provinces and
territories in order to ensure that all eligible persons in Canada who want to be vaccinated have access
to a safe vaccine by the end of September 2021.
BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. The plan put an emphasis
on six main principles—Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability;
Fairness and Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting. Based on this model, Canada has
remained adaptable, keeping in mind equity and fairness in respect to all aspects of the vaccine supplies
and distribution to the provinces and territories.
Canada has remained engaged and involved with provinces and territories (PT) in order to address any
potential gaps in vaccine allocations, keeping in mind that PT governments are responsible for
administering vaccination programs and determining public health requirements in their jurisdictions.
Canada has secured contracts with vaccine suppliers and conducted regulatory reviews to ensure the
safety of its authorized vaccines. Furthermore, by providing logistics services and by covering the costs
of vaccines, Canada will continue to provide support to PTs, which includes, but is not limited to,
enhancing PT cold-chain capacity.
We will continue to coordinate the delivery of vaccine supplies and will work with PTs to unlock and
optimize resources across the country. Furthermore, federal, provincial and territorial officials, along
with indigenous leaders, are continuing to meet frequently to refine plans for the distribution and
administration of vaccines throughout Canada. Canada’s engagement to date ensures equitable access
to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples as well as distribution of vaccines to Canada’s northern
territories and other remote and isolated areas.
COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative to
assist provinces and territories in managing the impacts of COVID- 19 outbreaks. It is available for
consideration when needs exceed municipal, provincial, and territorial capabilities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada assisting jurisdictions with surge capacity needs?
KEY MESSAGES
• As part of our ongoing support to the provinces and territories, we have established a COVID-19 Public
Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative.
• This initiative is in addition to the Safe Restart Agreements, which provided provinces and territories
with over $19 billion in federal investments to support:
- Health care system capacity;
- Testing and contact tracing; and
- Other social services to support Canadians.
• The Rapid Surge Capacity initiative supports the needs of provinces and territories in responding to
COVID-19 outbreaks and mitigates transmission in hot zones where they have exceeded their own
capacity.
• It can also strengthen existing services in areas where needs are most pressing, and most critical –
including outbreak management, testing, and contact tracing.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT GIVEN TO PROVINCES/TERRITORIES…
• Provinces and territories are responsible for prioritizing requests from their local jurisdictions.
• The Government of Canada prioritizes requests received based on the needs and capacity available at
the time of the request.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada coordinates the requests for surge capacity support and
assistance.
• We are currently providing support to 8 provinces and 1 territory, and we are in discussions with all
provinces and territories on their needs that could be addressed through this initiative.
• Our current support includes:
o Public Health Rapid Response Teams to provide a range of supports to partners during the pandemic.
o Approximately 150 Canadian Red Cross personnel deployed to address outbreaks or to provide
emergency testing sites, from a roster of about 4,100 available personnel. This roster will continue to
increase in size over the coming months.
o Six federal labs to supplement testing capacity.
o Supplying laboratory and testing equipment to all provinces and territories.
o Processing approximately 9,345 calls a day to assist with contact tracing.
o Committing $100 million for safe voluntary isolation sites across the country.
o Providing access to federal staffing inventories to assist provinces and territories in hiring the
personnel they need.
• In addition, the federal government has over 100 subject matter experts ready for rapid deployment
to assist provinces and territories with assessing local outbreaks.
• The Government of Canada has also committed $35 million for the Canadian Red Cross to supplement
testing.
• The Fall 2020 Economic Statement committed a further $150 million to support the Canadian Red
Cross and other non- governmental organizations with enhancing their surge capacity workforce for
Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment, as well as medical equipment and supplies, and expedite the delivery of this equipment to
our frontline healthcare workers.
BACKGROUND
Through the COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative, rapid response surge capacity is
being offered for potential deployments across Canada, including rural and remote locations as well as
Indigenous communities.
Under this initiative, the Government of Canada has developed eight fields to respond:
• Public Health Rapid Response Team;
• Outbreak Management;
• COVID-19 Patient Testing;
• Laboratory Services;
• Laboratory Equipment;
• Contact Tracing;
• Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites; and
• Human Resources Recruitment.
The initiative leverages federal resources as well as the existing Public Safety Canada contribution
arrangement with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC).
Resource Management (as of March 31):
Services Total Available Capacity Committed Capacity
1. Public Health 108 individuals Nil
Rapid Response
Team
2. Outbreak Full Support team: 4,095 · ON: 4 personnel to support a
Management individuals temporary foreign worker site, and
(CRC) 71 personnel to support 3 long
term care facilities
· QC: 76 personnel at 4 long term
care sites.
3. COVID-19 Patient ~400 staff, 10 teams · Nil
Testing (CRC)
4. Laboratory 12,000 tests per day · NML Winnipeg: ~212 tests per day
Services (supporting MB, ON & federal
point of entry testing)
· CFIA Lethbridge: ~ 625 tests per
day (supporting AB, federal point
of entry testing)
· NML Guelph: ~1079 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
· DFO Moncton: ~76 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
· CFIA Ottawa: ~352 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
· ECCC Vancouver: ~100
tests per
day (supporting federal
point of
entry testing)
5. Laboratory · Abbott IDNow (rapid point of · Abbott IDNow: 3,203 units to all
Equipment care diagnostic testing); PTs
· BioFire (multiplex diagnostic · BioFire: 115 units to 10 PTs
panel testing for patients with (except QC, AB, SK)
respiratory illness · GeneXpert: 127 units to 10 PTs
symptoms); (except NB, NS, PE)
· GeneXpert (point of care · Kingfisher: 39 units to 8 provinces
diagnostic testing); (AB, BC, MB, ON, QC, NB, NL,
· KingFisher (automated PE)
sample extraction for
analysis by the diagnostic
instruments).
6. Contact Tracing 17,020 calls per day Average over the last 5 days:
· AB: 198 calls per day
· MB: 271 calls per day
· ON: 5832 calls per day
· QC: 475 calls per day
· BC: 716 calls per day
· SK: 609 calls per day
· NB: 184 calls per day
· NL: 580 calls per day
· NT: 376 calls per day
· ISC: 105 calls per day
7. Safe Voluntary $100M over 2 years ON:
Isolation Sites · Toronto: $13.9M over 12 months
(Aug 2020-Aug 2021)
· Peel: $6.5M over 16 months
(Dec 2020-Mar 2022)
· Ottawa: $4.7M over 7 months
(Dec 2020-June 2021)
· Waterloo: $4.1M over 15 months
(Dec 2020-Mar 2022)
· Northern SK: $11.6M over 14
months (Jan 2020 – Mar 2022)
· Ontario: $23.7M over 6 months
(Jan 2021 – Jun 2021)
· Sault Ste. Marie & Algoma District:
$0.34M over 13 months (Feb 2021
– Mar 2022)
8. Human Resources 4 federal personnel · AB: 41 referrals made to support
Recruitment inventories: data entry needs in AB
· Post-Secondary Recruitment · QC: 5 referrals made to support
· Indigenous Career Pathways nursing needs in QC
· Federal Student Work
Experience Program
· 2020 Volunteer Recruitment
Campaign
The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment (PPE), as well as medical equipment and supplies. Canada is receiving a steady supply of PPE
with shipments arriving daily, and the inventory is rapidly allocated to the provinces and territories.
More information on the Government’s efforts in this area can be found in the “National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile Management and Personal Protective Equipment and Medical Device Procurement”
QP note.
RESPIRATORS: QUALITY AND COUNTERFEIT ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the increased importation, sale and use of varying kinds of
medical devices in order to protect healthcare workers and treat patients. While most of these medical
devices have functioned properly, a subset of Class I medical devices, including personal protective
equipment (PPE) such as respirators, have been found to be of substandard quality, misrepresented or
counterfeit. Respirators that do not meet required standards may not provide consistent and adequate
protection.
• Health Canada will continue to actively monitor information related to the safety and effectiveness of
respirators and will take prompt and appropriate action if needed to protect the health and safety of
Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure the quality of respirators used by Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• The quality, effectiveness and safety of health products is a top priority for the Government.
• The Government of Canada verifies the effectiveness of all respirators it procures to confirm that they
meet performance standards before they are distributed to the provinces and territories for frontline
healthcare workers.
• We continue to assess and take action when respirators do not meet safety and effectiveness
standards. This includes directing companies to recall and re-label respirators for use in settings where
standards, such as 95% filtration, are not required. Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are
removed from the market and are not permitted to be sold in Canada.
• Health Canada maintains a list of manufacturers and respirators that are subject to recall/re-labelling
on its website, as well as a list of confirmed counterfeit respirators so that Canadians can make informed
decisions when purchasing PPE.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PROTECT CANADIANS…
• Health Canada assesses all sources of information related to respirators that may not meet safety and
effectiveness standards, including testing conducted by the National Institute for Occupational Safety
and Health (NIOSH), the Public Health Agency of Canada and other laboratories.
• Health Canada also conducts inspections of licensed importers/distributors and assessments of
referred shipments at the border to prevent the sale of non-compliant respirators in Canada.
• The Department has directed companies that have imported or distributed respirators that do not
meet safety or effectiveness standards to stop sale and re-label those products where appropriate. This
includes respirators where claims of 95% filtration are not met, which can be re-labeled and used in
settings where this level of filtration is not required.
• Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are removed from the market and are not permitted
to be sold in Canada.
• Health Canada continues to provide guidance to industry on the detection of substandard,
misrepresented and counterfeit products.
• Health Canada has warned Canadians about the risks of using counterfeit respirators through a public
advisory. The Department will continue to keep Canadians informed of issues impacting their health and
safety.
IF PRESSED ON RESPIRATORS PURCHASED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
• PPE and medical supplies received by the Government of Canada, whether donated or procured
internationally or domestically, are verified by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to ensure
they meet Government of Canada technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19
response.
• If PHAC cannot account for the quality of devices, they will not be allocated to the provinces and
territories for frontline healthcare response.
• Provincial and territorial health authorities and health care institutions have been advised to review
their inventories of respirators to confirm that they meet the Government of Canada technical
specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response on a regular basis.
IF PRESSED ON SUSPECTED COUNTERFEIT 3M RESPIRATORS…
• Health Canada is aware of cases involving the sale and distribution of suspected counterfeit 3M
respirators.
• The Department is taking action to remove products confirmed to be counterfeit from the Canadian
market. Officials are working with 3M Canada and the Canada Border Services Agency to help ensure
the supply of safe and effective respirators.
BACKGROUND
Regulation of Medical Devices in Canada
All medical device products, including N95 and KN95 respirators and other Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE), are subject to the safety and effectiveness requirements of the Medical Devices
Regulations. Manufacturers of medical devices are responsible for ensuring that they are safe and
effective.
Most PPE (e.g., respirators, gowns, masks) are classified as Class I devices in Canada. Class I devices are
considered the lowest risk Class of devices and do not require pre-market authorization by Health
Canada, which means they are not assessed by the Department for safety and efficacy prior to import or
sale in Canada.
A Medical Device Establishment Licence (MDEL) is required to import and distribute Class I devices.
MDELs are issued based on an attestation to requirements related to documented procedures for
complaint handling, distribution records, recalls and problem reporting.
In October 2020, Health Canada issued a guidance document to help explain the circumstances under
which certain respirators would be subject to the regulatory framework for medical devices during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Regulatory considerations on the classification of respirators (October 20, 2020).
Improving Access to Medical Devices During COVID-19
Health Canada has implemented three different measures to expedite the availability of medical devices
in support of COVID-19 response efforts:
1. Interim Order No.2 Respecting the Importation and Sale of Medical Devices for Use in Relation
to COVID-19 - provides an expedited authorization pathway for medical devices for sale in
Canada. Health Canada reviews the scientific evidence provided by the manufacturers through
this pathway to support the safety and effectiveness of devices before issuing authorizations for
these devices. This interim order replaces the March 2020 Interim Order Respecting the
Importation and Sale of Medical Devices for Use in Relation to COVID-19.
2. Interim Order No.2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose
in Relation to COVID-19 - facilitates access to alternative supplies of health products to help
prevent and alleviate shortages resulting directly or indirectly from COVID-19. Under this Interim
Order, companies must report shortages of medical devices related to COVID-19 to Health
Canada to help the health care system prepare for supply disruptions. This interim order
replaces the March 2020 Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a
Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19.
3. Expedited review and approval of MDEL applications for companies applying to supply medical
devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts. Health Canada continues to expedite the
review of MDEL applications related to COVID-19 products and, to date, has authorized 3286
MDELs to support the response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Suspected counterfeit 3M respirators
Health Canada is aware of cases involving the sale and distribution of suspected counterfeit 3M N95
respirators. The Department is working with 3M Canada, federal partners including the Canada Border
Services Agency, and provinces and territories to address the issue. Health Canada is taking action to
remove products confirmed to be counterfeit from the Canadian market.
Since mid-February 2021, the Department has seized close to 330,000 counterfeit 3M-branded N95
respirators from Canadian distributors and detained nearly 365,000 at the border.
The models of the seized and detained 3M N95 respirators are 1860, 1860S and 1870+.
3M has published information online advising that they have been receiving increasing reports of fraud,
including reports of counterfeit product, as well as fraudulent offers where product is offered but not
delivered. The company has also established hotlines and published information on its website to help
customers worldwide identify, prevent and report suspected fraud. 3M has alerted its Canadian
customers regarding this issue, as well as the provinces and territories, and other federal departments.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada is taking further action to evaluate potential safety issues related to the AstraZeneca
vaccines
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the current status of the AstraZeneca vaccines in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is aware of recent very rare reports of blood clots with low levels of blood platelets
following vaccination with the AstraZeneca vaccine in Europe.
• Health Canada has a robust monitoring system in place for vaccines and to date, no Canadian cases of
these events have been reported.
• Health Canada has been working closely with the EMA and other international regulators to assess
these recent reports in Europe and has taken action to confirm the benefit-risk profile of the
AstraZeneca vaccines.
• On March 29, 2021, Health Canada issued additional terms and conditions on the authorizations of the
AstraZeneca and COVISHEILD vaccines to require the manufacturers to submit a detailed assessment of
the benefits and risks of the vaccine by age and sex in the Canadian context.
• This information will support the ongoing evaluation of these rare blood clotting events, and allow
Health Canada to determine if there are specific groups of people who may be at higher risk.
• As a precautionary measure, the National Advisory Committee on Immunization has recommended a
pause on the use of the vaccine in people under 55 years of age until Health Canada’s assessment is
completed.
• Based on all of the evidence available internationally to date, Health Canada, along with other major
regulators such as the UK and the EMA, have confirmed that, overall, the benefits of the AstraZeneca
vaccine continue to outweigh the risks.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER APPROVED VACCINES
• In addition to the AstraZeneca vaccines, there are three other vaccines now authorized - Pfizer,
Moderna, and Janssen which give us additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly as possible.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through a robust vaccine safety monitoring system.
• Health Canada will continue to work with the Public Health Agency of Canada and international
regulators to monitor all COVID 19 vaccines for any potential adverse events.
• While an adverse event may occur soon after immunization, this does not mean that it was caused by
the vaccine, which is why such events are carefully reviewed to determine if any action should be taken.
• Should any safety issue be confirmed, the Department will take appropriate action immediately.
BACKGROUND
Summary of Regulatory Actions for AstraZeneca Vaccines
On February 26, 2021, Canada authorized 2 manufacturers of the ChAdOx1-S vaccine:
• AstraZeneca (brand name AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine)
• Verity Pharmaceuticals and Serum Institute of India (SII) in collaboration with AstraZeneca (brand
name COVISHIELD Vaccine)
AstraZeneca COVID‐19 Vaccine (manufactured by AstraZeneca) and COVISHIELD (manufactured by
Serum Institute of India) are ChAdOx1-S recombinant vaccines developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford
University. Health Canada reviewed the manufacturing information for these vaccines and found them
to be comparable.
The vaccine is approved for people who are 18 years of age and older. It is given by 2 separate injections
of 0.5 mL each into the muscle of the arm. The second dose is given 4 to 12 weeks after the first.
Recent Adverse Events
Throughout March, Health Canada has been participating in ongoing assessment of very rare adverse
events reported in Europe of thrombosis (blood clots) with thrombocytopenia (low blood platelets)
occurring after immunization with the AstraZeneca vaccine.
As of April 3, 2021, in Canada, the provinces have administered over 470,000 doses of the COVISHIELD
version of the AstraZeneca vaccine so far, and Health Canada has not received any reports of these very
rare events to date.
Following reports of these very rare adverse events in Europe, Health Canada has worked closely with
European regulators to review the evidence. A series of statements were issued to keep Canadians
informed of the situation.
• March 18, 2021: A statement was issued indicating that the benefits of AstraZeneca vaccines continue
to outweigh the benefits
• March 24, 2021: Health Canada communicated about updates to the product monograph and issued
guidance for healthcare professionals and vaccine recipients on the potential symptoms to monitor.
• March 29, 2021: Health Canada issued a statement on its issuance of new terms and conditions which
require that the manufacturers conduct a detailed assessment of the benefits and risks of the vaccine by
age and sex in the Canadian context.
• On March 31, Health Canada issued a proactive statement to media to communicate that its review is
ongoing, that the overall benefit-risk profile of the vaccine remains positive, and that we continue to
work closely with the EMA.
Health Canada is aware that researchers in Europe have indicated that they have identified a possible
cause for these very rare events observed in AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine recipients; however, little
information is available about this emerging research. Health Canada will be reviewing this evidence
when available.
Health Canada is also consulting with scientific experts in Canada and internationally to discuss the very
rare events, and continues to be in regular contact with international regulators and the manufacturer
of the AstraZeneca vaccine to review all evidence as it becomes available.
COVID-19 SAFE VOLUNTARY ISOLATION SITE PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
• Through the Fall 2020 Economic Statement, the Government of Canada established the Safe Voluntary
Isolation Sites Program ($100 million over 2 years), as part of Canada’s rapid response tools against the
spread of COVID-19. The program aims to decrease community transmission of COVID-19 by addressing
gaps identified for individuals who live in housing that may be crowded or have insufficient space for
proper distancing from household contacts to self-isolate. The voluntary isolation sites will help reduce
the risks of spread of the virus among household contacts, especially in Canada’s most densely
populated cities, municipalities and health regions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How will funding voluntary isolation facilities help with our fight against COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is taking action to support individuals who lack the space and means to
undertake an effective isolation.
• The availability of voluntary isolation sites is expected to help lower the rate of COVID-19 community
spread via reduced transmission among those living in crowded housing.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing funding for these sites across Canada.
• We are working to identify cities and municipal regions that would benefit from this program.
IF PRESSED on voluntary isolation sites vs. Designated Quarantine Facilities
• Voluntary isolation sites are different from Designated Quarantine Facilities.
• Designated Quarantine Facilities are for individuals who are ordered to stay under the Quarantine Act.
This includes travellers who arrive in Canada without a valid pre-departure molecular test, are
symptomatic upon arrival, or do not have an appropriate quarantine plan upon entry into Canada. These
facilities are operated under federal jurisdiction.
• Voluntary isolation sites are meant for individuals who cannot safely isolate at their usual place of
residence due to crowded housing or resource constraints. These sites are operated under the direction
of local, municipal, or provincial health partners.
IF PRESSED on the location of selected sites
• The program exists to fill a gap for cities, municipalities, and health regions that are at risk of high rates
of transmission due to factors such as crowded housing.
• The first site under this program was launched in the City of Toronto as a pilot on September 12, 2020.
• Following the creation of the national program, the program has expanded to fund sites in the
following locations: Toronto, York, Region of Peel, Durham, Ottawa, Region of Waterloo, Thunder Bay
and Windsor-Essex. Additional sites are expected to be announced shortly.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work with other cities and municipalities that could
benefit from a voluntary isolation site to reduce community transmission of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the occupancy rates of the different voluntary isolation sites
• Since opening, the voluntary isolation sites have accommodated a steady stream of people from their
respective communities.
• The sites continue to provide safe self-isolation rooms to their residents while operating with strong
infection prevention and control measures in place.
• Eligibility criteria to access the sites is determined by local public health officials.
BACKGROUND
Context for Safe Self-Isolation
When presenting with symptoms of COVID-19, self-isolation is one of the most effective ways of
reducing the risk of spreading the virus. However, for some Canadians, crowded housing conditions and
restrictive costs can make it unsafe or impossible to effectively self-isolate at home.
Within the context of the broader COVID-19 pandemic response, evidence has emerged that individuals
facing socio- and economic challenges are at higher risk of contracting COVID-19. Evidence suggests that
densely populated neighbourhoods have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including its
most severe outcomes. Individuals from these neighbourhoods may have more difficulty properly
isolating themselves due to factors such as overcrowding and/or resource constraints. The
establishment of voluntary self-isolation sites aims to assist in addressing this issue.
Role of Eligible Recipients
Sites selected under the Program will provide a centralized location where identified individuals can
safely self-isolate for the required period. Regular monitoring and reporting will be conducted in
coordination with local public health officials. The sharing of best practices will be encouraged among
the selected sites to optimize effective site operation and administration of services under the
objectives of the Program.
Costs Covered by Federal Funding
Federal funding will include: transportation to and from the site, lodging, meals and incidentals such as
bedding and other necessities for residents, as well as on-site security and cleaning personnel for the
facility. It is also understood that related activities may be required, such as those performed by public
health professionals in the context of infection prevention and control.
Eligibility to access the self-isolation site
Through its case and contact management process, local public health officials will identify individuals to
be offered transfer to the isolation site on a voluntary basis.
For example, if a person is COVID-19 positive and lives in a home where there is no separate room in
which they can isolate, they may be considered as a candidate for the voluntary self-isolation site.
Individuals who are household contacts will also be considered if, for example, the individual cannot
isolate safely from positive case(s). Those awaiting test results may also be considered.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Five COVID-19 vaccines have now been authorized by Health Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the current status of COVID-19 vaccines expected to be available for Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• With five vaccines now authorized - Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca vaccines, and Janssen - we have
additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly as possible.
• The authorized COVID-19 vaccines in Canada provide additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly
as possible.
• In addition, Health Canada continues to review the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine for authorization.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON JANSSEN (JOHNSON AND JOHNSON) VACCINE SAFETY – VERY RARE BLOOD CLOTS IN THE
US
• Health Canada is aware that the U.S. has paused use of the Janssen COVID-19 vaccine as a
precautionary measure while it investigates reports of rare blood clots. The European Medicines Agency
is also examining this new safety signal.
• The U.S. Centers for Disease Control’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices will be meeting
on April 13 to further review these cases and assess their potential significance.
• This appears to be very rare, with six cases of unusual blood clots reported following 6.8 million doses
of the Janssen vaccine administered in the U.S. Health Canada has already asked Janssen to provide
information on any cases of these rare blood clotting events.
• While the Janssen vaccines is not yet in use in Canada, Health Canada is following this issue very
closely and is working with the manufacturer, the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the European
Medicines Agency and other international regulators to examine it, and will take action if necessary.
Health Canada has already asked Janssen to provide information on any cases of these rare blood
clotting events.
• As the COVID-19 vaccine rollout continues in Canada, Health Canada will continue to monitor the use
of all COVID-19 vaccines closely and examine and assess any new safety concerns.
• Health Canada continues to consider that the benefits of all COVID-19 vaccines in protecting against
COVID-19 to outweigh the potential risks.
IF PRESSED ON ASTRAZENECA VACCINE SAFETY - VERY RARE BLOOD CLOTS IN EUROPE
• Health Canada has been working closely with the European Medicines Agency and other international
regulators to assess recent reports of very rare cases of blood clots in people vaccinated with
AstraZeneca’s vaccine in Europe.
• Health Canada has taken action to confirm the benefit-risk profile of the AstraZeneca vaccines.
• On March 29, Health Canada issued additional terms and conditions on the authorizations of the
AstraZeneca and Verity Pharmaceuticals/Serum Institute of India vaccines to require the manufacturers
to submit a detailed assessment of the benefits and risks of the vaccine by age and sex in the Canadian
context.
• This information will support the ongoing evaluation of these rare blood clotting events, and allow
Health Canada to determine if there are specific groups of people who may be at higher risk.
• Based on all of the evidence available internationally to date, Health Canada, along with other major
regulators such as the UK and the EMA have confirmed that, overall, the benefits of the AstraZeneca
vaccine continue to outweigh the risks.
• On March 24, the department updated the AstraZeneca vaccine labeling and issued guidance to
ensure that healthcare professionals and Canadians have the safety information they need.
• As the COVID-19 vaccine rollout continues in Canada, Health Canada will continue to monitor the use
of all COVID-19 vaccines closely and examine and assess any new safety concerns.
IF PRESSED ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUTHORIZED VACCINES
• The Janssen vaccine is the first single-dose COVID-19 vaccine to be authorized in Canada. All other
authorized vaccines require two doses. As with the AstraZeneca vaccine, the Janssen vaccine can also be
stored and transported at refrigerated temperatures, between 2 and 8˚C for at least three months,
giving greater flexibility in how it can be distributed across Canada.
• With the exception of the Pfizer vaccine, which is authorized for people 16 years of age and older, the
authorized vaccines are currently only for use in adults (18 years and older).
• The authorization of additional vaccines to fight this pandemic can only help. They provide additional
tools to fight COVID-19 as quickly as possible, and will provide more supply to the market.
IF PRESSED ON EFFICACY OF JANSSEN AND ASTRAZENECA COMPARED TO HIGHER EFFICACY OF MRNA
VACCINES
• Each vaccine has unique characteristics and all authorized vaccines are helpful in the fight against
COVID-19.
• Canada has negotiated a broad and diverse COVID-19 vaccine portfolio to ensure we have sufficient
supply for everyone in Canada, while also mitigating risks of supply disruptions.
• Having additional vaccines from different manufacturers can help meet volume requirements to get
more people vaccinated sooner and offers more vaccination options.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS IN GENERAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the Minister
of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness and quality
to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent data
and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada may
be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in different
timelines for authorization.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams for
COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF OTHER DECISIONS
• Health Canada continues to review the Novavax vaccine. We aim to issue a decision in general
alignment with those of our major regulatory partners.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines by
allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as it becomes available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Advance purchase agreements
The Government has announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven leading vaccine
candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson &
Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on successful completion of clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers of the vaccine candidates recommended by
the Vaccines Task Force. While regulatory approvals are separate from the procurement process, Health
Canada is expediting all vaccine drug submissions.
Status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer vaccine on December 9, 2020, a week after the UK authorized it,
two days before the US FDA, and almost two weeks before Europe.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna vaccine on December 23, 2020, 5 days after the US, and the
Janssen vaccine 6 days after the US.
Health Canada, Europe, the UK, and other jurisdictions have now authorized the AstraZeneca vaccine.
Health Canada worked closely with the European Medicines Agency on that review.
Health Canada continues to engage with all of the vaccine manufacturers to ensure that data is
submitted to Canada at the same time it is provided to other major regulators, which is supporting
similar completion timelines.
SUICIDE PREVENTION IN CANADA
SYNOPSIS
• Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across
Canada. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is supporting the implementation of a fully
operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service, which is providing 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government recognizes the impact suicide has on families and communities.
• That is why we are investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health,
and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of
distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR COVID-19
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced an additional $43 million to provide further support for
the Wellness Together Canada portal and the resources it offers. To date, the Government of Canada
has invested $67 million in Wellness Together Canada.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing additional funding for the Canada Suicide
Prevention Service to support the increased demand for crisis support at this time.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A 3-DIGIT NUMBER FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION CRISIS
SUPPORT
• As demonstrated by the recently passed motion calling on the federal government to set up a national
988 number, there is great interest in exploring the implementation of a 3-digit number in Canada.
• As a first step, there is a need to gain a better understanding of the regulatory, technological and
resource implications in the Canadian context.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission is responsible for establishing any
three digit abbreviated codes and is currently conducting outreach with certain stakeholders on the
implications of providing such a number.
BACKGROUND
Over the past 10 years, there was an average of 4,000 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which
results in 10 to 12 people that died by suicide every day. Suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a
combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal
issues and loss, childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has provided proof of concept funding to Crisis Services
Canada (CSC) in the amount of $5.46 million over five years (2015/16 to 2020/21) to support the
development of the Canada Suicide Prevention Service (CSPS), a national phone, text and chat suicide
prevention service that links existing telephone and distress and crisis infrastructures throughout
Canada. Quebec is serving its residents through its provincial suicide prevention line: 1-866-APPELLE.
PHAC is providing $21 million over five years, starting in 2020-21, to the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
CAMH will lead this initiative in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association (CMHA) and
Crisis Services Canada (CSC).
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention (Framework) was made publicly available in November
2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and
promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework were
released in 2016 and 2018 on Canada.ca, with the most recent report made publicly available in a
Minister’s Message posted December 2020.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH) and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events
(SMHSE)
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and self-
harm. The analysis will seek to estimate the prevalence of suicide ideation among the population in
Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and compare this to pre-pandemic prevalence, while also
identifying those groups that may potentially have a higher risk of suicide than the general population.
Motion 174 – A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the
Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention action plan. On May 8, 2019,
parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174, though it is non-binding. The proposed actions
in the plan are aligned with the Framework. PHAC will facilitate the coordination and collaboration on
elements of the action plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders through its
convening role on the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention. An update on M-174 was included
under the Framework progress report from December 2020.
3-Digit Suicide Prevention National Telephone Line – 9-8-8 Campaign in Canada
In line with the efforts of the U.S. and the U.K. to designate memorable 3-digit numbers for their suicide
prevention national lines, on December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of the
motion sponsored by MP Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia) calling on the federal
government to act immediately to set up a national 988 number that would consolidate all existing
suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission is responsible for establishing any
three digit abbreviated codes and is currently conducting outreach with stakeholders on the implications
of providing such a number.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
Demand for crisis support has increased significantly since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak. Through
the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada announced a $50 million investment to
bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to distress
centres in winter/spring 2021 (fiscal year 2020-21). A portion of funds will be retained for a second
round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. This second round of grants will be available for recipients with
remaining or emerging needs, or for eligible organizations not included in the first round of funding.
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
The Government of Canada recently launched Wellness Together Canada, a new portal dedicated to
mental wellness and substance use issues. The portal connects Canadians to peer support workers,
social workers, psychologists and other professionals for confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
Through its COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) is currently supporting more than 100 research projects on COVID-19 and Mental Health,
including problematic substance use ($13.5 million from CIHR and partners). These important projects
will look at mental health during and after the pandemic and will generate new evidence to inform the
Mental Health response to the pandemic. Ultimately, they will help offer new evidence-based
treatments and services to all Canadians, especially for priority populations that may be experiencing
acute mental health concerns associated with COVID-19.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
• On March 1, 2021, Health Canada issued new interim orders extending the regulatory flexibilities for
expedited access to COVID-19 medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the rapid testing devices needed during
the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Department has prioritized the review of all types of COVID-19 tests, including rapid and new
innovative testing options and technologies.
• As of April 1, Health Canada has authorized 63 testing devices, including tests that can be used at a
point of care and rapid tests, through an expedited regulatory review.
• Health Canada continues to work as quickly as possible to approve rapid, point-of-care diagnostic, self-
testing and monitoring tests without compromising on standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
• Health Canada continues to proactively contact manufacturers of self-tests authorized in other
jurisdictions to invite them to submit an application in Canada.
• As new tests become available and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada
works with provincial public health laboratories to acquire and distribute them to increase our existing
testing capacity.
• Based on the information available to date on variants, the authorized tests continue to be effective.
• Health Canada is monitoring the potential impacts of the new variants on the effectiveness of test
devices and will take action as necessary.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on home testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada is open to reviewing all testing solutions, including, approaches that use self-collection
or at-home test kits for screening purposes.
• Health Canada has received an application for a self-testing device and is reviewing it under the
expedited review process.
IF PRESSED… on why tests are authorized in other countries but not in Canada
• Each jurisdiction has different rules and approval processes.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing devices
available for sale in Canada have been accurate and reliable. As a result, we have avoided some of the
problems other countries have experienced, including recalling lower-quality tests.
• Health Canada accepts submissions made to another jurisdiction and assesses that data
independently.
• Once tests are approved by our international partners, we contact manufacturers to encourage them
to apply for authorization in Canada.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on saliva testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and reliable COVID-19 tests devices for use with
various samples
• At this time, Health Canada has not authorized the use of saliva samples with any authorized testing
device.
• Health Canada is prioritizing the review of applications for test kits that use saliva samples so
Canadians have access to new testing options.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of Spartan test kits:
• Health Canada authorized the Spartan Biosciences COVID-19 test kit under an Interim Order on
January 22, 2021.
• When Health Canada became aware of reports of inaccurate results from users of the Spartan
Biosciences COVID-19 tests, the Department requested detailed information from Spartan about the
nature of the inaccuracies, possible causes, and where the tests have been distributed.
• On March 30, 2021, Spartan initiated a voluntary recall and contacted their customers to notify them
of the issue, and Health Canada is closely monitoring the recall.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing the spread of
the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for clinical care and public health
management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the safety,
effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an application through the IO
pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based testing to reliably
diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. A number of lab-based and point-of-care
nucleic acid-based tests have been authorized for use in Canada. Health Canada has received additional
point-of-care nucleic acid-based tests which are being prioritized for review at this time.
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
Antigen tests are often rapid tests that can be offered at the point of care in disposable formats, though
one lab-based antigen test has been approved as well. Antigen testing is one of several emerging
technologies that can be used to determine if a person is infected with the COVID-19 virus.
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not aware of a
serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are not appropriate for early
diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection to develop antibodies.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces and
territories to distribute the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and Quidel
Sofia rapid tests, as well as putting in place surge support for laboratory testing.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians have access to effective COVID-19
testing?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure tests to meet both current and future demand as
testing continues to increase across the country.
• As part of this work, we purchased five rapid tests – the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott
Panbio, BD Veritor and Quidel Sofia– and have worked with our provincial and territorial counterparts to
allocate and distribute them.
• Cepheid GeneXpert tests began shipments in the spring of 2020, and the first shipment of Abbott tests
were sent in late October 2020. Shipments to provinces and territories will continue each week as
supply arrives in Canada.
• To date, over 41M tests have been delivered to Canada, including over 6.5 million Abbott IDNOW
tests, 22.8 million Abbott Panbio tests, 11 million BD Veritor tests and 850 thousand Quidel Sofia. These
tests are being provided to provinces and territories at no cost to them.
• Provinces and territories decide how to deploy these technologies, informed by the Pan-Canadian
Testing and Screening Guidance that was released in October.
• We have also put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact tracing,
testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to manage
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
• My department continues to work with colleagues in Public Services and Procurement Canada,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to identify
and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• As emerging testing and screening products or platforms become available and approved for use in
Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER TESTING
• The Government of Canada has implemented robust measures at Canada’s borders to prevent and
mitigate the importation of new COVID-19 cases associated with international travel.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with various provinces, territories and partners to
implement innovative and scientifically grounded measures at Canada’s international border.
• Border testing pilot projects are a means to help generate scientific evidence to inform development
and/or enhance various policies and programs that prevent introduction and spread of disease in
Canadian communities.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial and territorial
officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and conducting laboratory testing for the
virus that causes COVID-19. As of March 29, 2021, over 27 million tests for COVID-19 were performed in
Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Beginning September 3, a table outlining progress by provinces and territories in increasing their testing
capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory compared
to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement, has been published online.
As of March 25, the projected maximum testing capacity reported by provinces and territories was
222,124 tests/day, meeting the testing capacity target as articulated by provinces and territories under
the Safe Restart Agreement.
Province/ Testing Capacity Projected Max. Testing Capacity as % of
Territory Commitment under the Capacity* Commitment
SRA (tests/day) (tests/day)
BC 20,000 21,332 107%
AB 22,000 22,000 100%
SK 4,000 4,500 112%
MB 3,000 3,500 117%
ON 78,000 118,400 152%
QC 35,000 43,382 124%
NB 2,500-3,000 3,000 100-120%
NS 2,500 2,500 100%
PE 835 850 102%
NL 2,500-3,000 2,100 70-84%
NU N/A 300 N/A
NWT 225 110 49%
YT 160 150 94%
TOTAL 170,720 – 171,720 222,124 >100%
The federal government has activated additional laboratory capacity to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. Six federal labs are currently operational and can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 12,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as well as Correctional Services
Canada. By the end of March 2021, surge capacity should be between 16,000 and 21,000 tests/day,
about 10% of the target of 200,000 tests/day.
As we move into the next phase of lifting some public health measures and re-opening some parts of the
economy, cases of COVID-19 will still occur until the population has enough immunity or a vaccine is
available to prevent the disease.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community. In this next phase, testing will be
critical for groups that are more vulnerable to complications from COVID-19. This testing will be an early
warning for our healthcare system.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
VACCINATION CERTIFICATION
SYNOPSIS
There is currently no pan-Canadian proof of vaccination framework. Work is underway to develop a
Government of Canada position on this matter.
KEY MESSAGES
• Governments and international bodies around the world are exploring the possible use of vaccination
certificates as one tool to support the re-opening of societies and economies.
• As some jurisdictions begin to think about granting privileges to vaccinated people, any similar
consideration in the Canadian context would have to be based on reliable scientific evidence.
• Scientific evidence is clear that the COVID-19 vaccines approved for use in Canada are highly effective
at preventing illness. However, we do not yet know whether vaccinated individuals can spread the virus,
and thus pose a public health risk.
• At this time, the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that all
individuals should continue to practice recommended public health measures to help prevent the
spread of the virus and to help control the pandemic, regardless of vaccination status.
• As scientists work to understand COVID-19 immunity, we are focusing on the public health measures
that we know are effective, including wearing a mask, washing hands and maintaining physical
distancing.
IF PRESSED ABOUT GOVERNMENT OF CANADA POSITION ON VACCINATION CERTIFICATES
• We are aware that other countries and international actors are beginning to consider how vaccination
certificates could be deployed in the coming months and years to help reopen societies.
• We continue to monitor developments in this area, as well as the latest scientific information about
virus transmissibility.
BACKGROUND
The concept of an “immunity passport”, a proposed document or e-certificate proving that a person has
been vaccinated, or has a certain level of immunity to COVID-19, has been suggested in the media as a
potential basis to grant permissions or exemptions from COVID-19 rules. While the Government of
Canada has not decided yet whether it would develop a pan- Canadian proof of vaccination framework,
media reports have highlighted this possibility.
Provinces and territories administer vaccines and are responsible for keeping records of vaccinations.
Public health is within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, including potential decisions on whether to
relax public health measures based on vaccination status. The Government of Canada is the lead on
international travel and interprovincial travel. While it may at some point have an interest in a pan-
Canadian approach to proof of vaccination, it has no access to patient health data.
International scan
Around the world, governments, non-governmental organizations, and private companies are exploring
the concept of vaccination certification as a vehicle for conferring or re-instating certain freedoms
within their countries and organizations, and, in the case of countries, as a means to facilitate travel
across and beyond their national borders.
Some of the countries exploring this option include Israel, Iceland, Hungary, Denmark, Ireland, and Chile.
As well, a number of airlines are planning ways to help travellers comply with anticipated state
requirements, while others, such as Qantas and Korean Air, are planning to implement their own
vaccination requirements.
Organizations around the world are establishing working groups to develop international standards and
technical specifications, and Canada is attending ongoing discussions.
The World Health Organization (WHO) is convening a consortium for a Smart Vaccination Certificate to
establish common standards and governance for the security, authentication, privacy, and data
exchange of certificates, in the event they are used globally. The group will also provide guidance to its
member states to help them adopt certification if they decide to pursue this option. The Chief
Information Officer from the Public Health Agency of Canada has been invited to sit on this working
group.
Domestic scan
Some of the provinces and territories are considering whether vaccination certification would be of
benefit in their jurisdictions, but none have asserted a firm plan to implement this tool.
In December 2020, Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott indicated that "voluntary" proof of
vaccinations may enable vaccinated individuals to: travel…perhaps for work purposes, for going to
theatres or cinemas or any other venues.
In December 2020, BC’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Bonnie Henry, indicated that BC will have a
vaccination database for tracking purposes.
In December 2020, Premier Andrew Furey said Newfoundland and Labrador is not considering
demanding proof of vaccination for access privileges.
COVID-19 VACCINE ROLLOUT
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is committed to securing and deploying a sufficient supply of safe vaccines
to inoculate all Canadians.
Key Messages
• In partnership with provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities, the Government of Canada is
continuing to successfully roll out Canada’s COVID-19 immunization campaign, the biggest in the
country’s history.
• Health Canada has authorized four different COVID-19 vaccines —those by Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna,
AstraZeneca, and Janssen. Another vaccine, by Novavax, is currently undergoing Health Canada’s
regulatory review.
• In total, over 9.5 million doses will have been delivered by the end of this first week of April. By the
end of September 2021, every person in Canada who wants to be vaccinated will have access to a
vaccine.
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization is continuing to provide guidance on the
sequencing of vaccination in the population. The provinces and territories ultimately determine how
vaccines are best used.
• The Government of Canada will continue to ensure that Canadians have all relevant, accurate, and up-
to-date information about the vaccines to increase vaccine confidence.
• We are working with the provinces and territories to track the number of vaccines administered and to
identify and address any adverse events following immunization.
BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. It is based on 6 core
principles—Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability; Fairness and
Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for administering vaccination programs and
determining public health requirements in their jurisdictions. The federal government is responsible for
securing contracts with vaccine suppliers, conducting regulatory review and ensuring safety of vaccines,
delivering vaccines and supplies to provinces and territories (PTs), liaising among different PTs and
Indigenous leaders, and supporting the PTs with the administration of vaccines.
Federal, provincial, and territorial officials are continuing to meet frequently to refine plans for the
distribution and administration of vaccines throughout Canada. Both levels of government are also
sharing information with each other about vaccine coverage rates, vaccine safety, and inventory levels,
so that any potential issues or shortcomings can be identified quickly and addressed. Adverse Effects
Following Immunization (AEFI) are being tracked.
In order to address potential supply chain gaps and to have contingencies available, Canada has engaged
the private sector to deliver a broad range of end-to-end logistics and support services. A contract has
been awarded to a consortium for logistics services.
Priority populations
National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) guidance outlined a targeted vaccination program
to achieve public health goals as efficiently, effectively, and equitably as possible during this early period
when vaccine supply is limited. NACI recommended the following key populations for early (‘stage 1’)
vaccination:
• Seniors and workers in long-term care homes, assisted living senior facilities, retirement homes, and
chronic care hospitals;
• Healthcare workers on the frontlines of patient care;
• Older adults, starting with those 80 years and above, and then moving in 5-year increments to reach
those 70 years and older; and
• Remote or isolated Indigenous communities and the Territories.
On February 15, 2021, NACI released guidance on additional priority populations for vaccination, once
initial populations have received a vaccine. Stage 2 populations include:
• Adults in or from Indigenous communities, including in urban settings;
• Residents and staff of all other congregate settings (e.g. migrant workers’ quarters, correctional
facilities, homeless shelters);
• Adults 60-69 years of age, beginning with those 65 years of age or over;
• Adults in racialized/marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19;
• First responders (including police, firefighters, military, coast guard);
• Frontline essential workers who cannot work virtually and have direct close physical contact with the
public;
• Essential primary caregivers for individuals who are at high risk of severe illness from COVID-19 due to
advanced age (60 years of age or over).
NACI’s guidance for stage 3 priority populations includes:
• Individuals 16-59 years of age with an underlying medical condition at high risk of severe illness due to
COVID-19 and their essential primary caregivers;
• All adults 50-59 years of age, beginning with adults 55 years of age or over;
• Non-frontline healthcare workers who are needed to maintain healthcare capacity;
• Non-frontline essential workers.
VACCINE SURVEILLANCE
SYNOPSIS
• A robust vaccine surveillance system is essential for ensuring public confidence during Canada-wide
immunization efforts and on the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines. The Government of Canada is working
with partners to monitor the safety of the vaccine supply, conduct vaccine effectiveness studies and
track vaccine coverage and the factors that influence vaccine uptake.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to give confidence to Canadians in the COVID-19 vaccines?
• How is the Government ensuring the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, and monitoring
vaccination coverage in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers.
• To better understand how well the vaccine works under real-world conditions and for different
populations, we are funding and working collaboratively with established research networks to conduct
vaccine safety and effectiveness studies.
• The Government is also tracking vaccine coverage and the factors that influence knowledge, attitudes
and beliefs about the COVID-19 vaccination.
• We are providing $30.25 million through the Immunization Partnership Fund to continue promoting
vaccine acceptance and uptake among Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
• Openness, transparency, and public access to robust information are a key part of Canada’s
vaccination plan. The Government of Canada publishes reports on vaccine safety and coverage weekly.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines are behaving in the entire
population and their real-world impact. High-quality and timely data are critical to promote confidence
in COVID-19 vaccines and to inform decisions about implementation of the vaccination campaign across
Canada.
Vaccine Safety Surveillance
Canada’s rigorous regulatory system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before
they are authorized. However, no health product is completely risk-free.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. This
system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness and
sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada funds the Immunization Monitoring
Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a pediatric, hospital-based network that reports adverse events to
PHAC, and the Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, which provides weekly reports to PHAC and
P/T health authorities.
Monitoring Effectiveness
While manufacturer-led clinical trials give us data on how well vaccines work under controlled research
conditions, vaccine effectiveness tells us how well the vaccine works in the real world. In addition, while
the available evidence shows that COVID-19 vaccine recipients will develop immunity to the SARS-CoV2
virus, there is limited evidence on effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines on longer-term immunity against
the virus.
Evidence on the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines in Canada will help to instill confidence among
Canadians on the benefits of vaccination. It will also support further tailoring of Canadian guidance on
the use of the various vaccines that will be available to Canadians.
PHAC is well-positioned to provide federal leadership, given its experience working with existing vaccine
research networks, P/T public health authorities, and immunization programs. PHAC will continue to
review Canadian and international evidence, and data from vaccine manufacturers to support public
health decision makers and program implementation. Additionally, it will maintain confidence in the
COVID-19 vaccine program by sharing results with the media and general public.
Immune (antibody) responses following vaccination can be assessed through a variety of different
methods. PHAC, in collaboration with the Canadian Immunization Task Force, is funding several studies
in Canada to understand and monitor the durability of protection following vaccination across different
population groups. For example, the Canadian Immunization Task Force, in collaboration with PHAC, is
funding a study with Canadian Blood Services that provide monthly snapshots of population-level
immunity in vaccinated and unvaccinated individuals.
Vaccine Coverage Surveillance
Vaccine coverage surveillance is used to monitor the proportion of the population that has been
vaccinated. PHAC works with provinces, territories, and federal (FPT) jurisdictions to collect COVID-19
vaccination data and estimate vaccination coverage. Vaccination coverage data is essential to inform
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response and help the Government of Canada: assess vaccination uptake;
identify priority groups that require additional support; support adjustment of recommendations on
vaccine allocation to F/P/T jurisdictions; and determine the effectiveness of the immunization program
in delivering COVID-19 vaccines to Canadians.
Coverage data is obtained by P/T public health authorities from immunization registries in each
jurisdiction (Nunavut’s electronic registry is under development). Since mid-December, PHAC has been
posting pan-Canadian data on vaccine coverage on a weekly basis. This includes information on vaccine
type, vaccine dose (1 versus 2), age-group, sex and key population (i.e., seniors 80 years of age or older,
healthcare workers, long-term care and other congregate living residents, remote and isolated
communities where available).
PHAC is also working with Statistics Canada on vaccine coverage surveys to be deployed in P/Ts between
March and July. The surveys will provide in-depth information on sociodemographic characteristics (e.g.,
age, gender, ethnicity, Indigenous status, country of birth, education, and income), vaccination status,
reasons for not having been vaccinated, knowledge, attitudes and beliefs about COVID-19 vaccines and
vaccines in general. The series of surveys will allow for observation of trends in coverage rates and
respondent knowledge, attitudes and beliefs about the COVID-19 vaccines.
In February 2021, the Government announced an investment of more than $64 million to help partners
across Canada increase COVID-19 vaccination uptake, including a commitment of $30.25 million from
2020 to 2023, to the Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF) for community-led projects. This investment
will continue to support efforts to increase vaccine acceptance and uptake among Canadians, in
particular underserved groups, and reduce vaccine-preventable disease. It builds on initial investments
of $25 million from 2016 to 2021 through Budget 2016. Also through the IPF, PHAC is providing up to
$32.5 million to help P/Ts enhance their electronic vaccination registries and improve the way they
capture and report on the uptake of the COVID- 19 vaccine.
Youth Vaping
SYNOPSIS
• Youth vaping rates in Canada doubled over a two year period (2017-2019). Furthermore, youth are
also vaping more frequently. There has been significant media coverage and concerns expressed by
parents, educators, health professionals and non-government organizations.
• In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS)
results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019. While the
rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be closely
monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and the Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol
and Drugs Survey (CSTADS).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address the increased use and appeal of vaping products to youth?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is concerned by the rapid rise in youth vaping, and is taking comprehensive action to
address it.
• New regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be
seen or heard by youth. This means that young Canadians should no longer see advertising for vaping
products in public spaces, in convenience stores or online.
• On December 19, 2020, Health Canda published proposed new regulations on nicotine concentration.
The proposed regulations would lower the maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products sold in
Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. It would be prohibited to sell any vaping
products with a nicotine concentration higher than this new limit.
• Health Canada is also looking at additional regulatory measures to reduce youth access and the appeal
of vaping products. These include measures to restrict flavours, using the best available evidence.
• We also increased investments in our national public education campaign to inform youth and their
parents about the risks and harms of vaping, and created funding opportunities to engage partners and
stakeholders in a collaborative response.
• My department also intensified enforcement of the strong set of controls that Parliament has
established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act and will continue these efforts to ensure that
industry is compliant with our regulations.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping prevention campaign
to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping.
• The campaign included digital advertising on social media and television, advertising in malls, cinemas
and on transit and print and online resources. It also included an interactive learning tour in schools and
community venues. In November 2020, the tour re- launched in an online format with live facilitators, in
response to COVID-19.
• Vaping awareness kits were also provided to all middle and high schools across Canada. Information
resources were also sent to health care professionals to share in their offices.
• An evaluation of the advertising campaign found that 26% of teens who saw the ads, report that they
decided not to vape as result of the ads.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and vaping product promotions. For example, it is prohibited to furnish a vaping
product to anyone under 18 in Canada, and lifestyle advertising of vaping products is strictly prohibited
under the Act.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove:
o lifestyle advertising or advertisements from television and in- store displays; and,
o online content from social media influencers that encouraged youth vaping.
• In 2019, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000 retailers of vaping products and seized more than
80,000 units of non- compliant vaping products.
• Due to the COVID-19 pandemic on-site inspections were temporarily suspended, however, vaping
products are being sampled remotely and virtual inspections are being conducted online, focussing on
enforcing the promotion prohibitions under the TVPA on social media sites. Health Canada is currently
planning the resumption of on-site inspections.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of the Act
on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The purpose of the review is to examine the provisions of the Act, and whether it is supporting its
intended objectives.
• The first review must be initiated by May 23, 2021 with the report tabled in Parliament by May 23,
2022, and the next review will need to begin May 2023.
• Planning for the review is currently underway by the department.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. Health Canada has invested more than $13 million in the
campaign since December 2018.
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On December 19, 2020, Health Canada published the proposed Concentration of Nicotine in Vaping
Products Regulations that would lower the maximum nicotine concentration allowed for vaping
products in Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. These proposed new
regulations would prohibit the sale of vaping products in Canada if the nicotine concentration is higher
than the new limit. The consultation period for the proposed regulations closed March 4, 2021 and the
department is currently reviewing feedback from these consultations.
Building on consultations in 2019, additional measures with respect to flavour restrictions are being
examined, based on the best available evidence.
There is a large consumer market for vaping products in Canada. Smoking is the leading preventable
cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-related disease is caused by the toxic and
carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping products expose users to far fewer toxic chemicals and
substances than conventional cigarettes, and are less harmful alternatives to tobacco products if they
quit smoking and switch completely to vaping.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical dependence and
youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. Moreover, the long-term health
effects of vaping are unknown.
The most recent Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) results from 2018-2019,
released in December 2019, indicate e-cigarette prevalence rates doubled among students since the last
survey with 20% of students reporting having used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days, an increase from
10% in 2016-2017. These students are also reporting using vaping products more frequently. Health
Canada has not seen a corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to be at
all-time lows. Results showed the prevalence of current daily smoking decreased among students in
Grades 7 to 12 to 0.9% in 2018-2019, down from 1.3% in 2016-2017.
In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS)
results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019. While the
rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be closely
monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and CSTADS.
Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires that the Minister perform a
legislative review of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force. This
section was an amendment to the Bill, originally brought forward by Senator Seidman (CPC) during the
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI) examination of the clause-
by-clause of Bill S-5 on April 13, 2017. The review was proposed as an opportunity for Parliament to
keep an eye on the new areas of regulatory coverage relating to vaping products, especially their impact
on youth.
Building on consultations in 2019, additional measures with respect to flavour restrictions are being
examined, based on the best available evidence. The proposed flavour restrictions have been the
subject of a targeted letter writing campaign by former smokers who oppose any further restrictions to
vaping products in Canada.
