Created: 2024-02-26T17:30:56.101868
Name: Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2019-2020:_Cribs,_Cradles_and_Bassinets_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/cribs-craddles-bassinets-regulations-2019-2020.html
Package ID: 82784d84-be4b-4c33-8872-ba611ad7f103
Keywords: ['Cyclical Enforcement Project', 'Cribs', 'Cradles', 'Bassinets Regulations', 'industry’s compliance', 'specific requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of cribs with the specific requirements of the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations Fiscal year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of cribs with the specific requirements of the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations. For this project, compliance of select cribs with the Cribs, Cradles and Bassinets Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of crib companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, mechanical testing of 16 different products was carried out. The testing resulted in 1 stop sale, 7 stop distributions, and 8 commitments to address non-compliance. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Caramia Belgian 3 in 1 Crib Caramia Furniture Did not meet the entanglement, small parts, fastener, and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Caramia Furniture Child Craft Camden Crib Wayfair LLC Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Foundations Worldwide, Inc. Concord 4 in 1 Convertible Crib Concord Furniture Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Concord Furniture DaVinci Kalani 4 in 1 Crib Amazon.ca Did not meet the entanglement and labelling requirements Commitment by Million Dollar Baby Dream On Me Ashton 5 in 1 Crib Overstock.ca Did not meet the entrapment and labelling requirements Stop sale1 by Footnote *Overstock Dutailier Pomelo Crib Dutailier Group Inc. Did not meet the assembly and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Dutailier Group Inc. Lil Angels Naples Crib Lil Angels Furniture Inc. Did not meet the fastener and labelling requirements Commitment by Lil Angels Furniture Inc. Little Seeds Rowan Valley Linden Crib Dorel Home Did not meet the slat strength and labelling requirements Commitment by Dorel Home Natart Valencia Sevilla Crib Natart Juvenile Inc. Did not meet the assembly, entanglement, structural integrity, and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Natart Juvenile Inc. Pali Como Crib Pali Design Inc. Did not meet the entanglement and labelling requirements Commitment by Pali Design Inc. Pottery Barn Kendall Crib Pottery Barn Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Pottery Barn Restoration Hardware Callum Crib Restoration Hardware Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Restoration Hardware South Shore Furniture Savannah Crib South Shore Furniture Did not meet the open hole and labelling requirements Stop distribution by South Shore Furniture Stokke Sleepi Oval Crib Stokke Did not meet the fastener, slat strength and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Stokke Storkcraft Rosland 3 in 1 Crib Storkcraft Manufacturing Inc. Did not meet the open hole and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Storkcraft Manufacturing Inc. Ti Amo Catania Crib Bivona & Company Did not meet the entanglement and labelling requirements Stop distribution by Bivona & Company Footnote * The entrapment hazard would normally result in a recall, however, no affected cribs were sold to Canadians. Return to footnote * referrer Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). Related links Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2021-01-20 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy