Created: 2024-02-27T16:17:30.741753
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2019-2020:_Pacifiers_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/pacifiers-regulations-2019-2020.html
Package ID: 8678f292-310c-47f9-a277-ba43e0f23e2b
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Enforcement', 'Summary Report', 'Cyclical Enforcement Project', 'Pacifiers Regulations', 'industry’s compliance', 'pacifiers', 'mechanical-and-chemical requirements']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of pacifiers to the mechanical and chemical requirements of the Pacifiers Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Pacifiers Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Pacifiers Regulations Fiscal Year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of pacifiers to the mechanical and chemical requirements of the Pacifiers Regulations. For this project, compliance of select pacifiers with the Pacifiers Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of pacifier companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, mechanical and chemical testing of 15 different brands of pacifiers was carried out. The mechanical testing resulted in 2 voluntary recalls and 2 trader commitments to address non-compliance. There were 11 instances where no corrective action was required. The chemical testing resulted in no compliance issues, and therefore, no corrective actions were required. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Baby's Choice Pacifier & Pacifier Holder Deejay Inc. Did not meet the small parts requirements Voluntary recall by Deejay Inc. BIBS Natural Rubber Pacifier Tricor Distribution No compliance issues detected None Boka Maple Wood Pacifiers Arboreka No compliance issues detected None Ryan & Rose Cutie PAT 2-in-1 Pacifier Cara & Co. (previously Canadian DIY Supply) Did not meet the advertising and labelling requirements - indirect reference to the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act and Pacifiers Regulations Commitment by Cara & Co. (previously Canadian DIY Supply) Doddle & Co. The Pop Doddle & Co. No compliance issues detected None Hip Mommies Did not meet the advertising and labelling requirements - indirect reference to the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act and Pacifiers Regulations Commitment by Hip Mommies. Duoladuobu Anti-Dust Silicone Pacifier Thinka Did not meet the small parts requirements Voluntary recall by Thinka EcoViking Natural Rubber Pacifier (L, 12+ months, Round) WestCare Health Supplies Ltd. No compliance issues detected None Fred Chill, Baby Pacifier Clément Ltée No compliance issues detected None Mercedes-Benz Collection Soother Mercedes-Benz Canada Inc. No compliance issues detected None MAM MAM Air MAM Canada No compliance issues detected None Munchkin Latch Pacifier Munchkin No compliance issues detected None Natursutten Natursutten Butterfly Orthodontic Pacifier Monarch Distributing Ltd. No compliance issues detected None President's Choice Silicone Pacifiers with Clip EI Brands / Loblaw No compliance issues detected None Razbaby Razbaby Keep-It-Kleen Kidcentral Supply Inc. No compliance issues detected None Tommee Tippee Night Time Silicone Orthodontic Pacifiers (0-6 months) Mayborn Group No compliance issues detected None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2020-03-25 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy