Created: 2021-10-22T18:01:12.113998
Name: Standing_Committee_on_Health_(HESA):_Supplementary_Estimates_(A),_2021-22:_Votes_1a_and_5a_under_Canadian_Food_Inspection_Agency,_Vote_5a_under_Canadian_Institutes_of_Health_Research,_Votes_1a,_5a_and_10a_under_Department_of_Health_and_Votes_1a,_5a_and_10a_under_Public_Health_Agency_of_Canada
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/8ae62706-43a3-4bba-8361-3af913e2aa2e/resource/5490b5bd-e250-42b9-b446-583743a0080c/download/hesa-supps-a-disclosure-en.pdf
Package ID: 8ae62706-43a3-4bba-8361-3af913e2aa2e
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Supplementary Estimates (A), 2021-22: Votes 1a and 5a under Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Vote 5a under Canadian Institutes of Health Research, Votes 1a, 5a and 10a under Department of Health and Votes 1a, 5a and 10a under Public Health Agency of Canada
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
TABLE OF CONTENTS
1. Abortion Access
2. Adjusting Public Health Measures
3. Advancing Reconciliation in Canada’s Health Care System
4. Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy
5. AMR
6. Autism
7. Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research - MSM
8. Border Measures - General
9. Border Measures – USA
10. Bulk Imports
11. Canada Health Act – Compliance Issues
12. CEPA and CMP
13. Clinical Trials - Exp. Pathways
14. Clinical Trials Fund
15. COVAX Facility
16. COVID-19 Funding to CFIA
17. COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
18. COVID-19 Variants
19. Cybersecurity
20. Daily Shift Inspection Presence Program
21. Dental Care
22. Diabetes
23. Digital Tools
24. Drug shortages
25. Evolution of COVID-19 Science
26. Family Gender-Based Violence (FGBV)
27. Food Safety
28. Glysophates
29. GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network)
30. Health System Capacity (Hospital/Health Care System Impacts)
31. Health Transfers
32. HESA-Motion Production of Papers
33. High-Cost Drugs Rare Diseases
34. Home Care
35. Humane Use of Pesticides
36. Indigenous Reconciliation
37. Institute for Women’s Health Research
38. International Issues
39. Johnson and Johnson
40. LTC Homes
41. MAID
42. Mental Health and Substance Use Tools
43. Modelling COVID-19
44. NACI Recommendations for Delaying Second Doses and Interchangeability of mRNA
Vaccines
45. Natural Health Products – OAG Report
46. NESS Management and PPE Procurement
47. Opioid Overdose Crisis
48. Outbreak Monitoring
49. Palliative Care
50. Pediatric Cancer
51. Pharmacare
52. Plasma Collection
53. PMPRB Amendments
54. PMRA Neonic Pesticides Aquatic Risk
55. PT Vaccine Allocations
56. Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity
57. Research
58. Respirator Recall
59. Ryding Regency Meat Packers (E. Coli)
60. Safety of AstraZeneca Vaccine
61. Self-Isolation Sites
62. Sexual and Reproductive Health
63. Smoking and Tobacco Use
64. Status of Vaccine Approvals
65. Suicide Prevention
66. Switch Health
67. Taking Action to Strengthen Supportive Care for Canadians
68. Territorial Health Investment Fund
69. Test Kits
70. Testing Capacity (Rapid Test)
71. Therapeutics
72. Ultraviolet Devices
73. Vaccine Certification
74. Vaccine Surveillance
75. Essure
76. Youth Vaping
CANADA HEALTH ACT – ABORTION SERVICES
SYNOPSIS
• In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services
at Clinic 554 in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health Act.
Even with the announced closure of Clinic 554, the exclusionary nature of this regulation poses
comprehensiveness and accessibility concerns under the Act. The NB Health Ministry has stated publicly
that the government has no intention of changing its position on the issue.
• Evidence has indicated at least one abortion clinic in Ontario (ON) have been charging patients
to access insured services, contrary to the Canada Health Act and provincial legislation. Health Canada
and ON are working together to ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act and penalize provinces (such as NB and ON)
where patients face charges when they attempt to access to abortion services?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick was the last province with a private
abortion clinic where the province refused to provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack of
coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995,
without resolution.
Clinic 554, which was the only facility in the Fredericton area providing surgical abortion services, closed
in fall 2020 due to the lack of public funding for these services. In early July 2019, former Minister
Petitpas Taylor met with the NB Health Minister to discuss the accessibility and comprehensive concerns
related to this issue, including the patient charges being levied by the clinic for the abortion services.
These concerns were reiterated by Minister Petitpas Taylor, and then by the Prime Minister and
Minister Hajdu, in late 2019. During the recent election in NB, Premier Higgs maintained the province
provides sufficient access to abortion services and does not intend to fund abortion services in private
clinics. He said this was consistent with the Canada Health Act.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association filed a statement of claim in the NB courts,
as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive regulation 84-20. The Association was granted
standing in the case by the NB Court of Queen’s bench on June 2, 2021. The group argues that the
regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had previously
advised the province it would take legal action if the regulation was not amended to permit coverage for
abortion services received outside hospitals.
In December 2020, the NB Legislative Assembly passed a motion instructing the province’s two RHAs to
determine if access to abortion services in NB satisfies the requirements of the CHA and, if not, how the
Act’s requirements could be met while respecting NB legislation (i.e., without providing coverage for
clinic abortions).
When the Canada Health Act Annual Report 2019-2020 was tabled in Parliament in February 2021, some
media reports indicated Health Canada planned to levy a penalty of approximately $140K in March
2021. In fact, that was the deduction which was levied in March 2020. The penalty levied against New
Brunswick in March 2021 was $64,850.
Evidence indicates that several private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge patients facility fees when
accessing insured surgical abortion services. Health Canada has learned that, while the Ontario Health
Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics,
the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health
Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has been clear with ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics
are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a
deduction of $13,905 was levied against the province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and
ON are working together to ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. It is also specified that the federal
government is committed to collaboration with the PTs to strengthen the health care system and ensure
access to a full suite of reproductive and health services in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer
discussions. The Budget proposed $45 million over three years, to fund community- based organizations
that help make sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for
vulnerable populations.
ADJUSTING PUBLIC HEALTH MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), along with provincial and territorial partners, is
continually evaluating and adjusting recommended public health measures based on the most recent
evidence and the current epidemiological situation.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government adjusting public health measures to address the current situation in
Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Public health measures continue to be effective in preventing the spread of COVID-19, including
variants of concern.
• It is important for everyone, regardless of vaccination status, to continue to adhere to
recommended public health measures, including using multiple personal preventive practices at once, to
protect themselves and others.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada, working with provinces and territories, has developed
readiness indicators for easing restrictive measures in communities. These include:
• The reduction of infection rates to manageable levels;
• Having public health and health systems that are able to respond to increasing numbers
of infections in the community; and
• Having measures in place to reduce the spread of COVID-19 to high-risk groups and
settings.
• Canada’s approach to lifting public health measures will be gradual and focused on protecting
the health and safety of all people in Canada.
• Provincial and territorial governments will continue to make decisions about when to ease or
reinstate restrictive public health measures in their communities, based on indicators of readiness, the
most recent evidence and the current epidemiological situation.
• In collaboration with our provincial and territorial partners, we are continually evaluating the
effectiveness of public health measures using scientific literature, modelling and expert analysis.
BACKGROUND
Public health measures (PHM) are the non-pharmaceutical interventions implemented by
federal/provincial/territorial and local public health authorities to control COVID-19 transmission. Some
of these PHMs are personal preventive practices focused on helping individuals to protect themselves
and others. Personal preventive practices include: following advice of local public health authorities;
staying home and away from others if sick; minimizing non-essential in-person interactions with people
from outside one’s immediate household, and if interactions must occur they are as few, as brief and
from the greatest physical distance possible; properly wearing well- constructed, well-fitting non-
medical masks; and hand hygiene and respiratory etiquette.
Public health authorities also aim to prevent transmission by undertaking testing programs to detect
and isolate cases, tracing people who have had a high-risk exposure to an infectious case and
quarantining them so they cannot transmit COVID-19 to others. Community measures such as public
education campaigns, restrictions on gatherings, and school, business and workplace measures, help to
protect groups and the community at large.
All PHMs, including case detection and isolation, contact tracing and quarantining, and individual
personal preventive practices as well as community-based measures, need to be sustained in order to
maximize our ability as a society to control the spread of the virus over the long term.
Public health authorities will need to continue to rapidly identify and respond to outbreaks, including
the management of new cases of COVID-19 and their high-risk contacts, to reduce community-spread
and prevent large increases in case numbers and associated hospitalizations.
A series of models are being used to identify the potential impact of different combinations of control
measures on infection rates in the Canadian population. These models help to identify which
combinations of PHMs, applied with what intensity, are most likely to reinforce pandemic control. The
role of public adherence to and layering of these measures is a critical factor for ultimate effectiveness.
PHAC is continually evaluating the impact of PHM on the number of cases reported through surveillance
systems, and is adjusting guidance, as needed, in collaboration with provincial and territorial partners.
Community-based PHM are most effective when implemented as early as possible in response to
epidemiological triggers of concern (e.g. increases in unlinked cases). Therefore, preparations include
being ready to re-implement restrictive community PHMs by the provinces and territories or at the
municipal public health level. It is important to remember that it takes about two weeks before the
impact of PHM can be seen in surveillance data. This is because of the time lapse between when a
person is infected, when they are tested and subsequently reported to PHAC as a confirmed case.
When adjusting PHM, it is paramount that a protective approach for those most likely to experience
severe disease or outcomes due to COVID-19 be maintained throughout the pandemic. Furthermore,
jurisdictions have to balance the risks associated with spread of COVID-19 with the unintended social
and health consequences of restrictive PHMs, including among vulnerable groups.
PHAC, working with provinces and territories, has developed readiness criteria and indicators for easing
restrictive PHMs. These indicators were developed with a data driven approach to support public health
professionals and government decision makers in considering when to ease or reinstate PHM, taken into
consideration that thresholds and application of these indicators may vary based on local epidemiology
and level of restrictive measures already in place. Further, adjustments to restrictive PHM must be
considered in the context of risk associated with variants of concern (VOC), and the effect of increasing
vaccine coverage.
Starting this summer, if cases are low, and vaccine coverage for the eligible population is high for one
dose (i.e., 75%) and increasing for a second (i.e., 20%), local public health authorities may begin to lift
restrictions with the focus being on small outdoor gatherings and activities with family and friends.
However, people should continue to follow the advice of their local public health authority. By the fall, if
cases are low and vaccine coverage is high (i.e., 75% of the eligible population will have two doses), local
public health authorities may begin to lift more measures and allow people to gather with others
outside of their immediate household in indoor settings. However, COVID-19 will not be eliminated
therefore some public health measures will still be in place.
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS
SYNOPSIS
• Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Health
Canada and Indigenous Services Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health care
systems?
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous organizations
in the development of distinctions-based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care
systems.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health care needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
voices are heard through meaningful engagement across the Health portfolio.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous partners and health service providers to
identify and support distinctions-based Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism
across Canada’s health care system.
BACKGROUND
Systemic racism has no place in Canada. Unfortunately, Indigenous Peoples continue to experience
racism, discrimination, stigma and bias in many facets, including when interacting with the health care
system, which has been well documented in a number of reports. There are ongoing domestic and
international calls for Canada to implement measures that address racism and discrimination in the
health care system and to demonstrate timely and meaningful progress.
In September 2020, the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman from Manawan, Quebec,
sparked widespread indignation, media attention, a public coroner’s inquest, and a lawsuit from
Echaquan's family against the hospital where she suffered racist insults from hospital staff before she
died in Joliette, QC. On November 16th, 2020, the Manawan Atikamekw Council and the Council of the
Atikamekw Nation submitted Joyce’s Principle to the Prime Minister, as well as federal, provincial, and
territorial ministers, which demands that all Indigenous Peoples have an equal right to the highest
standard of physical and mental health, with a right to traditional medicines.
In response to Joyce Echaquan’s death, Ministers Miller, Bennett, Vandal and Hajdu held two national
discussions on October 16th, 2020, and January 27-28th, 2021, to listen to Indigenous patients and
health care providers regarding their lived experiences with racism, and to provide federal, provincial,
and territorial governments and health system partners a platform to present their past, ongoing, and
planned actions to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care system.
At the January meeting, Minister Hajdu announced $4M in funding to a National Consortium of
Indigenous Medical Education to work on improving the experiences of Indigenous Peoples in medical
school/practices. Minister Miller also announced plans to begin co-developing distinctions-based
Indigenous health legislation and funding of $2M to the Atikamekw Nation and Manawan First Nation to
implement Joyce’s Principle.
Following the January meeting, FPT leaders released a joint statement to express a collective
commitment to working with Indigenous communities, organizations, and leadership to address
Indigenous-specific racism in the health care system. The federal government also committed to hosting
a third national discussion in spring 2021, and its intention to continue to convene thematic,
distinctions-based, and regional roundtable discussions. Expectations are high for the federal
government to demonstrate timely action.
While the federal government is working with Indigenous partners on a number of health policy
initiatives, dedicated work must be undertaken to directly address anti-Indigenous racism in the health
care system. The Government has committed to responding to a number of high profile reports and
recommendations to address anti-racism, cultural safety, and safe and equitable care, including the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action and the Inquiry into Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women and Girls’ Calls for Justice. In addition, there are class action lawsuits on forced and
coerced sterilization of Indigenous women in multiple jurisdictions, and both the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health and the Senate Committee on Human Rights have undertaken studies on
this issue.
Budget 2021
The Government’s commitment to engaging with Indigenous Peoples has placed a heavy burden on
Indigenous organizations who may not have the capacity to participate in the multiple engagement
requests from the federal government, including Health Canada. This investment will support
Indigenous organizations to build capacity to engage with the Department and will support distinctions-
based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism. Distinctions-based measures contribute to a
meaningful reduction in racism, discrimination, bias and stigma experienced by Indigenous Peoples
when interacting with health systems.
Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Indigenous Services
Canada and Health Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination
where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe. Prior to this investment, there was no federal funding
available to specifically address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care systems.
ADVERSE REACTIONS
SYNOPSIS
• A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for protecting the health and safety of
Canadians, ensuring public confidence in the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting Canada-
wide immunization efforts.
• A serious rare disorder characterized by blood clots with low levels of blood platelets has been
linked to vaccination with viral vector vaccines - AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen (Johnson &
Johnson).
• A small number of myocarditis and/or pericarditis cases (inflammation of the heart muscle),
have also been observed by the US, EMA and WHO among people who received an mRNA vaccine
(Pfizer-BioNTech and Moderna).
• The Government of Canada continues to work closely with partners to monitor vaccine safety.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Given recent reports of blood clots following the use of viral vector COVID-19 vaccines
(COVISHIELD, AstraZeneca, Janssen) in Canada and internationally, and international reports of
myocarditis after mRNA vaccination, What is the Government doing to ensure vaccine safety, including
monitoring for adverse reactions to the COVID-19 vaccines?
• How is the Government making its decisions on the safe use of viral vector and mRNA vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• The safety and effectiveness of vaccines used in Canada is our government’s highest priority.
• Canada’s monitoring systems for adverse events following immunization rapidly detect possible
safety issues and investigate them thoroughly. The regulator takes action in line with the risks and
benefits of the vaccine.
• Reports of heart inflammation (myocarditis or pericarditis) following vaccination with mRNA
vaccines have been reported internationally. Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are
closely monitoring this situation.
• Evidence is limited at this time, so monitoring and engagement with international health
authorities ensures that Canada is receiving relevant information on this matter.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada also continue to closely monitor reports
of rare but serious cases of blood clots associated with low levels of blood platelets following
vaccination with AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccines and reports from the US related to the
Janssen vaccine.
BACKGROUND
Safety is a central consideration for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before they are authorized.
However, no health product is completely risk-free.
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are mild
reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild headache), although
serious and rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction). However, as the WHO states: “The fact that a
vaccine was administered within a reasonable time period of the occurrence of an event does not
automatically suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, PHAC, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers. Manufacturers are required
to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the national regulatory authority, as well as submit
regular summaries of global safety information. In addition, PHAC receives and reviews reports of
adverse events following immunization from provinces and territories (P/T) through the Canadian
Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS). This system has been enhanced
to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness and sharing of information with
partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC, and Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network which provides weekly
reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities.
Thrombosis and Thrombocytopenia Syndrome (TTS)
Health Canada and PHAC continue to closely monitoring international reports of thrombosis and
thrombocytopenia following immunization with viral vector vaccines - AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD
vaccines (Europe) and Janssen (US). Evidence thus far suggests an association between these vaccines
and very rare events involving serious blood clots and low levels of blood platelets.
On April 14, 2021, HC updated the AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD vaccines’ product information and
issued a public advisory to ensure there was awareness about this risk among health professionals and
vaccine recipients. Health Canada will continue to monitor information from the manufacturers and
international regulators about this safety issue.
PHAC has received reports of individuals in Canada who have experienced blood clots with low numbers
of platelets following immunizations with the COVISHIELD (the Serum Institute of India version of the
AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine) and AstraZeneca vaccine. These reports are rare, and they show that
Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring system works.
To support clinicians in identifying, diagnosing and treating people with this rare side effect, Thrombosis
Canada, with agreement from many provincial thrombosis leaders, and in collaboration with PHAC, has
developed and disseminated clinical guidance. In addition, PHAC, Thrombosis Canada, and the National
Collaborating Centre for Infectious Diseases have delivered a webinar to inform health care providers on
the treatment and reporting of this condition.
On April 23, 2021 and May 3, 2021 respectively, NACI updated its recommendations on the use of
authorized COVID-19 vaccines to incorporate its analysis of thrombosis (blood clots) with
thrombocytopenia (low platelets) following vaccination with AstraZeneca and Janssen. At this time and
based on current evidence, NACI recommends that the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines may be
offered to individuals 30 years of age and older without contraindications if the individual does not wish
to wait for an mRNA vaccine and if benefits outweigh the risk.
NACI’s updated recommendation is informed by Health Canada’s safety assessment; the most up-to-
date domestic and international evidence and guidance on managing people who develop thrombosis
and thrombocytopenia following vaccination, including updated rates and risks; the availability and
supply of mRNA vaccines in Canada; the rapidly changing epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada, including
the circulation of variants of concern; and a comprehensive analysis of ethics, equity, feasibility and
accessibility. NACI assessed the risk of developing and dying from thrombosis with thrombocytopenia
following vaccination compared to COVID-19 ICU admissions and deaths that could be prevented by an
early dose of the vaccine under various COVID-19 incidence rates.
NACI continues to evaluate the evolving vaccine landscape in Canada and potential safety signals, and
will update guidance as needed.
Surveillance of other adverse events of special interest following immunization
The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada are closely monitoring international reports
(WHO, US, EMA) of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the
lining around the heart) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. To date, the evidence is
limited, and no clear association has been established between myocarditis/pericarditis and mRNA
vaccines, and no regulatory action has been taken in Canada or internationally.
Based on reports received, Canada is not seeing higher rates than would be expected in the general
population (outside of a vaccine context). Health Canada, PHAC, and the P/T health authorities are
aware of these cases and will continue to monitor closely. Health Canada is also working closely with the
manufacturers and international regulators to review information as it becomes available and will take
appropriate action when needed.
In addition, PHAC continually monitors other rare adverse events that may be potentially associated
with a vaccine. This list of adverse events changes based on the evolving safety profile of vaccines (e.g.,
Myocarditis/pericarditis, Guillain Barré Syndrome, Bell's Palsy, Capillary Leak Syndrome).
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
Budget 2021:
Budget 2021 proposes to provide $28.6 million over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $5.7 million
per year ongoing to support efforts to prevent the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand
efforts to monitor the emergence of antimicrobial resistance in Canada.
SYNOPSIS
• Antimicrobial-resistant infections are becoming more frequent and increasingly difficult to treat.
This constitutes a serious threat to Canadians and our healthcare system. For example, potentially fatal
bloodstream infections (BSIs) are on the rise, with approximately 20% of these patients dying within 30
days of diagnosis. The antibiotics we rely on for common infections are becoming less effective,
resulting in serious illness and death. Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of
antibiotic treatment, and in 2018 approximately 5,400 Canadians died from a resistant infection and
there were an additional $1.4 billion in hospital costs.
KEY MESSAGES
• The World Health Organization has declared that antimicrobial resistance is one of the top 10
global public health threats facing humanity.
• Our Government recognizes that antimicrobial resistance, or AMR, is increasing worldwide and
is posing a serious and growing threat to the Canadian healthcare system.
• We are acting to preserve the effectiveness of antibiotics that Canadians rely on, and to prevent
the emergence and spread of drug resistant infections.
• The Government is using regulatory measures, research, surveillance, awareness, and public
information to combat AMR.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $28.6 million over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $5.7
million per year ongoing to support efforts to prevent the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and
expand efforts to monitor the emergence of antimicrobial resistance in Canada.
• We recognize that AMR is a complex global challenge and we will work with our international
partners to reduce antimicrobial resistance and protect the health of Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) is characterized by a decline in the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs
in treating an infection. Without effective antimicrobials, our ability to fight infectious diseases will
significantly decline. For example, routine medical procedures, joint replacements and even
chemotherapy for cancer patients, that depend on antibiotics, will become more risky for Canadians.
The Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) released a report on November 12, 2019, commissioned by
the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), that describes the serious threat of antibiotic resistance.
Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of antibiotic treatment and last year
approximately 5,400 Canadians died from a resistant infection. If current AMR trends are left
unchecked, projections of growth to 40 percent resistance by 2050 and 400,000 deaths are plausible
according to the CCA.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
The Government of Canada outlined its commitment to addressing AMR in the Federal Framework on
AMR and its supporting Action Plan. In July 2018, the first Progress Report on the Federal Action Plan
was released and can be found at Canada.ca. In recognition of the global public health threat, the
Government of Canada identified AMR as a priority in the Prime Minister’s 2019 mandate letter to the
Minister of Health. With support from the Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry, the Minister of
Agriculture and Agri-Food and the Minister of Environment and Climate Change, the Health Portfolio is
responding to the serious and growing public health threat posed by antimicrobial resistance by
developing and implementing actions with partners to preserve the effectiveness of the antimicrobials
that Canadians rely on every day.
Recognizing that the federal government cannot reduce the threat of AMR alone, and consistent with
our international partners, the Government of Canada led efforts with provinces, territories, and
stakeholders to develop the pan-Canadian AMR Framework, which was released in September 2017.
Work has been underway on a pan-Canadian AMR Action Plan to identify optimal and concrete actions
to address this complex issue across the human, animal health, and agri-food sectors. This work has
been undertaken in consultation, and with input from provincial and territorial partners and key
stakeholders. The focus by all jurisdictions in recent months on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic
has slowed progress on finalizing the Action Plan. PHAC is working with federal departments and
provinces and territories to determine the way forward to ensure that governments and stakeholders
can advance priority actions on AMR in the short and medium-term.
The Government of Canada is taking action to address AMR by:
• Strengthening surveillance systems to help identify new threats or changing patterns of AMR in
humans and animals;
• Strengthening the stewardship of antimicrobials in human and veterinary medicine, including
required regulatory and policy changes;
• Collaborating with national and international partners to advance policy, research and
innovation in both Canada and abroad, including research on diagnostics, new antimicrobials and
alternatives to the use of antimicrobials in human and veterinary medicine.
The Government of Canada has invested a total of $203 million in the past 10 years to support domestic
action on AMR:
• PHAC has invested approximately $50 million on AMR policy leadership, surveillance and
stewardship over 10 years.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested over $125 million in AMR research over
the past 5 years to strengthen research in areas such as antimicrobial discovery, target identification,
alternatives, diagnostics, surveillance, and stewardship. CIHR also provides funding to Canadian
scientists to participate in international AMR research efforts under the Joint Programming Initiative on
Antimicrobial Resistance. For example, through this Joint Initiative, in 2019, CIHR provided over half a
million dollars in funding to Dr. Derek MacFadden and Dr. Allison McGeer in support of their research
into a K-mer Based Approach for Institutional AMR Surveillance, Transmission Monitoring, and Rapid
Diagnostics. With antibiotic resistant organisms (AROs) having become increasingly difficult to treat,
with rising morbidity and mortality worldwide, and with increased spread within healthcare institutions,
new and more efficient approaches are needed for tracking transmissions, assessing transmission
patterns, and rapidly diagnosing disease. Drs. MacFadden and McGreer’s project looks precisely at these
alternatives as a means to improve surveillance, but also to gather important rapid diagnostic
information about the likelihood of resistance to a given antibiotic using the K- mer approach.
• Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has invested more than $37 million over the last 10 years to
support industry-led research initiatives to accelerate the pace of innovation and address some of the
AMR challenges in agriculture.
Budget 2021 proposes to provide $28.6 million over five years, beginning in 2021-22, with $5.7 million
per year ongoing, to the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency, to help address antimicrobial resistance. Investments would support efforts to
prevent the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand efforts to monitor the emergence of
antimicrobial resistance in Canada.
Regulatory and Policy Changes
In May 2017, amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations related to AMR in the
veterinary drug context. They aimed at increasing antimicrobial stewardship and promoting the prudent
use of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) in animals by:
• Collecting antimicrobial sales information;
• Increasing the oversight of active pharmaceutical ingredients for veterinary use;
• Controlling the “own use” importation of veterinary drugs and;
• Facilitating access to low risk veterinary health;
In support of these regulations, Health Canada has also undertaken complementary policy measures,
including labelling and sale reporting requirements.
Additionally, Health Canada released a Pathogens of Interest List that will help inform companies of the
bacterial pathogens in most urgent need of innovative therapeutic products in Canada. Health Canada
has also sponsored a challenge under the Innovative Solutions Canada program, where up to $1 million
is available to innovators and entrepreneurs to support the development of new, easy-to-use and cost
effective, point-of-care diagnostic tools to help combat the rise of AMR.
International Activities
In May 2015, the World Health Organization’s (WHO) member states, including Canada, endorsed the
WHO Global Action Plan on AMR, which calls on countries to develop multisectoral national action plans
to address AMR. Canada supports the ongoing collaborative leadership of the WHO, the World
Organization for Animal Health, and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, via a
One Health approach, to address AMR.
At the United Nations General Assembly high-level meeting on AMR in September 2016, world leaders
endorsed a political declaration that recognized the need for stronger surveillance systems,
strengthened regulation of antimicrobials, improved awareness, and innovative alternative treatments
and diagnostics.
In 2017, the Government of Canada also made a one-time investment of more than $9 million to
support the World Health Organization’s Global Action Plan on AMR. This initiative aims to ensure, for as
long as possible, continuity of successful treatment and prevention of infectious diseases with effective
and safe medicines that are quality-assured, used in a responsible way, and accessible to all who need
them.
Parliamentary Business
The Standing Committee on Health (HESA) tabled its 16th Report entitled: A Study on the Status of
Antimicrobial Resistance in Canada and Related Recommendations on May 1, 2018. The Government
Response to the Committee’s report was tabled on July 18, 2018, and is available online on the House of
Commons website.
AUTISM SPECTRUM DISORDER
Budget 2021:
Budget 2021 proposes to provide $15.4 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to the Public Health
Agency of Canada to work with partners to support the creation of a national autism strategy to improve
the health and well-being of Canadians with autism and their caregivers. This amount includes funding
to support strategy development ($4.1 million), address gaps in autism spectrum disorder surveillance
($2.2 million), and assist with the development of IT infrastructure to support data collection ($0.7
million).
SYNOPSIS
• Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by communication difficulties as well as
social and behavioural challenges. Protecting the health and safety of Canadians during the COVID-19
pandemic is the Government of Canada’s top priority, with a particular focus on our most vulnerable
Canadians. Amidst the challenges presented by this health crisis, the Government of Canada continues
to advance its commitment to work collaboratively with provinces, territories, families and stakeholders
toward the creation of a national autism strategy.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to helping all Canadians with disabilities, including
those with autism, as well as those who care for them and provide much needed support.
• Despite the challenges presented by the COVID-19 pandemic, we are continuing to work
collaboratively with the provinces, territories, those with lived experience, families and stakeholder
organizations, toward the creation of a national autism strategy.
• To improve the health and well-being of Canadians with autism and their caregivers, Budget
2021 proposes to provide $15.4 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to work with partners to
support the creation of a national autism strategy which includes enhancements to autism surveillance.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has engaged the Canadian Academy of Health Sciences
(CAHS), a neutral, third-party organization, to lead a broad and inclusive engagement process.
• The CAHS will consult and engage with stakeholders, families and autistic Canadians to inform
the development of a national autism strategy that is responsive to the needs of the autism community.
BACKGROUND
Government of Canada Initiatives
The December 2019 Mandate Letter of the Minister of Health included a commitment to work
collaboratively with provinces, territories, parents, individuals with autism and stakeholders toward the
creation of a national autism strategy. The Public Health Agency of Canada is leading the development
of the strategy, and is investing $1.46 million for the Canadian Academy of Health Sciences to lead the
consultation process.
The consultation process launched in February 2021, will be broad, inclusive, evidence-based and
provide all Canadians, particularly those on the autism spectrum, the opportunity to inform the
development of the strategy. The CAHS will apply a social determinants of health lens in their approach
to the evidence-gathering and the structure of the dialogue by focusing on 3 key themes: social
inclusion, economic inclusion and evidence-based interventions in recognition of the breadth of issues
to be considered during engagement to develop a strategy that reflects the diverse needs of those who
are most affected.
The CAHS has established a robust governance structure to support the consultations. They have
appointed the Chair of the oversight panel (Dr. Lonnie Zwaigenbaum) and, in January 2021, announced
members of an oversight panel and three working groups on social inclusion, economic inclusion and
evidence-based interventions. The biographies for each member are publicly available on the CAHS
website (cahs-acss.ca).
The CAHS is a neutral, independent, not-for-profit organization that has a mandate to provide objective,
evidence-based analyses of health challenges to inform both public and private sectors in decision-
making about policy, practice and investment. The CAHS convenes experts in their respective fields to
assess the evidence on complex topics of public interest to inform decision-making in Canada.
PHAC Investments
Budget 2018 provided $20 million over five years (2018-2023) in funding to support two new initiatives:
1) The Autism and Intellectual Disabilities Knowledge Exchange Network (AIDE Canada) ($10.9 million/5
years), is operational and provides access to online resources, including an inventory of services,
supports, employment opportunities and local programming for families across the country
(https://aidecanada.ca). In addition, six AIDE Canada locations across the country provide a point of
access for Canadians to obtain resources and supports on autism. In April 2020, AIDE Canada released a
toolkit: “Supporting Children and Youth with Autism and Intellectual Disability and their Families during
COVID-19” to provide tips for parents on how to help their child cope with stress, anxiety and disruption
to daily routines during the COVID-19 pandemic. (https://covid19.aidecanada.ca/)
2) The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategic Fund is providing $9.1 million over 5 years for
community-based projects that pursue innovative program models, help reduce stigma, and integrate
health, social and educational components to better serve the complex needs of families. One example
is McGill University’s Caregiver Skills Training (CST) project that will provide evidence-based skills
training for caregivers of children with autism, offering strategies and solutions that can address
practical needs and challenges.
On March 29, 2018, PHAC published the first National Autism Spectrum Disorder Surveillance System
(NASS) report. This surveillance system was established through collaboration with advocates and those
provincial and territorial ministries that were eager to address critical knowledge gaps to support
governments, professionals, health care providers, service providers, educators, communities and
stakeholders in meeting the needs of those with autism spectrum disorder (ASD).The report provides,
for the first time, national data on the number (i.e., prevalence) of children and youth ages 5-17 years
with autism, based on data collected in 2015 from six provinces and one territory. Key findings highlight
that 1 in 66 children and youth have been diagnosed with ASD in Canada. In collaboration with clinical
experts and provincial/territorial partners, PHAC is addressing the future directions outlined in the 2018
NASS report. This includes activities to enhance surveillance of ASD, focusing on the coverage of
Canadians of all ages, the expansion to all jurisdictions, and additional indicators such as co- morbidities
and key determinants of health.
PHAC has provided $102,189 to the Canadian Paediatric Society to develop ASD Guidelines for early
detection and screening, diagnosis, and post-diagnosis follow-up. The guidelines were released in
October 2019.
CIHR Investments
The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), invested over
$58.84 million in research related to ASD between 2015-16 and 2019-20. In the past two years, there
has been an investment of close to $32 million in research to increase the understanding of ASD as well
as the capacity to treat it effectively. For example, a CIHR-funded research team led by Dr. Lonnie
Zwaigenbaum from the University of Alberta developed a tool for detecting ASD at a very early age,
which has enabled families to access critical resources and services early, positively impacting their
children’s development.
CIHR-funded researchers are also developing innovative technologies for children with ASD and their
families. For instance, an interdisciplinary team led by Dr. Francois Bolduc from the University of Alberta
is creating an artificial intelligence-based interactive ‘chatbot’ that will allow persons with ASD (and
other neurodevelopmental disorders), their families, health professionals and teachers to better
navigate the healthcare system by identifying personalized interventions and resources.
Through Canada’s Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research, CIHR and its partners are investing in CHILD-
BRIGHT, an innovative pan-Canadian network that aims to improve life outcomes for children with
brain-based developmental disabilities and their families. The network’s many projects include:
• “Ready 2 Work”, an online vocational/employment readiness platform developed alongside self-
advocates with ASD, their families, and professionals who operate vocational programs for young
people with ASD.
• “MEGA TEAM”, which is evaluating whether a take-home video game can improve executive
functioning in children with ASD.
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC): The December 2019 Mandate Letter of the
Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion, the Honourable Carla
Qualtrough, included a commitment to support the Minister of Health toward the creation of a national
autism strategy. On April 10, 2020, Minister Qualtrough announced the establishment of a COVID-19
Disability Advisory Group, comprised of experts in disability inclusion. This Group has been providing
advice on the real-time lived experiences of persons with disabilities during this crisis; disability-specific
issues, challenges and systemic gaps; and strategies, measures and steps to be taken. Areas of particular
focus have been: equality of access to health care and supports; public communications and
accessibility; support for civil society and the not-for-profit sector; support for populations at highest
risk; and finances and employment. With a recently renewed and expanded mandate, the Advisory
Group builds on previous work advising the Minister and provides ongoing expert advice on disability
inclusion within Government priorities and on implementation of Government programs and policies.
Employment Support (through the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities Program): To
improve employment outcomes for persons with intellectual disabilities and ASD, Budget 2019 provided
an investment of $12 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, to the Canadian Association for
Community Living, in partnership with the Canadian Autism Spectrum Disorders Alliance to fund the
second phase of their Ready, Willing and Able (RWA) program. RWA is a national employment program
for persons with intellectual disabilities and ASD.
Accessible Canada Act (An Act to Ensure a Barrier-Free Canada)
The Accessible Canada Act, which came into force on July 11, 2019, takes a proactive and systemic
approach to the identification, removal and prevention of barriers to accessibility within federal
jurisdiction, with the objective of achieving a barrier-free Canada by 2040.
The Government of Canada supports initiatives that are intended to improve the participation and
inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of Canadian society through the Disability component
of the Social Development Partnerships Program (SDPP-D). The SDPP-D is a grant and contribution
program that provides funding to not-for-profit organizations to address the social issues and barriers
facing persons with disabilities. Since 1998, Autism Society Canada has received operating funding
through SDPP-D. In April 2019, the then Minister of Public Services and Procurement and Accessibility
announced operating funding of $18 million over three years (starting in 2019-20) for 28 national not-
for-profit disability organizations through the SDPP-D. Under this announcement, Autism Society Canada
is receiving operating funding of $350,000 over three years. Other organizations supporting individuals
with ASD, such as Autism Speaks Canada ($500,000) and the Canadian Autism Spectrum Disorders
Alliance ($328,768) are also receiving core funding under the program. These three organizations, along
with other national disability organizations, also received additional funding in 2020-21 ($83,000 in
total) to enhance their communications and engagement activities to better address the impact of the
COVID-19 pandemic on persons with disabilities.
In 2021, the Government of Canada is working to develop its first Disability Inclusion Action Plan (DIAP),
announced in the recent Speech from the Throne. The Plan will include a new Canadian Disability
Benefit, a robust employment strategy for Canadians with disabilities, and a better process to determine
eligibility for Government disability programs and benefits. The first step of the DIAP will be to consult
with Canadians with disabilities, in the spirit of “Nothing Without Us”. Over the coming months, the
Government will undertake discussions with the disability community, provinces and territories, and
other experts on the overall DIAP framework and its elements. The Government will begin engagement
through the launch of an online survey on the DIAP on June 4, 2021.
Under the National Housing Strategy (NHS), the $13.8 billion National Housing Co-Investment Fund
provides low-cost loans and contributions for new construction and retrofit of affordable housing. The
Co-Investment Fund is targeted to create at least 2,400 new affordable housing units for persons with
developmental disabilities. Low-income people living with disabilities will also benefit from funding
initiatives for community housing, federal housing investments in provincial and territorial programs,
and the Canada Housing Benefit.
All provinces provide ASD-specific funding for a range of services and supports with current investments
focused on interventions, services and education supports for pre-school and school-aged children.
While the three territories do not have any ASD-specific funding, they do have supports for broader
disability services, which includes ASD.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• I’m proud that our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from
donating blood by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral
period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration with
Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific
to reducing barriers to the donation of plasma.
• This research is ongoing. Health Canada remains open to assessing future changes to the MSM
donor deferral policy, including its elimination, provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
• To date, Health Canada has not yet received a submission from Canadian Blood Services or
Héma-Québec to eliminate the deferral period in question for donating whole blood.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor
screening requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without
this evidence, the current screening policies cannot be changed.
If pressed on the Canadian Blood Service’s plasma submission
• In May 2021, Health Canada received a submission from Canadian Blood Services to implement
behaviour-based criteria for MSM for collection of source plasma. Part of the evidence used by Canadian
Blood Services to support the plasma submission comes from results of the studies funded by Health
Canada.
• If authorized, this approach will be phased into plasma donor centres and will provide real-
world evidence in the Canadian context relating to the deferral for whole blood.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
• The Attorney General of Canada filed an application for judicial review of the September 25,
2019 decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission, which was dismissed by the Federal Court on
June 10th, 2021.The purpose of the judicial review that Health Canada had requested was not to stop or
pre-empt the inquiry in the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal from proceeding, but rather to correctly
establish the proper parties in the case. As the matter is presently before the Tribunal, any further
details of Health Canada’s position will be provided to the Tribunal.
If pressed on whether Health Canada ordered a 2-year wait between blood ban policy changes
• The blood establishments were required to monitor and report on the safety of the blood
system following the implementation of each change to their MSM donor deferral policies; however, a
2-year minimum monitoring period prior to filing subsequent changes was not a condition of Health
Canada’s authorizations
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
Canadian Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (H-Q) were created as arm’s length organizations
responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they
are required to make submissions to HC for any changes to their policies, such as changes to donor
deferrals. These submissions must include scientific data that support the safety of the proposed
changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before they can be implemented, but has no authority
to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed, except in extraordinary situations when safety
issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing nineteen (19) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are
under evaluation for MSM.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other countries,
including the Netherlands, France and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain and Italy
there is no MSM deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as having sex
with more than one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have adopted a 3-
month deferral including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and Australia
(January 2021).
More recently, on December 14th, 2020, the UK accepted changes that lift the MSM blood donation
deferral based on recommendations by the UK-wide For Assessment of Individualised Risk (FAIR)
steering group. Changes are expected to be implemented in summer 2021.
BORDER MEASURES
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in
response to COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to encourage the restart of the Canadian economy while
continuing to prevent imported cases of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada continues to strongly advise Canadians to avoid all non-essential
travel to mitigate the further introduction and transmission of COVID-19, and its variants, into Canada.
• As vaccination progresses throughout the country, the Government of Canada’s approach to
easing of border requirements will remain science and risk-based, and closely tied to important public
health measures.
• The first phase of easing Canada’s border measures will begin with allowing travellers who are
fully vaccinated and who are currently allowed to enter Canada to do so without the requirement to
stay in government-authorized accommodations.
• To meet the definition of fully-vaccinated, a traveller must have received the full dosage for a
vaccine series accepted by Health Canada.
• These travellers are still required to have a pre-departure and on- arrival molecular test, and
they must quarantine until they receive a negative arrival test result.
• As evidence changes and the situation evolves, the Government of Canada will continue to work
with provinces and territories to consider further targeted restrictions at the borders – and when to lift
or adjust them – to keep Canadians safe.
IF PRESSED ON NEW UPDATES TO THE BORDER MEASURES
• Fully-vaccinated travellers who are currently allowed to enter Canada and who arrive by air will
no longer be required to stay at a government-authorized hotel while they await their on-arrival test
result. Fully-vaccinated travellers will be permitted to await their on- arrival test result at their own
suitable place of quarantine.
• Fully-vaccinated travellers arriving by air or land, will continue to be required to complete the
mandatory pre and on-arrival testing. However, they will now be permitted to leave quarantine upon
receipt of a negative result from their on-arrival COVID-19 test, rather than after 14 days. These
travellers will not be required to complete a day-8 test.
• To meet the definition of fully-vaccinated, a traveller must have received the full dosage for a
vaccine series accepted by Health Canada. The last dosage must have been administered at least 14 days
prior to entering Canada. Vaccines accepted by the Government of Canada do not have to have been
administered while in Canada to be accepted.
• The traveller can receive their vaccine in any country and the list of vaccines could expand in the
future.
• At this time, proof of vaccination is not required to enter Canada. However, if a traveller wishes
to be exempt from the mandatory three-night hotel stay and have a reduced quarantine period, they
must provide proof that they are fully vaccinated.
• To be eligible for exemption from the mandatory hotel stay and a reduced quarantine period
with a negative on-arrival test, travellers will be required to provide proof of vaccination credentials in
English or French using the ArriveCAN app or the ArriveCAN website. Travellers must also retain a copy
(paper or electronic) of their proof of vaccination for verification at the border and for 14 days following
their entry to Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE SUSPENSION OF FLIGHTS FROM INDIA AND PAKISTAN
• The Government of Canada continues to monitor the epidemiological situation domestically and
globally. This allows us to take action to reduce the risk to Canadians as much as possible, including
managing risks imposed by international travellers.
• Effective April 23, 2021, the Government of Canada suspended all commercial and private
passenger direct flights from India and Pakistan for 30 days. This measure has been extended until June
21, 2021.
• The introduction of these measures was driven by science and data. These additional layers of
protection aim to manage the elevated risk of imported cases of COVID-19 and variants of concern into
Canada.
• Travellers arriving from India or Pakistan via indirect flights to Canada, unless exempt, will need
to obtain a negative COVID-19 pre-departure test from a third country before continuing their trip to
Canada and will continue to be subject to the current testing and quarantine requirements on arrival.
• The temporary ban will allow the Public Health Agency of Canada to collect epidemiological data
and assess the evolving situation globally and domestically to determine the appropriate border
measures that will mitigate the importation and transmission of new cases.
IF PRESSED ON MEASURES SPECIFIC TO TRAVELLERS FROM BRAZIL
• Throughout this pandemic, border measures have been introduced and adjusted in response to
emerging science, data on travellers arriving in Canada, and the epidemiological situation domestically
and globally.
• There are no specific prohibitions or public health requirements for travellers arriving from
Brazil.
• Canada does not have any direct flights from Brazil currently.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
• Travellers are responsible for arranging a suitable place to quarantine prior to their arrival in
Canada.
• If no other suitable arrangements to quarantine are possible, individual travellers may be
referred to a federally designated quarantine facility, if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT-AUTHORIZED ACCOMMODATIONS
• Government-Authorized Accommodations (GAA) are privately owned hotels that have agreed to
meet public health guidelines and selection criteria for the purposes of accommodating travellers while
they await their COVID-19 test results.
• There are currently 63 GAAs to choose from, located near each of the four international airports
in Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto and Montreal.
• Travellers who receive a negative result from the test they took on arrival can leave the GAA to
complete the remainder of the mandatory 14-day quarantine period at their final place of quarantine or
at a federal designated quarantine facility if they do not have a suitable quarantine plan.
• Exempting fully-vaccinated Canadian citizens, permanent residents, persons registered under
the Indian Act and fully-vaccinated Foreign Nationals who are not prohibited from entering Canada from
the mandatory government-authorized hotel stay is a cautious first step on the path to easing border
measures.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the RCMP and provincial and municipal law
enforcement agencies to verify compliance with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order.
• Compliance verification visits by a third party contractor are now underway in all provinces.
• Officials provide information handouts at the border, and contact travellers throughout their
isolation or quarantine period to remind them of the requirements.
• If travellers cannot be reached, or appear non-compliant with isolation or quarantine
requirements, they are referred to local law enforcement for follow-up.
• Failure to comply with the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order is an offence
under the Quarantine Act. Penalties could include up to six months in prison and/or $750,000 in fines.
Effective June 4, 2021, the fine for non-compliance with most border measures implemented under the
Quarantine Act will increase from $3,000 to $5,000 to reinforce the ongoing seriousness of the
pandemic and to deter non-compliance with the current border measures.
• Violating other measures in the Quarantine Act, including exposing another person to serious
disease, can lead to up to three years in prison and/or $1 million in fines.
• The Government is engaging local police to urgently follow-up on cases of individual travellers
who leave the airport and do not comply with testing and quarantine measures. Travellers who refuse to
comply could face a fine of at least $5,000.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE NUMBERS
• Overall, travel volumes have decreased by 96% when compared to this time last year.
• As of June 7, 2021, more than 2,200 contravention tickets have been issued and 16 individuals
have been charged under the Quarantine Act.
• To date, over 299,000 travellers have received a compliance verification visit, and 48,253
referrals have been made to the RCMP as a result of these visits.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER PRESENCE
• Public Health Agency of Canada’s Designated Officers are present at 33 Canadian points of entry
that receive international travellers.
• All international air travel to Canada is being directed to one of four airports (Vancouver,
Calgary, Toronto, or Montreal).
• All of Canada’s points of entry will continue to have 24/7 access to support from the Public
Health Agency of Canada’s Quarantine Officers through the remote Central Notification System.
IF PRESSED ON TESTING AND QUARANTINE OF TEMPORARY FOREIGN WORKERS:
• The Government of Canada recognizes the essential role that temporary foreign workers (TFWs)
play in maintaining Canada’s food security and economy.
• Since February 22, 2021, asymptomatic TFWs are exempt from the requirement to await on-
arrival test results at a government- authorized accommodation, provided they are travelling to their
place of quarantine using private transportation, and travelling only with those who arrive in Canada
with them.
• The Government of Canada is working with provincial authorities to introduce tailored measures
that support the safe and timely arrival of TFWs, including allowing private charter flights to land in
airports that are close to the employers of TFWs.
• We are also, where needed and requested by the province, implementing alternative testing
protocols for these workers in the agriculture, agri-food and seafood sectors to ensure that each worker
is tested for COVID-19 as every other non-exempt traveller is required to do.
• These efforts are part of a government-wide approach to ensuring timely arrival of TFWs, while
maintaining public health objectives to prevent the introduction and spread of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON TESTING AND QUARANTINE EXEMPTIONS FOR CANADIANS TRAVELLING TO OTHER
COUNTRIES TO GET VACCINATED
• All travellers entering Canada, unless exempt, are required to comply with the Government of
Canada border testing and quarantine measures.
• Currently, there are several measures under the existing Order in Council to facilitate exemption
from pre-arrival testing, quarantine and post-arrival testing, including with written evidence from a
licenced healthcare practitioner.
IF PRESSED ON TESTING AND QUARANTINE REQUIREMENTS FOR TRAVELLERS ARRIVING IN PRIVATE
PLANES
• Since February 2021, Transport Canada has had in place a very strict Notice to Airmen (NOTAM)
that restricts all international commercial and charter flights from arriving into Canada outside of the 4
major airports of Montreal, Toronto, Calgary and Vancouver. This includes international private charter
and business aviation flights.
• Travellers arriving to these airports are subject to pre-departure, on- arrival, and post arrival
testing, and quarantine requirements, including a stay of up to three nights in a government-authorized
accommodation while they await the results of their on-arrival test.
• There are very few exceptions to the NOTAM, such as cargo flights, medevac operations, and
very small privately owned recreational aircraft that are not used for conducting business. However, the
Canada Border Services Agency still meets these excepted flights and provides test kits for days 1 and 8
to the travellers before they proceed to their suitable place of quarantine, as assessed by a quarantine
officer.
IF PRESSED ON RECOMMENDATIONS FROM THE COVID-19 TESTING AND SCREENING EXPERT ADVISORY
PANEL'S REPORT
• The Government of Canada appreciates the work of the Expert Advisory Panel and the
thoughtful analysis in its report.
• The Government will consider the Panel's recommendations as an important component in its
determination of how testing and quarantine strategies should evolve.
IF PRESSED ON THE LABOUR DISPUTE AT PACIFIC GATEWAY HOTEL
• On March 27, 2020, the Pacific Gateway Hotel was designated as a federal quarantine facility in
Vancouver. At that time, Public Health Agency of Canada officials met with hotel management and
employees to explain how they could safely support aspects of the quarantine operation. A number of
hotel staff continue to be employed by the hotel and support the operation.
• As with all of its quarantine facilities, the Government of Canada maintains ongoing engagement
with respective hotel management, confirming its operational needs are in accordance with contract
agreements, are supportive of the hotel industry and its employees, within the Government of Canada’s
mandate of ensuring safe and effective quarantine operations.
• The Government of Canada is unable to comment on ongoing labour issues between employees
and their employers.
BACKGROUND
The continued identification of new variants around the globe, with demonstrated increases in
transmissibility, has introduced new risks to manage.
Between February 3, 2020 and May 21, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 53 Emergency Orders
under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce risks from
other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce the
impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
On Arrival Testing, Mandatory Hotel Stays and Enhanced Quarantine
On January 29, 2021, the Government of Canada announced enhanced testing and quarantine
measures, in addition to the pre-departure testing requirement already in place. All air travellers to
Canada, with limited exceptions, will face additional costs, including a COVID-19 molecular test on
arrival, as well as a hotel stay when they return to Canada.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to
• submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan, electronically
via ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
• take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and
• take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
As of February 22, 2021, travellers arriving by air are required to reserve and stay in a government-
authorized accommodation (hotel) for up to three days, at their own cost, while they await the results of
the COVID-19 molecular test they took on arrival, before completing the rest of their mandatory 14-day
quarantine period.
On June 9, 2021, Ministers Hadju and Leblanc spoke to plans to begin easing some border measures
including Phase I of a phased approach to introduce certain exemptions for fully vaccinated travellers
who are already eligible to enter Canada.
The government will take a phased approach towards adjusting current border measures. As a first step
in this approach, the federal government will allow fully vaccinated Canadians, permanent residents and
Registered Indians, and other foreign nationals who are currently permitted to enter Canada, to do so
without the requirement to stay in government-authorized accommodations. Fully vaccinated
individuals are defined as having received the recommended dose of a Health Canada-accepted COVID-
19 vaccine at least 14 days prior to entering Canada. These individuals would still be required to have a
negative pre-departure molecular test, would be required to be tested upon arrival and quarantine until
they receive a negative arrival test result. They could then be released from quarantine requirements
upon receipt of that negative test result.
To promote travellers’ awareness and compliance with quarantine requirements, the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) is working with security companies to help complete compliance checks for
travellers arriving in Canada. Employees of these companies were trained by PHAC and authorized as
Screening Officers under the Quarantine Act. These Screening Officers will visit travellers’ quarantine
locations to establish contact, confirm identity and confirm that travellers are at the place of quarantine
they identified upon entry into Canada.
Travel Advisories
The Government of Canada’s current travel advice to all Canadians is to avoid all non-essential travel
outside of Canada (Level 3) and to avoid all cruise ship travel (Level 3). Although this travel advice is not
binding on Canadians choosing to travel abroad, some travel insurance providers no longer cover travel
booked on or after March 13, 2020, when these advisories came into effect. Canada’s Travel Health
Notice was updated on January 6, 2021 to reflect pre-departure testing requirements, and on April 22,
2021 to reflect suspension of entry for all incoming flights from India and Pakistan.
Emergency Orders
Currently, the three emergency orders - the prohibition of entry from the United States (U.S),
prohibition of entry from countries other than the U.S., and the quarantine, isolation, and other
obligations order, are in place until at least June 21, 2021.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and provincial partners to
facilitate commercial traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods and services, while continuing to
protect the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including
recreation and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with
some exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine ports,
and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers, including
quarantine officers, at 33 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
Testing is available on site at 16 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of March 4, 2021. At land
ports of entry with no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provided two take-home test
swabs kits to every traveller.
Security at Designated Quarantine Facilities
PHAC has enhanced our security presence at DQFs and has developed and enhanced policies and
procedures, and increased training to staff to prevent some escalating situations and emergency
protocols. We continue our efforts to engage Police of Jurisdiction.
Government of Canada employees and security personnel are stationed at designated quarantine
facilities to ensure secured, controlled and monitored entry and exit points. All travellers who must stay
in one of these facilities are provided with information that articulates the details of the quarantine
requirement, including a code of conduct and potential fines for non-compliant behaviour.
On Canadians Travelling to other Countries to get Vaccinated
There are liability considerations that need to be addressed with Canadians receiving vaccine outside of
Canada. Health Canada is examining these issues particularly with respect to any arrangements that
might be considered for cross border shipment of vaccines, or cross border movement for the purpose
of receiving a vaccine.
On Temporary Foreign Workers
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has been working with federal and provincial partners to
facilitate the entry, testing and quarantine of Temporary Foreign Workers (TFWs) in Canada who work in
the agriculture and agri-food, fish and seafood sector.
PHAC works closely with Employment and Social Development Canada, Agriculture and Agri- Food
Canada and Service Canada to ensure that every TFW entering Canada has a complete welcome package
that includes information on testing and quarantine, and knows what to do to meet their quarantine
requirements.
Where a province or territory wants to take on the responsibility to conduct the day 8 testing, PHAC has
worked to develop alternative testing protocols in these jurisdictions, meaning that for workers destined
for smaller provinces, where airports, in general, are not operating, so that the risk of contracting and
transmitting COVID-19 are minimized.
Enforcement
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement to ensure that travellers are abiding by the requirement
to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where compliance cannot be confirmed, PHAC
refers these travellers to the contracted security firms to verify compliance by way of an on-site
compliance visit with the travelers. Personnel with these companies are trained and designated under
the Quarantine Act as Screening Officers. In addition, PHAC refers travelers to the RCMP for compliance
follow-up by local police. Maximum penalties for failing to comply with an order under the Quarantine
Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation and Other Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or
imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to people who do not comply with the Quarantine
Act, with fines of up to $5,000 for different Quarantine Act offences (this does not apply in AB, SK and
the territories, as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the contraventions regime).
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person, while willfully
or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be liable for a fine of up to $1
million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
In addition to the Quarantine Act, individuals can also be subject to fines under Transport Canada’s
Aeronautics Act for non-compliance in relation to mandatory requirements prior to boarding a flight to
Canada.
BORDER MEASURES – UNITED STATES
SYNOPSIS
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put in place successive border measures in response to
COVID-19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What is the Government doing to protect Canadians at the Canada/United States border?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has established robust border measures, including quarantine and travel restrictions as
well as pre-departure testing for travellers to Canada.
• U.S. citizens are permitted to travel directly from the United States to Alaska and vice-versa for
non-discretionary purposes, such as going for work, and returning home.
• Some U.S. citizens are also permitted to enter Canada for legitimate work purposes, including to
provide an essential service, or for compassionate reasons, as specified under the Orders in Council.
• U.S. citizens should not be taking the opportunity to travel within Canada for personal or
discretionary reasons. This is an enforceable offence, with monetary penalties.
IF PRESSED ON LAND ARRIVALS
• As of February 15, 2021, all travellers arriving to Canada by land, with some exceptions, are
required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in the United States within
72 hours of pre-arrival, or a positive test taken 14 to 90 days prior to arrival.
• Fully-vaccinated travellers arriving by air or land, will continue to be required to complete the
mandatory pre and on-arrival testing. However, they will now be permitted to leave quarantine upon
receipt of a negative result from their on-arrival COVID-19 test, rather than after 14 days. These
travellers will not be required to complete a day-8 test.
• We continue to collaborate with partners in the United States to strengthen our border
measures and keep our countries safe.
• As evidence changes and the situation evolves, the Government of Canada will continue to
consider easing border measures to keep Canadians safe and the economy running.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINATED TRAVELLERS/SNOWBIRDS RETURNING TO CANADA
• At this time, proof of vaccination will not replace other border measures, including the
requirement to provide proof of a COVID- 19 test result. Individuals who have been vaccinated are still
required to quarantine on entry to Canada.
• A vaccine protects an individual from illness, but we need more evidence to understand if a
vaccinated person can still transmit the virus.
IF PRESSED ON TRAVEL TO THE U.S. FOR HEALTH CARE
• We recognize that quarantine requirements have a significant impact on Canadians who have
just received essential medical services or treatment outside of Canada.
• Persons who receive essential medical services in another country are now exempt from pre-
arrival and pre-departure testing, testing on arrival, and mandatory quarantine requirements, provided
certain conditions are met. These include a requirement for a licensed health care practitioner indicating
that the medical services are essential.
• Additionally, the Chief Public Health Officer has issued an exemption for asymptomatic Canadian
citizens, permanent residents, or persons with status under the Indian Act who accompany a dependent
child, or an asymptomatic person requiring assistance, in accessing the essential medical services or
treatment.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S APPROACH TO EASING OF BORDER MEASURES
• The Government of Canada continues to strongly advise Canadians to avoid all non-essential
travel to mitigate the further introduction and transmission of COVID-19, and its variants, into Canada.
• As vaccination progresses throughout the country, the Government of Canada’s approach to
easing of border requirements will remain science and risk-based, and closely tied to important public
health measures.
• The first phase of easing Canada’s border measures will begin with allowing travellers who are
fully vaccinated and who are currently allowed to enter Canada to do so without the requirement to
stay in government-authorized accommodations.
• To meet the definition of fully-vaccinated, a traveller must have received the full dosage for a
vaccine series accepted by Health Canada. The last dosage must have been administered at least 14 days
prior to entering Canada. Vaccines accepted by the Government of Canada do not have to have been
administered while in Canada to be accepted.
• The traveller can receive their vaccine in any country and the list of vaccines could expand in the
future.
• These travellers are still required to have a pre-departure and on- arrival molecular test, and
quarantine until they receive a negative arrival test result.
• As evidence changes and the situation evolves, the Government of Canada will continue to work
with provinces and territories to consider further targeted restrictions at the borders – and when to lift
or adjust them - to keep Canadians safe.
BACKGROUND
Between February 3, 2020 and May 21, 2021, the Governor in Council has made 53 Emergency Orders
under the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce risks from
other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the border to reduce the
impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
• Foreign nationals entering from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including
recreation and/or tourism purposes;
• Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than the U.S., with
some exceptions, such as those delivering essential services; and
• Foreign nationals entering from any country with signs or symptoms of respiratory illness.
As of February 15, 2021, travellers five years of age and over entering at Canada’s land ports of entry,
unless exempted, are required to provide proof of a negative COVID-19 molecular test result taken in
the United States within 72 hours before their arrival at the border, or proof of a positive COVID-19 test
conducted between 14 and 90 days prior to arrival (similar to the existing requirement for pre-departure
testing for air travellers).
As of February 22, 2021, all travellers, with limited exceptions, whether arriving by air or land, are
required to
• submit their travel and contact information, including a suitable quarantine plan, electronically
via ArriveCAN before boarding their flight or crossing the border;
• take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival; and
• take a COVID-19 molecular test later during their quarantine.
On June 9, 2021, Ministers Hadju and Leblanc spoke to plans to begin easing some border measures
including Phase I of a phased approach to introduce certain exemptions for fully vaccinated travellers
who are already eligible to enter Canada.
Fully vaccinated individuals are defined as having received the recommended dose of a Health Canada-
accepted COVID-19 vaccine at least 14 days prior to entering Canada. These individuals would still be
required to have a negative pre-departure molecular test, would be required to be tested upon arrival
and quarantine until they receive a negative arrival test result. They could then be released from
quarantine requirements upon receipt of that negative test result.
Testing is available on site at 5 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of February 22, 2021.This
service will be available as of March 4, 2021 at another 11 land ports of entry. At land ports of entry with
no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provide two take- home test swabs kits to every
traveller.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including food and medical
supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) is working with other
federal partners to share information with commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that
commercial traffic is not impeded.
Border Presence
Canada has 117 land border points of entry, 12 large international airports, 4 commercial marine ports,
and 3 rail stations. PHAC has increased the physical presence of its designated officers, including
quarantine officers, at 33 points of entry across Canada, including major land borders.
Testing is available on site at 16 of Canada’s busiest land ports of entry as of March 4, 2021. At land
ports of entry with no on-site testing capacity, Border Services Officers will provided two take-home test
swabs kits to every traveller.
U.S. PROPOSAL TO ALLOW BULK IMPORTS OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS FROM CANADA
SYNOPSIS
• On November 30, 2020, the United States rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs came
into effect. This rule creates a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers to import in bulk
certain prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market. The rule could worsen the existing
problem of drug shortages in Canada and put the health of Canadians at risk.
• The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on
November 27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help prevent bulk importation
programs, such as the one recently established by the U.S., from causing or exacerbating a drug
shortage in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to safeguard Canada’s drug supply from U.S. bulk importation
schemes?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue to have access to the medicines they need is a top priority for
our Government.
• This is why, on November 27, 2020, I signed an interim order prohibiting certain drugs intended
for the Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of Canada, if that sale could cause or
exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
• Canada’s drug market is too small to meet the demand for prescription drugs of both Canadian
and American consumers.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FOR CANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased drug prices for Canadians. The
Government of Canada is committed to improving Canadians access to, and the affordability of,
necessary prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with
key partners to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• This interim order respects international trade rules, and is not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributes to
millions of jobs in both countries and to increased North American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
IF PRESSED ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE U.S. IMPORTATION PROGRAMS
• We are aware that two proposals for State importation programs have been submitted to the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA). However, these proposals have not yet been approved and
there are no bulk importation programs running at this time.
• We are aware that the U.S. pharmaceutical industry is currently challenging the U.S. rule in
court. We are monitoring the proceedings and will consider the impact of the decision when the
outcome becomes known.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with the U.S. to understand its implementation
plans and to mitigate any risks to the health and safety of Canadians posed by the U.S. rule.
• Drug establishment licence holders who violate the terms of the interim order may be subject to
enforcement actions, which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or
the suspension or cancellation of the licence.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On November 30, 2020, the U.S. rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs came into effect. The rule
creates a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state- sponsored
program approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA), to import in bulk certain
prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be FDA- and
HPFB-approved drugs labeled for sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The Canadian
seller must be licensed by Health Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a provincial authority, and
must also be registered with the FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import request to the FDA at
least 30 days in advance of product entry and arrival into the U.S. The program allows only a direct
supply chain of one manufacturer, one Canadian seller and one importer for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk.
On March 9, 2020, the Government of Canada submitted comments during the U.S. consultation
process to publicly document Canada’s opposition to the proposed rule, given that it is not deemed to
be an effective solution to high drug prices in the U.S. and that it could exacerbate drug shortages in
Canada. The comments also made it clear that the Government of Canada will take the necessary
measures to safeguard Canada’s drug supply.
President Biden has indicated support for importation programs as a solution to high drug pricing in the
U.S. On May 28, 2021, the Biden administration submitted a court filing to dismiss a lawsuit challenging
the U.S. rule from the industry group Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America (PhRMA).
The request was made on the basis that there is too much uncertainty about if and when the
importation programs would be approved or implemented.
States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription drugs
from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have already
enacted legislation to authorize such a program, and 15 other states have similar legislation in progress.
As of June 2021, Florida and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services for review and approval. There is no timeline for when a
decision will be made about the proposals. However, Florida has already identified a Canadian
wholesaler and a vendor to manage its importation program, if approved.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. Large industry players, representing 90-95% of pharmaceutical distribution in
Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this program. However, there is the
potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any industry uptake could have an impact
on the Canadian drug supply.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
The Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply) was made on November
27, 2020. This interim order introduces new measures to help ensure that bulk importation programs,
such as the one recently established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage in Canada.
Under the interim order, certain drugs intended for the Canadian market are prohibited from being sold
for consumption outside of Canada if that sale could cause or worsen a drug shortage.
The interim order also authorizes the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or
drug establishment licence holder (DEL) that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate
an existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not in the scope of the interim order.
Health Canada will administer this interim order through compliance promotion, monitoring, and
verification activities. DEL holders who violate the terms of the Interim Order may be subject to
enforcement actions, which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or
the suspension or cancellation of the DEL.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure Canadians are not forced to pay out-
of-pocket for the medical services they need?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• While the COVID-19 pandemic continues to disrupt the lives of Canadians at an unprecedented
level, our universal health care system has been an enduring source of comfort.
• The Minister of Health takes her responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK AND ONTARIO…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services (NB and ON)
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of
surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service – two in
Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who received these services at the private
clinic in Fredericton were required to pay out-of-pocket. NB was the last province with a private
abortion clinic where the province refused to provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act (CHA) and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. The lack
of coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995,
without resolution.
When the Canada Health Act Annual Report 2019-2020 was tabled in Parliament in February 2021, some
media reports indicated Health Canada planned to levy a penalty of approximately $140K in March
2021. In fact, that was the deduction, which was levied in March 2020. The penalty levied against New
Brunswick in March 2021 was $64,850.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charged patients facility fees when
accessing insured surgical abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage
for physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees
in the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has
been clear with ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA,
and based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied
against the province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and ON are working together to
ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. The Budget proposed $45 million
over three years to fund community-based organizations that help make sexual and reproductive health
care information and services more accessible for vulnerable populations.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, including a deduction
of $4521.29 in March 2021, these amounts have been reimbursed as the province has successfully
eliminated the charges.
Charter Challenge in British Columbia (BC)
On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of BC released its decision in Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC
(Attorney General), which dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of BC’s Medicare Protection
Act and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private insurance for publicly
insured health care services. The decision is being appealed and will be heard in the BC Court of Appeal
June 14-18, 2021. Canada is participating in the appeal.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
While the elimination of patient charges in BC has been hindered by an injunction related to the Charter
challenge, the province has continued to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address these
charges. In March 2021, British Columbia's CHT payment was reduced by $13,949,979 for patient
charges at private surgical clinics. To date, Health Canada has authorized a partial reimbursement of
BC’s March 2019, March 2020, and March 2021, deductions for a total of $24,598,418 in recognition of
efforts taken by the province to address and eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy, which came into effect on April 1, 2020, is aimed at eliminating patient
charges for medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the
long-standing federal position that medically necessary diagnostic services are insured services,
regardless of the venue where the services are delivered.
Provinces and territories were given nearly two years’ notice that the Diagnostic Services Policy was
coming into effect, to give them time to align their health care systems with its requirements. Under the
Policy, provinces and territories will be expected to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Seven provinces currently allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic
services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
CHEMICALS MANAGEMENT
BUDGET 2021
The Chemicals Management Plan is a comprehensive Government of Canada strategy to protect human
health and the environment from harmful chemical substances. It continues to be supported by
industry, health and environmental groups. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada proposes
to provide $296 million in new funding over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support the renewal of
the Chemicals Management Plan.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How will the funding announced in the Budget better protect Canadians from harmful
chemicals?
QUESTION POTENTIELLE
• Comment le financement annoncé dans le budget protégera-t-il mieux les Canadiens contre les
produits chimiques nocifs?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to protecting all Canadians from the risks that harmful chemicals
pose to their health and to the environment.
• This investment will allow the Government of Canada to continue implementing the Chemicals
Management Plan to help protect the health of Canadians and their environment from the risks of
chemical substances.
• Under this plan, the Government of Canada has addressed the risks of thousands of chemical
substances over the past 15 years.
• We will continue working with other leading jurisdictions to monitor international trends and
focus our efforts on key risks to Canadians.
BACKGROUND
• Jointly delivered by Environment and Climate Change Canada and Health Canada, the Chemcials
Management Plan uses authorities under various federal Acts, including the
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA), the Pest Control Products Act, the Canada
Consumer Product Safety Act, and the Food and Drugs Act to help manage the risks of substances found
to be harmful to health or the environment.
Budget 2021
• Budget 2021 announced new funding of $296 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to
fund the renewal of the Chemicals Management Plan. This funding will support the continued
implementation of the Chemicals Management Plan to help protect the health of Canadians and their
environment from the risks of chemical substances.
• To maximize our investment, we will also work with other leading jurisdictions to monitor
international trends to further reduce risks to Canadians.
Assessing and Managing Priority Chemicals
• As of March 31, 2021, the Government has assessed and, where appropriate, managed the risks
of almost 4,000 chemicals used in consumer products, cosmetics, and industrial applications in Canada.
Since 2006, the Government has also conducted pre-market assessments of approximately 6,500 new
substances prior to their introduction to commerce in Canada.
• Where there have been risks to Canadians, we have taken action to protect human health and
the environment. Almost 500 control measures have been put in place to control the harmful effects of
chemicals under CMP.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has used agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID-19 clinical
trials and the review of COVID-19 vaccine and treatment submissions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has Health Canada done to facilitate and expedite access to COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of applications for
COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and submissions for authorization, while maintaining its high standards
for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• These measures have allowed us to authorize several clinical trials in Canada for COVID-19
vaccines, as well as the Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF APPROVAL
• The vaccines were reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September 2020, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety,
effectiveness and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submissions depends on the outcomes of the
companies’ ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes
for Canadian supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of June 2021, over 100 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for sale in
Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that
these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
Authorizing products
The Interim Order Respecting the Importation, Sale and Advertising of Drugs for Use in Relation to
COVID-19 created a mechanism for the expedited review of treatments, while ensuring that a high level
of scientific scrutiny is maintained.
The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and vaccines
for Canadians in four ways:
• authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements
• authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority
• allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related indications
that were not in the original authorization; and,
• permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada, if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety, efficacy and
quality.
In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate action,
including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required, to
protect the health and safety of Canadians.
As of June 2021, 16 submissions have been received under the interim order – including 9 treatments
and 7 vaccines. Five of these vaccines and two treatments have been authorized and one submission has
been withdrawn. The others remain under review.
Clinical Trials
Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new vaccine are both safe and effective in human
beings, and Health Canada is also facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada, using the
Interim Order respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs related to COVID-19, which was
issued in May 2020.
The IO introduces regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical trials to take place
more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient participation across the country. The IO
helps to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtaining patient consent in light of COVID-19 realities;
• broaden the criteria for qualified health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator
duties at remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinical trial
authorization.
Clinical trial applications are being reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
CLINICAL TRIAL FUND & X
BUDGET 2021:
$250 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to
implement a new Clinical Trials Fund & $250 million over four years, starting in 2021-22, for the federal
research granting councils to create a new tri-council biomedical research fund.
KEY MESSAGES
• In order to grow Canada’s bio-manufacturing sector, Budget 2021 proposes to invest a total of
$2.2 billion over 7 years into multiple initiatives.
• As part of this investment, $250M will be used to create a new Clinical Trials Fund, managed by
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, which will support research teams and infrastructure across
the country to conduct clinical trials.
• These trials will test new drugs, treatments, and interventions to prevent, detect, treat or
manage various diseases or medical conditions.
• In addition, $250M will be allocated to create a Tri-Council Biomedical Research Fund.
• This new fund will support bio-innovation-related research that straddles the health and natural
sciences and connects these efforts to industrial and health system partners to enhance key bio-
innovation capabilities.
• These important investments will stimulate innovation in the country and ultimately lead to
better health care systems and services for all Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Randomized controlled trials (RCTs) are considered the highest level of therapeutic evidence (i.e., the
gold-standard), enhanced by systematic reviews of similar trials, when available. The current global
pandemic has reinforced the vital importance of clinical trials, with research being fast-tracked to assess
the efficacy and safety of clinical candidate interventions to treat, diagnose and prevent COVID-19.
With $250M to establish the Clinical Trial Fund, CIHR will develop and implement an initiative that will
support clinical trials research projects through competitive funding opportunities while also training
highly qualified personnel (HQP) in trials research who can direct the conception, design and
implementation of controlled trials. CIHR will also develop a Network of clinical trials networks to
provide coordination and collaboration infrastructure for clinical trials activities across the country.
With $250M to establish the Tri-Council Biomedical Research Fund, CIHR will work with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) to support inter- disciplinary bio-innovation
research projects undertaken in collaboration with industrial and public health partners. It will integrate
the expertise and insights of the natural sciences and the health sciences, and link collaborating
researchers with partners who can commercialize and apply research results.
CANADA’S PARTICIPATION IN THE COVAX FACILITY
SYNOPSIS
• Canada is a strong supporter of the COVID-19 Vaccine Global Access (COVAX) Facility, a global
procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and timely access to COVID-19 vaccines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why is Canada participating in the COVAX Facility?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism that will help deliver fair, equitable, and
timely access to COVID-19 vaccines for participating economies.
• In September 2020, the Government of Canada committed approximately $220 million to the
Facility to procure up to 15 million vaccine doses for Canadians.
• Canada has received 972 thousand doses of AstraZeneca through COVAX.
• During the G7 Leaders Summit in Carbis Bay on June 11-13, G7 leaders announced a collective
commitment of more than 2 billion doses to be shared with the world. Canada’s portion of that is 100
million.
• Canada’s $1.3 billion contribution to the ACT Accelerator, as part of the $2.5 billion that we have
contributed to the global fight against the virus, is helping provide 87 million vaccine doses to
developing countries.
• We are also donating 13 million doses, procured by Canada, to other countries through COVAX.
• Some of these initial doses are expected to be available right away to address urgent needs
experienced around the world, with more doses becoming available for distribution later this year.
• This commitment of 13 million doses represents an initial contribution. Commitments to
redirect additional excess doses internationally will be made as our domestic supply continues to ramp
up and more and more Canadians are vaccinated.
IF PRESSED FOR THE BREAK DOWN OF DOSES CANADA IS SHARING
• Canada is sharing approximately 4.1 million AstraZeneca doses, 1.4 million Janssen/J&J doses,
and 7.4 million Novavax doses.
• The Janssen/J&J and AstraZeneca vaccines have each already received approval through the
World Health Organization Emergency Use Listing process and been approved by Health Canada.
• These vaccines have logistical advantages compared to mRNA vaccines and are already being
rolled out in many countries around the world.
• Novavax is currently in a phase 3 clinical trial and under review by Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN RECIPIENTS WILL RECEIVE THIS DONATION
• Some of these initial doses are expected to be available right away to address urgent needs
experienced around the world, with more doses becoming available for distribution later this year.
• The deployment schedule is dependent on the agreement between the COVAX Facility and its
partner organizations, manufacturers, and recipient countries.
• No doses sit idle - they will be deployed to recipient countries as soon as possible.
IF PRESSED ON WHY CANADA IS SHARING DOSES BEFORE OUR POPULATION IS FULLY VACCINATED
• Canada is determined to make progress toward vaccinating everyone in Canada who is eligible,
while playing its part to ensure that the rest of the world has access to safe and effective COVID- 19
vaccines.
• Canada’s vaccine supply is increasing. Canada will soon be in a situation with sufficient vaccine
supply thanks to the success of so many of the vaccine candidates that we purchased.
• Redirecting doses we don’t need from Canada’s vaccine supply in a way that supports global
public health, economic and health equity goals can help bring us closer to the end of this pandemic.
• Continued global spread of COVID-19 continues to threaten the health and safety of Canadians.
Sharing our vaccine supply so that other countries can vaccinate their most at-risk populations will help
mitigate this risk and protect Canadians. No one is safe until everyone is safe.
IF PRESSED ON WHY CANADA RECIEVED DOSES THROUGH COVAX
• The COVAX Facility is a global procurement mechanism to support the development and
equitable distribution of safe, effective and accessible COVID-19 vaccines for all participating
economies–both high-income and developing.
• Canada has contributed $545 million to ensure that COVAX is able to procure and deliver
vaccine doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare workers and high risk populations, in
low and lower middle income countries as soon as possible.
• With this support, the COVAX Facility is delivering vaccine doses to the world. This is a major win
for us all.
• In an effort to secure a diverse portfolio of vaccine candidates for Canadians, and as part of its
vaccine options chosen via COVAX, Canada selected the AstraZeneca vaccine candidate prior to having a
supply arrangement with the manufacturer.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE NATIONALISM
• Canada is committed to global collaboration to end this pandemic. We have contributed $545
million to secure and deploy COVID-19 vaccine doses for the COVAX Advanced Market Commitment
(AMC) for 92 low- and middle-income countries.
• The COVAX Facility is designed to provide timely access to vaccines for all participants, using an
equitable allocation framework to share scarce doses across countries so that all participants achieve a
measure of protection.
• To complement Canada’s participation in COVAX, we have secured bilateral agreements,
recognizing that the Facility is not designed to provide full coverage for any participants’ population.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SURPLUS VACCINE DOSES
• This commitment of 13M doses represents an initial contribution. Commitments to redirect
additional excess doses internationally will be made as our domestic supply continues to ramp up and
more and more Canadians are vaccinated.
• Canada will share doses via the COVAX Facility to ensure efficient distribution and to maximize
impact.
• Canada is pleased to have provided funding (up to $5 million Canadian) to the COVAX Facility to
design and implement the dose sharing mechanism that is now serving as the platform for countries
committing to share doses via COVAX.
• Canada will continue to look for ways to reinforce the COVAX Facility’s ability to respond to
global demands to end the acute phase of the pandemic.
BACKGROUND
COVAX Overview
• The COVAX Facility is a global pooled procurement mechanism for COVID-19 vaccines designed
to foster equitable global vaccine access to help end the acute phase of the pandemic. It is co-led by
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI), and the World
Health Organization (WHO). The COVAX Facility is aiming to develop an actively managed portfolio of
around 10 vaccine candidates to secure 2 billion vaccine doses for the world by the end of 2021.
• Canada has committed approximately $220 million to the COVAX Facility to procure up to 15
million vaccine doses for people in Canada. Canada is also contributing $545 million to ensure that
COVAX is able to procure and deliver vaccine doses to priority populations, and in particular healthcare
workers and high-risk populations, in low- and lower-middle income countries as soon as possible.
Securing doses for Canadians
• Canada’s participation in COVAX is through an ‘optional purchase model’, providing flexibility to
ensure that any doses obtained through COVAX are well-aligned with doses obtained through bilateral
agreements. Canada’s Vaccine Task Force has been engaged to provide advice on which vaccines Canada
should select.
• On February 26, 2021, COVAX confirmed that Canada would receive 1,624,800 doses of
AstraZeneca’s COVID-19 vaccine as its initial COVAX allocation. Canada received 972,000 of these doses
and will donate the balance of doses available to it through COVAX, approximately 13 million doses total
across the AstraZeneca, Novavax and J&J vaccines.
• These doses would come in addition to the 2 million doses Canada has secured through an
agreement with Verity Pharmaceuticals Inc./Serum Institute of India and the 20 million doses Canada
secured through an advance purchase agreement directly with AstraZeneca.
Bilateral Advance Purchase Agreements
• The Government has already announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven
leading vaccine candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca (as well as the Verity
Pharmaceutical Inc./Serum Institute of India version of the AstraZeneca vaccine),
Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson & Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
• The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on it successfully completing clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
COVID-19 Response Funding for CFIA to Address Disruptions in Food Production and Supply
Budget 2021:
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is committed to protecting the health and well-being of
Canada’s people, environment, and economy, through safeguarding its food, animal and plant resource
base.
• Budget 2021 provides $20M in 2021-22 to continue to respond to the unprecedented impacts of
COVID-19 on Canada’s food production and supply chain.
• This will also allow the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to maintain reliable inspection services
paramount to ensuring that Canadians have continued access to safe, high-quality food to feed their
families.
SYNOPSIS
• The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic significantly disrupted the Canadian food supply- chain by
forcing a shutdown in many slaughterhouses and meat processing plants, and pushing consumers to
panic-buy meat in fear of a shortage.
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) took immediate and decisive action to protect the
integrity of Canada’s food supply by prioritizing inspections. Inspection coverage for meat slaughter /
processing facilities surfaced as a key issue early on, and CFIA received $20M in emergency funding to
hire and train new inspectors, equip them with appropriate inspection tools and procure personal
protective equipment (PPE).
• CFIA inspectors are essential for enforcing federal standards for the safe, humane slaughter of
food animals, the mitigation of health and food safety risks associated with the slaughter or processing
of meat products, and for export certification. Without adequate capacity to deliver inspection services,
trade may be compromised and Canadians could be exposed to increased risk from the food supply.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why does the Canadian Food Inspection Agency require additional funding of $20 million this
year, now that we are a year into the pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada’s investment demonstrates its commitment to supporting Canada’s
food safety system.
• The funds will enable the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to retain inspectors hired on a term
basis in fiscal 2020-2021 as surge capacity.
• By preserving trained and qualified staff, the Agency will be positioned to respond to
unpredictable staff shortages due to the pandemic and will be able to continue to deliver inspections at
establishments that require regular Agency oversight.
IF PRESSED…
• These investments will maximize Canada’s ability to operate one of the most modern and
effective food safety systems in the world.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) is committed to protecting the health and well- being of
Canada’s people, environment, and economy, through safeguarding its animal and plant resource base.
The CFIA continuously works to improve its response to current and emerging risks while supporting
innovation and building for the future.
The onset of the COVID-19 pandemic significantly disrupted the Canadian food supply-chain by forcing a
shutdown in many slaughterhouses and meat processing plants, and pushing consumers to panic-buy
meat in fear of a shortage. CFIA took immediate and decisive action to protect the integrity of Canada’s
food supply by prioritizing inspections. Inspection coverage for meat slaughter / processing facilities
surfaced as a key issue early on, and CFIA received $20M in emergency funding to hire and train new
inspectors, equip them with appropriate inspection tools and procure personal protective equipment
(PPE).
As sectors continue to operate through this prolonged period of uncertainty, unpredictable demands for
inspection and veterinarian services continue – particularly in the meat sector.
To maintain required inspection capacity in meat slaughter and processing facilities in light of the
COVID-19 resurgence and to ensure continued access to a safe, reliable food supply for Canadians, this
investment will enable the CFIA to retain the inspectors hired during the initial phase of the pandemic
for an additional year. Due to the unprecedented impacts of COVID-19 on the food supply chain, CFIA
must remain responsive to unpredictable levels of demand for meat inspection services. Without
adequate surge capacity, there is a high risk that inspections could be delayed due to a lack of qualified
personnel, which could severely inhibit the production and distribution of safe and high-quality goods
across Canada, directly impacting the availability of food.
CFIA is committed to maintaining critical inspection services and putting in place plans to deliver these
critical services in the event of a reduced number of inspectors. There are currently 775 federally
registered meat establishments in Canada. CFIA is maintaining the appropriate number of inspectors in
these establishments, and working closely with establishments to determine what capacity is required
to ensure food safety and prevent pressures on the meat supply. CFIA is also diligently monitoring
outbreaks at meat-processing establishments to protect its inspectors and inform its safety protocols.
CFIA inspection services for the meat sector remain in high demand in order for slaughter / meat
processing facilities to demonstrate that they fulfill the necessary regulatory requirements to remain
operational. CFIA is committed to maintaining critical inspection services and putting in place plans to
best meet evolving industry needs. Without continued investment in CFIA’s surge capacity, there is a risk
that the availability of food could be directly impacted.
For example, 85% of Canada’s total beef supply was produced domestically in 2019. Canadian retailers
are therefore mostly reliant on domestic beef supply, suggesting that the supply shortage at the start of
lockdown measures in March can be attributed mainly to disruptions in domestic facilities. Furthermore,
suppliers had difficulty supplying the retail and food-service industries during lockdown resulting in per-
customer limits on meat products being introduced in some retailers.
COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force (CITF) to measure how widely
the COVID-19 virus has spread in Canada as a whole and in high risk subgroups, including long-term care
facilities, and among occupational groups such as healthcare workers. The CITF is supporting studies
that monitor vaccine safety and effectiveness and duration of immunity for key questions that have
been identified by the Vaccine Surveillance Reference Group and the National Advisory Committee on
Immunization.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
Why did the Government of Canada establish an Immunity Task Force?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada established the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force to determine how
widespread COVID-19 infection is in the Canadian population, with a $300 million investment for this
work over two years.
• The Task Force supports public health action by monitoring levels of immunity in the population.
• As vaccination increases, the Task Force is providing data on trends in immunity and on the gaps
that need attention to protect Canadians with vaccinations.
• They are also supporting work to assess the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines to
help guide vaccination programs.
• This illustrates how the government is mobilizing Canada’s experts to accelerate evidence on
vaccination.
IF PRESSED
• The membership of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force includes scientific experts and
researchers, along with partners from provincial and territorial Ministries of Health.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is administering funding to support the studies
recommended by the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force and the Vaccine Surveillance Reference Group in
consultation with the National Advisory Committee on Immunization.
• Statistics Canada and Canadian Blood Donor organizations are contributing to the efforts of the
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force activities through nation-wide seroprevalence surveys.
• Studies of groups at higher risk of infection, such as health care workers, the elderly in Long
Term Care Facilities, children in schools, and inmates in correctional facilities will help us determine the
immunity levels and effect of vaccination in these vulnerable populations.
BACKGROUND
Serology Levels in Canada
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of large numbers of
people provide the data needed to understand the scale of infection in the Canadian population.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific groups can help to
direct proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or even disease- preventing
therapies should they become available, and inform targeted surveillance efforts to contain and stop
further outbreaks. Canadian Blood Services, Statistics Canada and Héma-Québec are conducting ongoing
studies to assess antibody levels from donor blood in all 10 provinces.
The Task Force website hosts a web portal called “Sero-Tracker”, which summarises serological studies
from around the world. Other organisations across the country are all actively contributing their testing
results to the larger national data.
To date, results from the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force funded studies and other initiatives indicate
that the levels of immunity in the general population in Canada are still very low, which is comparable to
data from other countries.
Government Initiatives
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19 serology surveillance and
targeted research studies, has been established to catalyze, support, and harmonize the design and
rapid implementation of population-based studies that will generate reliable first estimates of SARS-
CoV-2 immunity, overall and in vulnerable and unique populations across Canada.
The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force reflects key agencies of the Government of
Canada and includes representation from several provincial Ministries of Health as well as experts from
across Canada in matters related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology, infectious diseases,
public health, and clinical medicine.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force website provides details of activities and findings, connects and
engages scientists within Canada and globally, and links with CanCOVID Network, a platform mandated
by Canada’s Chief Science Advisor to expedite communication and collaboration between the scientific,
healthcare and policy communities during the COVID-19 pandemic.
With the deployment of authorized COVID-19 vaccines, the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force and its
secretariat are supporting a program of work to advance studies of vaccine safety and effectiveness. The
Vaccine Surveillance Reference Group was established in January 2021 for this purpose as a
collaboration among the COVID-19 Immunity Task force, the Canadian Immunization Research Network
and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization.
COVID-19 VARIANTS OF CONCERN
SYNOPSIS
Several COVID-19 variants of concern have emerged internationally. As of June 8, 2021, the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is aware of four variants of concern present in Canada: the B.1.1.7
variant (Alpha), the B.1.351 variant (Beta), the P.1 variant (Gamma), and the B.1.617.2 variant (Delta).
PHAC, in collaboration with international partners, continues to closely monitor COVID-19 variants.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the Government of Canada monitoring and addressing emerging COVID-19 variants?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is closely monitoring emerging COVID-19 variants of
concern.
• We are aware of COVID-19 variants of concern circulating internationally, four of which have
been identified in Canada: B.1.1.7 (Alpha), B.1.351 (Beta), P.1 (Gamma), and B.1.617.2 (Delta).
• We are participating in international efforts, including with partners at the World Health
Organization, to develop a standardized approach to assessing and grading COVID-19 variants.
Reference frameworks continue to be refined as we build the knowledge base and better understand
the COVID-19 variants and their potential implications.
• There is no conclusive evidence that the variants of concern identified in Canada to date impact
testing devices used in Canada.
• The public health measures we have been practicing continue to be effective in preventing the
spread of COVID-19, including the variants of concern.
• We are aware that vaccine manufacturers are investigating the impacts of these variants of
concern on their vaccines.
• Surveillance and research are ongoing, and we will continue to communicate information to
Canadians as our knowledge develops.
IF PRESSED ON VARIANTS…
• All viruses mutate over time, and the virus that causes COVID-19 will also naturally mutate (i.e.,
change the genetic material in the virus).
• Most genetic mutations have little to no impact on the characteristics of the virus. Scientists
monitor changes to viruses so that if a significant mutation is identified, we can adapt and respond to
limit its spread.
• “Variants of concern” are viruses that have a confirmed impact on the characteristics of the
virus.
• A variant is “of concern” when it is associated with:
o Increased disease spread;
o Increased disease severity;
o Decreased effectiveness of vaccines, treatments, diagnostics, or public health measures.
• The variant of concern Alpha is the predominant variant of concern circulating in Canada.
Monitoring of variants of concern Beta, Gamma and Delta is ongoing.
• We are closely monitoring a number of additional variants of COVID-19. Scientists in Canada and
around the world are evaluating these variants and their key mutations; until these assessments are
made, these are currently categorized as “variants of interest” rather than variants of concern.
IF PRESSED ON LABORATORY / RESEARCH WORK…
• In April 2020, the Government of Canada contributed $40 million to support the creation of the
Canadian COVID-19 Genomics Network to help understand the genetic variations of the COVID-19 virus
as it evolves.
• On February 12, the Government of Canada announced an investment of $53 million in an
integrated Variants of Concern Strategy to increase our capacity to find and track variants of concern.
• To implement the Strategy:
o The National Microbiology Lab is providing $20 million, and the Canadian COVID-19 Genomics
Network is providing $8 million, to increase genomic sequencing and real-time data sharing capacity.
o The Canadian Institutes of Health Research is also providing up to $25 million to increase our
understanding of emerging variants and provide decision makers with rapid guidance for drug therapy,
vaccine effectiveness, and other public health strategies.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada is closely monitoring genetic variation of the SARS-CoV-2 virus. The
Canadian and global medical, public health and research communities are actively evaluating these
genetic changes to better understand the potential implications in terms of transmission, clinical
presentation and vaccine and therapeutics development.
Monitoring genetic variations combined with interprovincial and international spread of the virus will
become increasingly important as public health measures are gradually lifted and cross- border travel
resumes. Variants of COVID-19 are important to monitor for patterns of transmission (for example, in
different age groups), if more severe outcomes are observed, if diagnostic tests can detect the variants,
and whether vaccines and therapeutics will continue to be effective.
A detailed characterization of genetic variations can also help researchers to:
• understand the viral and host mechanisms leading to disease and recovery;
• understand how it spreads through populations and other potential hosts; and
• help identify suitable drug and vaccine targets.
To date, we are aware of several COVID-19 variants circulating internationally including variants of
concern Alpha (B.1.1.7), Beta (B.1.351), Gamma (P.1), and Delta (B.1.617.2). As of June 8, 2021, the
B.1.1.7 variant has been reported in 144 countries, the B.1.351 variant has been confirmed in 108
countries, the P.1 variant has been identified in 59 countries, and the B.1.617.2 variant has been
identified in 69 countries.
In Canada, as of June 8, 2021, the B.1.1.7 variant has been identified in all Canadian provinces and
territories; the B.1.351 variant has been identified in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia; and the P.1
variant has been identified in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, Québec,
Newfoundland and Labrador, New Brunswick, and Nova Scotia. Increased numbers of cases of VOC in
Canada are primarily driven by the B.1.1.7 and P.1 variants. Identification and reporting of cases of the
B.1.617.2 variant is increasing across Canada following designation of this variant as a VOC in Canada on
May 12, 2021.
PROTECTING THE ROLLOUT OF CANADA’S COVID-19 IMMUNIZATION PLAN AGAINST CYBERSECURITY
THREATS
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is working to protect the rollout of Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan
against cybersecurity threats.
KEY MESSAGES
• The urgent need to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic has created a global environment of
competition for vaccines and resources.
• In this context of uncertainty, hostile actors can be expected to attempt to steal vaccine
research, interfere with the integrity of vaccine supply chains, and spread disinformation in an effort to
destabilize and divide.
• Cybersecurity threats are also a concern with key partners such as the United States and the
United Kingdom. This is an issue affecting every major actor responding to the pandemic.
• The Government of Canada takes these threats very seriously.
• Embedded in the Agency’s National Operations Centre, Canadian Armed Forces logistics experts
are fully aware of the threats posed by hostile cyber activities. They are in communication with cyber
experts from Communications Security Establishment Canada as well as other partners in the security
community to monitor the cyber landscape.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada remains dedicated to delivering vaccines safely and securely
to destinations throughout Canada.
• Canadians can help fight disinformation and other cyber threats by consulting reliable sources
for their news and information, such as the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security website.
BACKGROUND
The Canadian health sector is considered a key critical infrastructure that needs to be protected against
disruptions, whether caused by national disasters or hostile activities. It includes research and
development; intellectual property; digital networks and health data; supply chain and distribution;
pharmaceutical drugs (such as therapeutics and vaccines); medical and protective equipment; and
healthcare buildings and infrastructure.
The concept of critical infrastructure refers to processes, systems, facilities, technologies, networks,
assets, and services essential to the health, safety, security or economic well-being of Canadians.
Disruption of critical infrastructure could result in catastrophic loss of life, adverse economic effects, and
significant harm to public confidence.
In the context of the pandemic, hostile actors can be expected to attempt to steal vaccine research,
interfere with the integrity of vaccine supply chains, and spread disinformation in an effort to destabilize
and divide. Social media platforms and readily available cyber tools enable hostile actors to broaden the
scale, speed, range, and impact of their interference activities.
American and British intelligence agencies have publicly expressed concerns about hostile activities
targeting COVID-19 vaccine research. The European Medicines Agency reports being targeted by
malicious cyber activity, and private information technology companies are witnessing similar online
hostile activities.
A community of practice around cyber security has been established within the health sector. It brings
together over 100 stakeholders on a weekly basis with the objective of enhancing our collective
resilience. As part of this forum, Communications Security Establishment Canada shares the latest cyber
threat information, including sensitive information drawn from the latest intelligence available.
As another example of many federal government efforts, last summer, Public Safety Canada, in
partnership with the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security and the Public Health Agency of Canada,
developed the Canadian Cyber Security Tool. This tool enables health sector organizations to perform an
easy self-assessment to identify areas for improvement in their cyber security posture.
DAILY SHIFT INSPECTION PRESENCE
BUDGET 2021:
• Canada’s food safety system is recognized internationally as one of the best in the world.
• Budget 2021 provided $33M over two years, in order to maintain the Daily Shift Inspection
Presence program in all federally licenced meat processing establishments.
• This will help to meet the United States inspection frequency requirement and ensure that
Canada has continued access to its primary meat export markets.
SYNOPSIS
• Daily shift inspection presence (DSIP) was instituted in Canadian meat processing plants in 2010
after a United States (US) audit in 2009 determined that, although the food safety systems were
deemed equivalent, Canadian meat processing plants did not meet the US requirement for inspection.
• DSIP is a prescriptive requirement found in US legislation, i.e., an inspector must visit each meat
processing plant every day, in order to comply with the regulation. Canada implemented DSIP in order
to maintain access to the American market for Canadian meat processors.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why is inspection presence required daily in federally licenced meat processing plants?
KEY MESSAGES
• Federal inspection presence is required during each operating shift to maintain access of
Canadian meat to the United States (US) market. This has significant benefits for the Canadian economy.
• While there may be some differences in the inspection procedures of each country, the meat
inspection systems of both countries are similar and both countries have earned reputations as world
leaders in food safety.
• Canadian Food Inspection Agency inspectors are present on a daily basis in federally-licenced
meat slaughter and processing establishments.
• Investing in these activities creates a strong foundation upon which trade relationships can
grow, bolsters confidence in the Canadian system by both Canadian consumers and other countries, and
fosters an environment conducive to increased exports in the economic recovery to come.
• This funding underpins the Budget 2017 announcement that set an ambitious target to grow
agri-food exports to at least $75 billion by 2025.
BACKGROUND
• Budget 2021 provided $33M over two years, in order to maintain the Daily Shift Inspection
Presence (DSIP) program in all federally licenced meat processing establishments to meet the United
States (U.S.) inspection frequency requirement and maintain market access.
• This program will have positive social and economic impacts as it will contribute to maintaining
the confidence of Canadian consumers and international trading partners in Canadian meat products.
• U.S. meat processors and all countries exporting meat products to the U.S. must comply with
the U.S. Federal Meat Inspection Act of 1906 and related regulations. It requires an inspector to oversee
operations in a meat processing establishment on a daily shift basis, defined by the U.S. as at least once
every 12 hours of operation.
• In 2009, the United States Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service
conducted an audit that found the frequency of inspections in Canada's federally licenced meat
processing plants was not equivalent to the frequency of inspections in American plants.
• In response to these findings, Canada adopted a daily shift inspection presence in plants
exporting meat products to the U.S. in order to meet their standards and maintain access to the U.S.
market.
• CFIA receives funding for the DSIP program, at federally licenced meat processing plants.
• The United States Department of Agriculture, Food Safety and Inspection Service (USDA-FSIS)
conducts regular audits of the Canadian meat inspection system to ensure that Canada continues to
maintain a food safety system for meat and poultry that is equivalent to that of the U.S.
• Examples of meat processing activities that require daily inspection presence include boning,
cutting, slicing, grinding, injecting, pumping, adding ingredients through other mechanical means,
formulating or assembling meat components of meat products. If these establishments did not have
daily inspection presence, they would be unable to export their products to the U.S., which is their most
significant market for processed meat products.
• DSIP provides establishments with market access to countries that impose import conditions
relating to the daily inspection presence of a government official (e.g., European Union, China,
Singapore) similar to U.S. requirements. The program therefore facilitates market access, which
contributes to trade growth.
• The meat processing sector supports the Canadian economy. In 2019, it accounted for the
largest share of employment (22%) in the food and beverage processing industry. In 2019, food and
beverage processing accounted for 16.5% of total manufacturing GDP, ($33.2B of $201.2B).
• In 2019 meat exports to the U.S. represented $4.0B; about half of Canada’s global meat exports
($8.0B). Given the size of the U.S. market, Canada needs to continue to demonstrate its ability to
maintain an equivalent meat inspection system with that of the U.S.
DENTAL CARE
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with Parliament on its study of national
dental care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• My mandate letter highlights this Government’s desire to work with Parliament to study and
analyze the possibility of national dental care.
• Dental care is only one aspect of our commitment to improving health care for Canadians. The
2019 Speech from the Throne committed to work with provinces and territories to address health needs
arising from the pandemic, but also to improve access to primary care, set standards for long-term care,
address the opioid epidemic and implement pharmacare for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-62 FEDERAL DENTAL CARE PLAN
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and Minister of Health Mandate Letter both committed to
support Parliament in studying and analyzing the possibility of a national dental care program.
• The results of this work by Parliament would be helpful for determining the best approach for
identifying gaps, improving access to dental care, and determining a federal role in this area. The
Government looks forward to the outcomes of Parliamentary work on this issue.
BACKGROUND
• The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health both
committed the Government to work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of national
dental care. The 2020 Speech from the Throne is silent on this issue.
• In February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) agreed to
undertake a study on the development of a national dental care program, although the study never
began during the last session. On October 26, 2020, New Democratic Party Member of Parliament Don
Davies introduced a motion that HESA undertake a study on the development of a national dental care
program as an insured service for Canadians. Health Canada remains ready to support a study by the
Committee, should it decide again to undertake that work.
• On February 22, 2021, Motion M-62 – Federal Dental Care Plan was placed on the Order of
Precedence was introduced by the New Democratic Party. The Motion proposes: “That, in the opinion of
the House, the government should establish a federal dental care plan as soon as possible for Canadian
families earning less than $90,000 per year who are not covered by a dental care plan, as an interim
measure toward the inclusion of full dental care in Canada’s health care system.” The Motion’s first hour
of debate occurred on May 4, 2021. The second hour of debate has not yet occurred.
• In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental
care program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated
that this program would cost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3
billion to clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually
through 2024-25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year,
and decrease to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
• During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified inequality and
wasted spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care avoidance due to cost results in
preventable oral health emergency room spending. The NDP planned to address this issue through a
national, income-based “Denticare” plan that would have provided free care for households earning
under $70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between $70,000 and
$90,000.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental
services in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was
publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans.
• Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care
for all residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select
services for groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
• Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for services
not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental services to Canadian
Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries, and some veterans and refugee claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of Canada’s
employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in 2020-21,
which is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not including the
value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income tax system
provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical
expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
• Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
DIABETES
SYNOPSIS
• Diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or
when the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Uncontrolled or undiagnosed diabetes can
lead to serious complications and premature death. Those who have diabetes can take steps to control
the disease and lower the risk of complications. Canadians living with diabetes may be at greater risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our top priority is to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Our Government recognizes
the impact diabetes has on the health of Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic and beyond.
• Our Government invests in research, prevention and early detection of diabetes. In fiscal year
2018–2019 alone, our Government invested over $48 million in diabetes research through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research.
• We are also supporting community-based initiatives that aim to help Canadians reduce their risk
for chronic diseases, including diabetes, by promoting physical activity, healthy eating, and tobacco
prevention and cessation.
• Budget 2021 proposes to invest $35 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, to support
diabetes research, surveillance and prevention, including the development of a national framework for
diabetes, and a Diabetes Challenge Prize.
BACKGROUND
Approximately 3.2 million Canadians are living with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year. Some Canadians, such as men, First Nations and Métis people, people of African
and South Asian ethnic backgrounds, and people with lower income and education levels have higher
rates of type 2 diabetes compared to the general population. Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating
and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and negative diabetes-related health
outcomes. Evidence demonstrates that there is an increased risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19
(both hospitalization and mortality) among Canadians with diabetes, those who are obese, and those
who do not meet physical activity guidelines. COVID-19 is also having a disproportionate impact on
specific sub-groups of the population, many of whom are at greater risk of suffering from the health,
social and economic effects of the pandemic.
Government of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collection and analysis of chronic diseases
and their risk and protective factors, strengthens collaborations to better track disease trends and risks,
and supports the development of prevention guidelines for primary care.
PHAC is also supporting community-based initiatives through the Healthy Canadians and Communities
Fund, which invests approximately $20 million annually and leverages additional funding to promote
physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco prevention/cessation.
To help Canadians identify their risk of diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC developed CANRISK,
the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible to Canadians through partnerships with
Diabetes Canada, Loblaws, and others.
From 2014-15 to 2018-19, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), invested approximately $229 million in diabetes research.
This year (2021) marks the 100th anniversary of the discovery of insulin at the University of Toronto, by
the Canadian scientist, Dr. Frederick Banting. The Government of Canada is working with stakeholders to
celebrate this significant milestone. For example, in addition to a new Partnership to Defeat Diabetes
with JDRF, CIHR recently launched an initiative with key partners to celebrate the 100th anniversary of
the discovery of insulin.
On April 14, 2021, the World Health Organization and the Government of Canada co-hosted the Global
Diabetes Summit, with the support of the University of Toronto. The Summit commemorated the 100th
anniversary of the discovery of insulin at the University of Toronto, and aimed to increase political and
public awareness and action to address the global burden of diabetes.
Budget 2021 proposes to invest $25 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for diabetes research
(both Type 1 and Type 2), surveillance and prevention, and to work towards the development of a
national framework for diabetes. This framework will be developed in consultation with provinces and
territories, Indigenous groups and stakeholders, and will help to support improved access to prevention
and treatment, as well as better health outcomes for Canadians.
Budget 2021 also proposes to invest $10 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for a new Diabetes
Challenge Prize. This initiative will help surface novel approaches to diabetes prevention and promote
the development and testing of new interventions to reduce the risks associated with Type 2 diabetes.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) released its report on its study of diabetes
strategies. It was re-tabled in the House on April 13, 2021. The Government Response to this report is
expected to be tabled in Parliament by August 2021.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173) designating the month of November as
Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal – Ontario) introduced Bill C-237,
which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with stakeholders, to develop a national
framework designed to support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better
health outcomes for Canadians. The Government announced its support during the second hour of
debate in March 2021. The Bill received unanimous support from the House of Commons on June 2,
2021 and has been sent to the Senate for consideration.
Digital Supports and Virtual Care
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety
throughout the pandemic.
• Digital tools play an important role in Canada’s COVID response and help provide Canadians
with up-to-date information and valuable resources, like alerts, and enhancing access to services to
support mental health and well-being.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide in 2021-22, $9 million to ensure the continued availability of
federal digital tools and $62 million for the Wellness Together Canada portal to continue to provide
services to support the mental health and well-being of Canadians.
SYNOPSIS
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada put in place a range of
digital supports to help Canadians get the information, resources and care they need. In May 2020,
$240.5 million was committed to support Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches. Of this, $200M is supporting work in health
systems to expand deployment of virtual care. Funding also helped launch a suite of digital tools,
including an online self-assessment tool, a mobile app to provide trusted information and resources and
an online portal for access to mental health and wellness supports. Budget 2021 proposes to provide in
2021-22, an additional $9 million to ensure the continued availability of federal digital tools and $62
million for the Wellness Together Canada portal to continue to provide services to support the mental
health and well-being of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the resources they need
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians need access to readily available digital tools and resources to help during the COVID-
19 pandemic and as we move into recovery, including education, information, mental health and
substance use supports, and alerts.
• The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories, vendors
and stakeholders to make these tools widely available to Canadians and their families during the
pandemic.
• In May 2020 the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health systems meet
health care needs through virtual approaches and digital tools.
• This investment will support virtual care services so that Canadians can safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-conferencing, to have their health needs met.
It also means they can continue to access specialist services throughout this time of uncertainty.
• As well, through this investment we implemented important digital health tools, including:
o A mobile app called “Canada COVID-19,” which provided reliable information and resources to
Canadians early on in the pandemic, when there were limited sources of information;
o Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of virtual mental health and substance use
supports available through the Canada COVID-19 app and Canada.ca website.
• The funding proposed in Budget 2021 will ensure the ongoing availability and adaptation of
federal digital tools to meet the needs of Canadians as the pandemic evolves.
IF PRESSED ON THE WIND DOWN OF THE CANADA COVID APP
• As the COVID-19 pandemic has evolved, so has the Government of Canada’s response and that
of the provinces and territories.
• The Canada COVID 19 app and self-assessment tool launched early in the pandemic to provide
Canadians with vital information about COVID when there was little information available.
• Since then, the federal government has developed a range of COVID-related information
resources and tools to support Canadians, including COVID Trends and COVID Alert.
• Provinces and territories have also put in place their own self- assessment tools, websites and
other digital tools that deliver information related to COVID risks and public health measures at the
regional or local level.
• With these alternative sources of information and the evolving needs of Canadians, the Canada
COVID-19 app’s use has declined significantly.
• Accordingly, the Canada COVID-19 app and self-assessment tool will no longer be available as of
June 30, 2021.
• The retirement of the Canada COVID-19 app will not impact COVID Alert, which is a completely
separate app. Canadians are encouraged to download and continue to use the COVID Alert app as
provinces and territories implement reopening plans.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
• Over the last 15 months, the Government of Canada has been working with provinces and
territories to support the rapid uptake and use of virtual care services.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada will help reduce the pressure on health
systems and provide Canadians with needed health services and authoritative information in a safe and
secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-conferencing, in addition to face-to-face visits.
• As of the end of May 2021, our government has signed and announced 8 agreements and
continues work to finalize the remaining bilateral agreements with provinces and territories, which will
provide a total of $150M to support enhancements to virtual care.
• In addition, we are providing up to $50M to Canada Health Infoway to develop pan-Canadian
standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing, and provide support to provinces and territories
to implement virtual care initiatives.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
• Privacy considerations were – and continue to be – front and centre at every stage of these
initiatives.
• Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve
personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 has created stress and anxiety for many
Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access to their regular support networks.
• That is why the Government launched an online portal for mental health and substance use
supports: Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for individuals living in Canada to access
self-directed tools and find credible information on mental health and substance use issues.
• It also connects individuals living in Canada to peer support workers, social workers,
psychologists and other professionals for confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online counselling.
• The $62 million proposed in Budget 2021 will ensure that these valuable services continue to be
available and aligned with the needs of Canadians in 2021-22.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL PLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
• Our government recognizes that the past 15 months have been unprecedented for Canadians.
• We will continue to work closely with provinces and territories and other partners to evaluate
needs and adapt digital supports as the pandemic evolves and as we move into recovery
• Health Canada continues monitor the WTC portal by supporting data collection, reporting and
evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
• On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools
for Canadians. As agreements are finalized and announced, they will be posted on Canada.ca.
• Of this, funding of $150M is flowing to PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to
virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient
monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end supports to integrate these tools within
existing digital systems.
• In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards
on secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant
to the bilateral agreements. To date, Infoway has led consultations on standards with all jurisdictions,
with a view of identifying key priorities and informing the standards development process.
• Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure. As part of this work, Health Canada is supporting key
organizations (Infoway, CIHI, CADTH, Centre for Digital Health Evaluation) in leading a cost-benefit
analysis of virtual care.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020 – June 20, 2021)
• Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, this
tool has been available to all Canadians through the Canada.ca website and the Canada COVID-19 app
since its release in March 2020. The self-assessment tool has provided guidance to over 1.6 million
Canadians.
• However, all provinces and territories have now put in place similar tools and/or guidance which
are helping to direct Canadians to local information and resources for COVID.
• Given that there is no longer a need for the federal COVID-19 Self-Assessment Tool, it will be
formally retired on June 20, 2021.
• The Government of Canada continues to support Canadians to access needed information and
resources on COVID, including through COVID Alert and the Wellness Together Canada portal for mental
health.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020 – June 30, 2021)
• Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app has provided an
integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and engage on issues related to
COVID-19. Since its release in March 2020, nearly 1 million people have downloaded the app.
• The Canada COVID-19 app was one of the first digital tools introduced by the Government of
Canada in response to COVID-19. It has helped Canadians access trusted resources, such as the federal
self-assessment tool and to remain up to date about COVID-19.
As the pandemic has evolved so to have the needs of Canadians. The use of the Canada COVID-19 app
has declined as Canadians turn to more localized and region-specific sources of reliable information. For
example, provincial and territorial websites dedicated to COVID-19 now offer localized information and
guidance to keep residents safe and informed of risks in their immediate vicinities.
• Given changing information needs of Canadians, the increase of more region-specific sources of
information and the decline in the use of the Canada COVID-19 app, this app will be retired on June 30,
2021.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April 15, 2020)
• Wellness Together Canada is a free online portal for virtual mental health and substance use
supports, available 24/7 in all provinces and territories in both official languages. It is available online at
https://ca.portal.gs/
• Depending on their needs, individuals living in Canada can access different levels of support,
ranging from information and self-assessment tools to connecting to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for confidential text sessions or phone calls. It also
provides individuals living in Canada the opportunity to assess their mental health and monitor their
progress as they engage in their chosen care option.
• Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and connect users to
credible and appropriate promotion and prevention resources. They also help with determining the level
of need as well as self-managing mental health and substance use issues.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources promote mental health
as well as prevent poor mental health, mental illness and problematic substance use. These will focus on
enhancing protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and social networks) and addressing
risk factors (e.g., substance use, social isolation, discrimination and stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential triage support, chat sessions,
phone calls and online counselling with peer support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals.
• These supports complement, and do not replace, existing provincial and territorial services. Use
of Wellness Together Canada is closely monitored to ensure that tools and supports best align with the
needs of Canadians. New resources are continuously added to the portal to support Canadians in
addressing diverse mental health and substance use needs.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
• The Government of Canada put in place an opt-in email subscription service called “Get Updates
on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to those Canadians who would like to be alerted to
updates on the COVID-19 situation in Canada.
CovidTrends through the WeatherCAN app
• CovidTrends, a tool from the Public Health Agency of Canada is available through Environment
and Climate Change Canada’s WeatherCAN app and provides Canadians with summary data about
COVID-19 that is specific to their area.
Health Canada continues to explore other digital tools with a view to providing Canadians with the
information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic.
DRUG SHORTAGES
SYNOPSIS
• The onset of COVID-19 created global supply chain challenges and increased demand for drugs
used in supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly in the context of COVID-19
critical drugs, pose a risk to the health of Canadians.
• Health Canada collaborated with partners and took action early in the pandemic to supplement
existing supply and in certain cases avoid critical drug shortages. While some pressures still exist, the
supply and demand levels for many drugs are stabilizing.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is
continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with key supply chain players to mitigate impacts
of any drug shortages.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does not create drug
shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for the Government
of Canada.
• Significant efforts were made early in the pandemic to respond to drug supply disruptions. As a
result, the supply situation for many key drugs has been stabilizing.
• I have signed four Interim Orders to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages related to
COVID-19 and to safeguard supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to help
prevent and minimize the impact of shortages.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES…
• Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the impact of any drug shortages
related to COVID-19.
• Through this work, we have been able to secure additional supplies of needed drugs for Canada.
For example, we have worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of
drugs such as muscle relaxants, inhalers, and sedatives to support COVID-19 patients.
• While the supply and demand situation for many critical drugs is stabilizing, the need for
vigilance continues. As of June 8, 2021, we have been able to de-escalate 34 shortages from critical
status, out of a total of 51 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
Active monitoring continues and we will apply the lessons learned throughout the pandemic to
strengthen our response going forward.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL SHORTAGES OF ARTHRITIS DRUGS USED TO TREAT COVID-19 PATIENTS
(Tocilizumab)
• The Government of Canada is taking steps to ensure Canadians have access to promising, safe
and effective COVID-19 therapies, which are essential to saving lives, reducing suffering and alleviating
the burden on health systems.
• The Government of Canada has secured access to some additional supplies of key drugs being
used to treat COVID-19 patients, including drugs also used to treat arthritis such as Tocilizumab, to help
protect supplies for all patients who rely on these drugs. These drugs are being directed to where they
are needed most in Canada and are making a difference.
• The Government of Canada will continue to closely monitor supplies of all drugs being used to
treat COVID-19 patients, and will take action with our partners to help mitigate the impact of any
shortages.
IF PRESSED ON THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE…
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada has established a
COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve.
• Based on Canada’s experience to date, analyses, discussions with provinces and territories, as
well as the advice of health care experts, the Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals
to support patients with COVID-19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular
blockers.
• The Critical Drug Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drug shortage
management efforts, and is a safety that has augmented the supply of key drugs used in treating
patients with COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE POTENTIAL FOR SUPPLY DISRUPTIONS AS A RESULT OF THE SITUATION IN INDIA…
• Early outreach by Health Canada to Market Authorization Holders did not uncover signals of
imminent shortages likely to result from the situation in India.
• Health Canada is continuing to work with its partners, including key industry associations, to
closely monitor the situation in India for any signals of drug supply disruptions and will take action to
help prevent and mitigate any potential shortages as required.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care
professionals, and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages where possible and minimize their
impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring
collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors, practitioners, and the
federal government. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and
territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may
include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repeals and replaces the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 that the Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention and Alleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to COVID-
19
This interim order, made by the Minister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduces new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allows the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allows the Minister to impose or amend terms and conditions
on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduces new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
such as the one recently established by the United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in
Canada. The interim order also enables the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could
help Health Canada take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Drug Shortages
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of years, capacity
has been built up across governments, leading to a more coordinated and effective approach to mitigate
the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages, and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocating supply where it is needed most.
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve has been established, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives,
muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
EVOLUTION OF COVID-19 SCIENCE
SYNOPSIS
• The Public Health Agency of Canada recognizes the continually evolving evidence and
understanding related to COVID-19, and develops guidance and recommendations based on the best
evidence, Canadian and global experiences and public health practices.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How does the federal government evaluate emerging scientific evidence related to the COVID-
19 pandemic, and how does it decide when to change guidance provided to Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s response efforts to COVID-19 continue to be guided by the latest science, evidence
and research through a collaborative effort from federal, provincial and territorial governments and
international partners.
• Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 will also evolve and be informed by new
scientific evidence, global data, expert opinion, experiences of other countries and analysis of what
would work best in Canada.
• Provinces and territories also develop guidance for their own jurisdictions which may differ,
reflecting regional circumstances in response to the pandemic.
• When we determine that a body of evidence has gained sufficient credibility, is relevant in the
Canadian context, and is accepted by the scientific community and Canadian public health experts, we
update our advice and guidance as quickly as possible, often in collaboration with provinces and
territories.
• The Government of Canada has developed funding programs to support the scientific research
needed to fill current knowledge and infrastructure gaps in Canada.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, and around the world, researchers are actively investigating all aspects of the novel
coronavirus, SARS-CoV-2, causing COVID-19. Although our knowledge of COVID-19 is continually
growing, it is incomplete, and we will keep learning more as the science continues to evolve. Canada’s
public health advice will continue to be informed by and guided by science, which will help ensure the
health and safety of the Canadian population in the face of this unprecedented pandemic.
PHAC has organised a network of experts who closely follow the emerging scientific literature and the
experiences of jurisdictions to understand what is known about COVID-19. The evolution of knowledge
and pandemic experience is used to continually shape the COVID-19 response. Surveillance systems
have been developed to monitor the pandemic. Expertise across the agency has worked to develop
testing capacity, to model how COVID-19 may spread and evaluate the impact of public health measures
on the pandemic, to develop guidance for public health measures, infection prevention and control and
mass vaccination based on the most recent information.
PHAC is an active participant in a number of expert groups and has developed strong linkages with FPT
partners and academia to harness the collective knowledge and experience most relevant to the
Canadian context. Canada’s guidance is developed and revised based on analysis of COVID-19 evidence,
global data, experiences of other countries and analysis of what will work best in Canada. Provincial and
territorial partners may also develop their own guidance which may differ depending on the specific
circumstances of the jurisdiction. There are dedicated scientists, epidemiologists and public health
experts across PHAC that are routinely scanning and assessing scientific data from around the world, to
assess its quality, relevance to Canada, and potential impact on guidance related to COVID-19.
PHAC liaises with international partners, including the World Health Organization (WHO). PHAC is an
active member of many WHO expert committees that are continually working to incorporate the newest
evidence and data in recommendations to public health decision-makers.
Evidence is a central component to Canada’s pandemic response. Thus Canada’s research and scientific
communities have been mobilized to advance research and technology development. Since March 2020,
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has moved quickly in collaboration with key partners
to invest more than $200 million in almost 400 research projects, which includes over 128 international
collaborations, focusing on a diverse array of topics including vaccines, therapeutics, and transmission
dynamics.
Furthermore, CIHR, in partnership with Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), is leveraging the existing
Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) to address the COVID-19 pandemic. CIRN has received
three directed grants to date. The first, for $997,683, is to coordinate the collection and analysis of
epidemiological and laboratory data to inform public health planning and decision making in regards to
Canada’s emergency response to COVID-19. The second provided $240,731 in funding for CIRN to
conduct research on the impact of legal frameworks on vaccination in Canada, which will help inform
the approach to potential COVID- 19 vaccines. The third, for $3.5 million, is to undertake urgent
research activities related to COVID-19 vaccine clinical trials and to provide vaccine-related research
outcomes that will inform effective, equitable and timely COVID-19 public health decision-making.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Budget 2021:
Budget 2021 announced $601.3 million over five years to advance a new National Action Plan to End
Gender-Based Violence. This includes an investment of $50 million over five years to the Public Health
Agency of Canada to design and deliver public health interventions that promote safe relationships and
prevent family violence, including intimate partner violence, child maltreatment, and elder abuse.
SYNOPSIS
Family violence, including all forms of intimate partner violence, accounts for roughly 40% of violent
crime reported to police. The emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts of the COVID-19
pandemic create additional risks for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families.
KEY MESSAGES
• Gender-based violence, including family violence, is a serious public health issue that can have
lasting impacts on both the physical and mental health of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 announced $601.3 million over five years to advance a new National Action Plan to
End Gender-Based Violence. This includes an investment of $50 million over five years to the Public
Health Agency of Canada to design and deliver public health interventions that promote safe
relationships and prevent family violence, including intimate partner violence, child maltreatment, and
elder abuse.
• This funding builds on the prior government-wide investment of nearly $200 million over the
last five years to establish a Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government has announced new initiatives that can
help reduce the risk and impacts of family violence; including funding for Kids Help Phone, shelters and
sexual assault services, income support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable
organizations.
BACKGROUND
The consequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short and long-term mental
and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs. These can include: behavioural
problems in children; drug and alcohol use and attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and
lack of stable employment in adulthood; and, depression and financial problems in older adults. In
addition, spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The COVID-19 pandemic has created increased risks for the health and safety of many vulnerable
Canadians, as children and families face increased stress, and may have difficulty leaving abusive
relationships or accessing support or prevention programs. One-third of Canadians reported that they
were very or extremely concerned about family stress from confinement, and 8% of Canadians reported
that they were very or extremely concerned about the possibility of violence in Canadians homes.
New Government Initiatives, announced between March and October 2020, that will help address
pressures on vulnerable families in the context of COVID-19 include:
• $7.5 million investment to Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis support for
children and youth;
• $100 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
• multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and families,
including the enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence, PHAC is investing
more than $8 million per year ongoing to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child
maltreatment, and equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to survivors.
Supporting the Health of Survivors of Family Violence
In addition to these new investments to prevent gender-based violence, PHAC invests over
$6 million per year to support the health of survivors of family violence, through guidance and training
for professionals, and through the delivery and testing of health promotion interventions for survivors.
These projects are measuring their impact on health outcomes such as anxiety, depression and Post-
Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Budget 2021 announced $610.3 million over five years to advance a new National Action Plan to End
Gender-Based Violence. Of this new investment, PHAC will receive $50 million over five years ($27.9
million in existing funds, $22.1 million in new funds) to design and deliver public health interventions
that promote safe relationships and prevent family violence.
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative (FVI), which brings together 12 departments
and agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family violence. On behalf of the FVI, PHAC
hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a web-based source of current information on family
violence for health professionals and the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to supports and
services available in each province and territory.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health (SCMH)
PHAC is currently analyzing surveillance data to understand the unintended consequences of COVID-19
on concerns of violence in the family and parenting challenges. The analysis seeks to estimate the
prevalence of concerns of violence among the population in Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and
compare prevalence at different times during the pandemic, while also identifying those groups that
may potentially have a higher risk of these concerns than the general population.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family relationships
and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts surveillance on family violence; and supports analysis to
understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
FOOD SAFETY
BUDGET 2021:
• Budget 2021 provided the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with $31M over two years in
renewed funding to maintain strengthened food safety measures and continue work to modernize
Canada’s food safety system.
• This renewed funding will allow the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to target inspection
activities to high risk domestic and imported food and food products.
• It will also facilitate compliance with existing and future food safety requirements across the
food supply chain.
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has made key investments to enhance food safety in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Does the Canadian Food Inspection Agency have the resources it needs to deliver its food safety
mandate?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the best food safety systems in the world. The system became even stronger
on January 15, 2019, when the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations came into force.
• The regulations improve food safety prevention and the ability to remove unsafe food from
shelves. They apply to food produced in Canada for interprovincial trade and export, and to imported
food.
• Budget 2021 invested $31M over two years in renewed funding to allow the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency to continue to strengthen its risk management approach to food safety.
• The Budget 2021 funding will allow for improved risk targeting for both domestic and imported
foods, to guide preventive and targeted food safety activities, including offshore preventive activities
and promote awareness and understanding of Safe Food for Canadians Regulations regulatory
requirements through the “Ask CFIA” portal.
IF PRESSED ON COVID 19…
• There is currently no scientific evidence that food or food packaging is a source or transmitter of
the COVID-19 virus.
• There have been no reported cases of food or food packaging being associated with the
transmission of COVID-19.
• The government recommends that all Canadians continue to follow good hygiene practices
during food handling and preparation to prevent the spread of the virus.
BACKGROUND
All food sold in Canada is expected to be safe, and it is industry’s responsibility to produce safe food.
When there is reason to believe that a food is contaminated, or does not follow federal regulations, the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) initiates its process to investigate and recall product if
necessary.
The number of inspection staff changes due to seasonal requirements and is adjusted based on demand.
Inspection staff are hired and depart for various reasons throughout the year.
On April 14, 2020, the federal government announced $20 million to CFIA to support critical food
inspection in light of the COVID-19 pandemic. This investment has allowed CFIA to hire, train and equip
additional staff to conduct critical inspection activities, reassign staff from within the Agency to focus on
critical services, and work closer with industry and trading partners to minimize supply disruptions
during this crisis.
On January 22, 2021, the federal government announced $162.6 million for CFIA over the next 5 years,
and then $40 million per year of ongoing funding. These funds will augment CFIA's oversight and
surveillance capacity in its domestic programs by dedicating resources to areas of highest risk.
The investment is critical to alleviating the resource pressures CFIA is facing due to increased demand
and operational risks, which are a result of rapid growth in international trade, technology
developments, changing consumer preferences and new food safety threats.
As part of its normal business, CFIA has been undertaking a series of initiatives to improve inspection
delivery, achieve greater industry compliance with food safety requirements, and better protect
consumers.
The Safe Food for Canadians Regulations (SFCR), which came into force on January 15, 2019, are an
example of this Government’s commitment to strengthen an already strong food safety system. The
regulations apply to imported, exported or inter-provincially traded food.
The new rules are also consistent with international food safety standards, and strengthen Canada’s
food safety system, enable industry to innovate, and create greater market access opportunities for
Canadian food products exported abroad.
These regulations help Canadian food businesses continue to have access to trading partners like the
United States, which has already adopted similar regulations.
The CFIA has also established a Foreign Verification Office to verify the safety of food produced in other
countries for export to Canada when there is evidence of risk.
Budget 2021’s funding of $31M over two years will allow the CFIA to continue to strengthen its risk
management approach to food safety through improved understanding of the dynamic risk landscape,
both domestic and foreign, to guide preventive and targeted food safety activities. This will be achieved
through sustained oversight of stakeholder compliance in protecting Canada’s food supply and
improved offshore preventive activities for all exported and imported food products.
GLYPHOSATE
SYNOPSIS
• Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticide globally. Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) published its final re-evaluation decision document for pesticides containing
glyphosate, on April 28, 2017, allowing its continued use in Canada (marketed under brand names such
as Roundup and Vision). Several Notices of Objection (NoOs) were filed at the time, and following a
review of stakeholders’ concerns, the Department confirmed that issues raised in these NoOs were not
scientifically supported.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel was filed. On February 13,
2020, the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. This decision has been
subsequently appealed, along with a denied application for an NGO to intervene in the case. A hearing
date on the merits of these appeals has yet to be determined.
• Media and stakeholder interest in glyphosate remains high. It is the subject of class action
lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that have yet to be resolved. Much of the interest stems
from the hazard classification of glyphosate as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC). This concern was addressed by Health Canada in its final decision based on
an extensive risk assessment, which aligns with major pesticide regulatory bodies around the world.
• Public debate regarding the safety of glyphosate continues, with the tabling of a private
member’s bill to ban the use of glyphosate in Canada. There are also a number of Canadian
municipalities that have banned or are examining the issue of glyphosate use.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Given the dangers it poses, and the class action lawsuits in Canada, why is glyphosate still
approved for use?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions. Health Canada scientists regularly re-evaluate pesticides approved in Canada
to ensure they can be used safely and that human health and the environment are protected.
• We understand that Canadians have concerns about pesticides, and that is why we conducted
an extensive review of this chemical and of the issues raised during the Notice of Objection process.
• Health Canada concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions are followed.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S AWARENESS AND USE OF THE “MONSANTO PAPERS” IN THE REVIEW
OF GLYPHOSATE
• Health Canada scientists are aware of concerns raised in the media around the independence of
some scientific reviews of glyphosate.
• Health Canada scientists had access to all relevant data and information from the federal and
provincial governments, international regulatory agencies, published scientific reports and multiple
pesticide manufacturers. A total of 1368 peer-reviewed scientific papers were considered in the review.
IF PRESSED ON THE INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC)
• Health Canada took the International Agency for Research on Cancer findings into consideration,
but found that the level of exposure of Canadians to glyphosate does not cause any harmful effects,
including cancer.
• Health Canada’s finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority, the European
Chemicals Agency, the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. None of these pesticide regulatory authorities considers glyphosate
to be a cancer risk to humans when used according to the label.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN FOOD
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency shows levels found are not a cause for
concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE IN DRINKING WATER
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk of glyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosate was found not to be of
concern.
• Monitoring data from both surface and ground water sources were considered in this risk
assessment.
BACKGROUND
• Health Canada published its Re-evaluation Decision document for glyphosate on April 28, 2017.
The evaluation determined that glyphosate is unlikely to be genotoxic or carcinogenic. Health Canada
considered the findings of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) that glyphosate is
“probably carcinogenic to humans”, but did not alter the decision. It is important to note that the IARC
classification is a hazard classification and not a health risk assessment. This means that the level of
human exposure, which determines the actual risk, was not taken into account by IARC. Health Canada’s
finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
• In May 2017, eight Notices of Objection (NoO) to the glyphosate decision were filed with Health
Canada. On January 11, 2019, Health Canada scientists concluded that the concerns raised by the
objectors could not be scientifically supported when considering the entire body of relevant data.
Therefore, the final re-evaluation decision for glyphosate did not change. Health Canada published its
response to each notice of objection in the Public Registry.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in respect of part of the
glyphosate re-evaluation was filed on February 11, 2019 by two of the objectors. On February 13, 2020,
the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. One of the objectors appealed the
decision to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA) on March 13, 2020. On August 14, 2020, three NGOs
sought leave to intervene jointly in the appeal and the Court granted leave to intervene on October 7,
2020. In December 2020, a fourth NGO filed a motion with the Court seeking leave to intervene in the
appeal, which the Court denied on February 5, 2021. This NGO applied for leave to appeal the FCA’s
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) on April 7, 2021. Canada’s response will be due 30 days
from the SCC opening its file. A hearing date on the merits of the appeal has yet to be determined.
• A private member's bill to ban the use of glyphosate in Canada, was tabled in April of 2021 in
the House of Commons. Several municipalities continue to assess the use of glyphosate; the city of
Laval, Quebec has banned the use of the product.
• The European Commission renewed the authorization of glyphosate for five years starting in
December 2017. However, Luxembourg became the first EU country to completely ban products
containing glyphosate, effective December 31, 2020. France and Germany have announced their
intention to ban or severely restrict the use of glyphosate in the next few years. These plans are
contingent on alternatives to the uses of glyphosate being developed. Austria has notified the
Commission of its intention to ban glyphosate.
• The USEPA published an interim registration review decision in January 2020. The EPA uses
interim decisions to finalize enforceable mitigation measures. The EPA has concluded that there are no
risks of concern to human health when glyphosate is used according to the label and that it is not a
carcinogen. The EPA released a draft biological evaluation (endangered species assessment) for
glyphosate, in November of 2020. They are considering public comments before finalizing the decision.
• Mexico has announced that they will gradually reduce the use of glyphosate, towards a total
ban in 2024.
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
SYNOPSIS
In 2020, the Minister of Health announced the External Review Panel to examine the Public Health
Agency of Canada’s Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). On February 28, 2021, the Panel
provided the Minister with an interim report on its work, which was made available to the public on
March 20, 2021. The Minister of Health and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) received a final
version of the panel’s report at the end of May, and the Panel briefed the Minister on June 4. The report
is now undergoing final technical editing and formatting in order to be published online.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the Government of Canada doing to respond to concerns about Canada’s Global Public
Health Intelligence Network?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to scientific excellence, and I am committed to
improving Canada’s early warning system for potential emergencies – including pandemics.
• That is why, last year, I announced that the External Review Panel would undertake a review of
the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) at my request.
• The Panel’s final report was provided to me on May 28, 2021.
• The report is now undergoing final technical editing and formatting in order to be published
online.
• I am committed to addressing the recommendations in the report, as well as the
recommendations of the Auditor General, to further improve Canada’s early warning system that
informs public health action.
• Recommendations from both of these reports will help inform decisions and further
improvements to the Government of Canada’s public health intelligence and surveillance so that Canada
is well-positioned to detect and respond to future public health events.
IF PRESSED FOR DETAILS ON THE FINAL REPORT
• The final report provides recommendations that will be used to determine how this global
public health surveillance system can best serve Canadians and the international community.
• The External Panel has confirmed that GPHIN was not shut down. GPHIN provided early warning
of COVID-19 to Canadian public health professionals, and continues to operate as Canada’s event- based
public health surveillance system.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada fully supported the work of the External Review Panel by
connecting them with program staff and officials, and providing documents and information requested
by this Panel to complete their review and the final report.
IF PRESSED ON THE ISSUANCE OF ALERTS
• At the onset of the pandemic, GPHIN performed its key function of providing early warning
within Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to use GPHIN as Canada’s global event-based
surveillance system, relying on the full scope of its capabilities to provide early detection and warning of
potential public health threats.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public health agencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance. GPHIN requires a free subscription from eligible
users. GPHIN is an important contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic
Intelligence from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
• a professional multidisciplinary team of life science analysts conducting rapid risk assessments
to detect public health threats; and
• an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing
to facilitate the work of the analysts.
Every day, GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of, on average, 7,000 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese)
sourced from open event-based surveillance to validate and assess the data for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report published each morning. This report goes directly from GPHIN to
Canadian public health practitioners at the federal, provincial and territorial levels, including senior
management at PHAC and other government departments.
Independent Review of GPHIN
In August 2020, the Minister of Health requested an external review of the global public health
surveillance system. This review was established to consider:
• the capabilities and effectiveness of the existing system;
• the system’s role in detecting and informing the Public Health Agency of Canada’s response to
COVID-19 and in global and domestic public health surveillance;
• opportunities to improve the system; and
• the future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next generation
of intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of Canada is well
positioned to respond to future public health events.
Panel members, Margaret Bloodworth, Dr. Paul Gully, and Dr. Mylaine Breton, were selected based on
their expertise in public health, governance, health security, and intelligence.
On March 20, 2021, the External Review Panel’s interim report was made publicly accessible on the
Canada.ca website.
The interim report provides a comprehensive overview of GPHIN and clearly states that, while areas for
further improvement exist, GPHIN’s actions did not hinder Canada’s knowledge of or subsequent action
in response to COVID-19. The report highlights the Panel’s approach and work on this review, which
includes a look at the past and present state of GPHIN, from its creation in the 1990s to its current
operations. The report provides an overview of GPHIN’s structure and functions, and GPHIN’s initial
detection of what would become the COVID-19 pandemic.
The final report was provided to the Minister on May 28, 2021. The External Review Panel found that:
• GPHIN identified the outbreak in Wuhan on December 30, 2019, and included this report in the
December 31, 2019 Daily Report and in a stand-alone Special Report shared internally on January 1,
2020.
o GPHIN performed its key function of providing early warning within Canada through the Daily
Report. Daily Reports are sent to domestic subscribers, such as PHAC and other federal departments,
provincial and territorial officials, and others.
• Canada’s response was swift and effectively began on the first day of 2020, in part due to event
identification and notification of the initial signal by GPHIN.
o PHAC’s leadership took immediate action on becoming aware of this emerging public health
threat, including enhanced surveillance and reporting, and notification of officials across government,
followed by notification of public health officials across Canada on January 2, 2020.
• Issuing a GPHIN Alert would not have made Canada’s response to COVID-19 faster or more
effective.
o An Alert is issued to flag signals for domestic and international subscribers, however,
international partners were already aware of this signal, as it was being disseminated widely through a
number of other mechanisms at the time.
o By the evening of December 31, 2019, the significance of this event was clear in the public
health surveillance community. The WHO stood up its Incident Management Support Team on January
1, 2020.
• The Panel saw no evidence suggesting earlier identification by GPHIN of the outbreak was
possible, though other systems, such as BlueDot and ProMed, did identify the outbreak on the same
day.
• Event-based surveillance provided the earliest global detection of the outbreak of pneumonia in
Wuhan, by GPHIN and other systems, which all signalled the outbreak of pneumonia in Wuhan within a
similar timeframe.
The recommendations in the final report are focused on:
• The operational context, role and mandate of GPHIN;
• Governance structures that support GPHIN;
• Partnerships and flows of information between GPHIN and stakeholders, domestically and
globally;
• Lessons learned from COVID-19 and opportunities to further improve the system; and
• Advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems and the future of
surveillance tools.
The final report will be made publicly available by the end of June 2021.
GPHIN in the Auditor General’s Report on Pandemic Preparedness
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
entitled Covid-19 Pandemic: Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance and Border Control Measures. This
included an audit of PHAC’s and Canada Border Service Agency’s pandemic response. The report notes
that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC quickly mobilized and adapted
its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potential public health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed.
• PHAC officials confirmed that by the end of December 2019, other international sources had
already shared news of the virus and therefore it was unnecessary for GPHIN to issue an alert.
• GPHIN did issue daily reports about the new virus to Canadian partners (including federal,
provincial, and territorial public health officials) starting on December 31, 2019, and thus performed its
key function of providing early warning within Canada.
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after which the
number of alerts decreased significantly.
• PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of and response to
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert reporting.
• In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure
was put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
In response to the Auditor General’s recommendation, and the recommendations from the GPHIN
External Review Panel, PHAC will make further improvements to GPHIN including the alert process.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
SYNOPSIS
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about the health care
system’s capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health care system?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is making investments that are helping provincial and territorial
health systems respond to the virus.
• Budget 2021 confirmed an additional $5 billion in direct support to provinces and territories for
health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination roll-out.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are
ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term
care, home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500
million in support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance
use, or homelessness.
• The federal government is ready to respond to provincial and territorial requests for assistance,
e.g., with health human resource support and the facilitation of mobile health services capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health system capacity
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and
territories to track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital beds and
medical equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
• Governments continue to work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under
different modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support from the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
• We know that in some cases, our systems are already severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
• That is why governments are very carefully balancing public health restrictions with available
capacity and careful tracking of resource use in hospitals (like intensive care bed use), and why the
Government of Canada stands ready to provide additional support should it be needed (for example,
through field units).
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase system capacity and
meet projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically
reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is also
complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also running training
exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing
to mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for Canadians
experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some
of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’
gradual return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential services
to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
• a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid sick leave
with access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemic and to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testing supplies
and supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE
and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as maintaining the
readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing a new Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces
and territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and control to
protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
• Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
• Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work with provinces and territories to set new,
national standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions;
• Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
• Continuing to respond to Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19
context; and
• Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond to COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-19
outbreaks and other large-scale emergencies.
Support for Health Care and Vaccinations
• Budget 2021 confirmed the Government’s intention to continue support for provinces and
territories, including addressing urgent health care needs.
• On March 25, 2021 the Government introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in
direct support to provinces and territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
• The proposed funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health
Transfer, distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care
system pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing the
backlog of medical procedures, patient care, and access to primary care put on hold due to the
pandemic.
• The legislation also includes a one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, to
the provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
SYNOPSIS
• Minister Hajdu’s 2019 mandate letter from the Prime Minister indicates that the government
will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare and renew
health agreements. This work will include ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams,
setting national standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and palliative care. Since
then, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and Fall Economic Statement have confirmed these priorities,
also committing up to $1B for safe long-term care, and to working with PTs to set new national
standards for long-term care, and $3B over five years proposed to support provinces and territories in
ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. This is in addition
to supplemental investments to the Canada Health Transfer announced in March 2020 and a
commitment most recently through Bill C-25 to provide provinces and territories with an additional $5
billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the CHT. This commitment and new
investment build on the bilateral agreements that are in place and will be renewed in 2022 to support
improved access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to support provincial and territorial health care
systems in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• On March 25, 2021, our Government committed to provide provinces and territories with an
additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer
to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support
vaccine roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19
billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
• In fall 2020, given the toll that COVID-19 has taken on those living in long-term care facilities,
our government further committed to up to $1 billion to support safe long-term care, and Budget 2021
proposes to provide $3B over five years to support provinces and territories in ensuring standards for
long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
• Through this work, our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories
in order to improve health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE LETTER COMMITMENT ON PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
• There are almost 90,000 physicians in Canada, a record number, but access to care is still an
issue for some Canadians.
• Our Government is committed to engaging with provincial and territorial counterparts, health
professionals and experts to help make sure Canadians can access primary health care when they need
it.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
• Our Government will provide provinces and territories with over $43 billion in 2021-22 through
the Canada Health Transfer, totalling over $235 billion over the next 5 years.
• The Government has also introduced legislation to provide an additional $5 billion in direct
support to provinces and territories for health care, including steps to address backlogs, and vaccination
roll-out. This includes a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT.
• This investment supplements funding of $700 million to help ensure health care systems are
ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable Canadians – including those in long- term
care, home care, and palliative care – who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19, and $500
million in support and protection for people experiencing challenges related to mental health, substance
use, or homelessness.
• In addition, targeted funding in Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion in new targeted funding
over 10 years to provinces and territories to improve access to home and community care and mental
health and addiction services.
• Since then, our government has made additional commitments to support provinces and
territories in areas where resources are most needed and more recently targeted support has been
announced for virtual care of 150 million and safe long-term care of over $1 billion, and $3 billion to
ensure that standards for long- term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home
and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $9.7 billion to Quebec in
2021-22.
• Quebec will also receive $902.4 million as part of its share of the $4 billion, one-time top-up to
the CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING
• The Government of Canada has consistently emphasized the importance of Canadians seeing
results for the investments in mental health and home care.
• In the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles, federal, provincial and territorial Ministers
of Health agreed to work collectively to develop a focused set of indicators to measure progress and
report to Canadians.
• In 2018, Ministers of Health agreed to a set of pan-Canadian indicators to measure progress.
The Canadian Institute for Health Information began reporting on the first of these indicators on an
annual basis in 2019.
• In addition, provinces and territories have also included program- specific indicators in their
bilateral agreements.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE
• Through Budget 2021 our Government announced $3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23,
to support provinces and territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent
changes are made.
• This is in addition to our Government’s commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control.
• Through the Safe Long-Term Care Fund, provinces and territories are expected to use this
investment to undertake priority activities, including hiring additional staff (such as personal support
workers) or topping up wages, infrastructure improvements and readiness assessments for infection
prevention and control.
• As a condition of funding, provinces and territories must provide a detailed plan, similar to what
has been provided for home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
• The federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while
respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors
and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend those agreements to flow funding
for the Safe Long-term Care Fund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion, an increase of $28 billion from
$42 billion in 2020-21, or from its current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called
for the CHT to grow by an annual escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand
on March 25th.
On March 25, 2021, the Government tabled Bill C-25 in Parliament, which will provide provinces and
territories with an additional $5 billion for health care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT
intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by waves one and two of the
pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to support Canada’s COVID- 19 immunization plan.
Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is
in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that also provided one-time funding of $500 million through
the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
Federal Commitment to the Health Accord (now referred to as the Common Statement of Principles on
Shared Health Priorities):
In 2015, the Government committed to engage with the Provinces and Territories (PTs) to develop a
new Health Accord, including a new long-term agreement on funding. The Government also committed
to work jointly, and with Indigenous leaders, to explore areas of shared priority that will improve the
health of Indigenous Peoples.
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services as follows:
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, for better home and palliative care, and $1 billion
over 4 years, starting in 2018-19, to address critical home care infrastructure requirements; and,
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, in support of mental health initiatives
This funding is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs. It
provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of
the Canada Health Act, which are: universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public
administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate the renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-
23 to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will continue to
work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare. This work will include
ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams, setting national standards for mental health
access, and supporting home care and palliative care.
Safe Long-term Care:
The Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term Care
Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
HESA MOTION ORDERING THE PRODUCTION OF DOCUMENTS RELATED TO THE GOVERNMENT’S
RESPONSE TO THE COVID-19 PANDEMIC
SYNOPSIS
• On October 26, 2020, the House of Commons adopted a Motion ordering that the Standing
Committee on Health undertake a study of the COVID-19 emergency situation. The motion contains six
parts related to the production of documents on the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN),
testing, Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) and vaccines.
• To date, thousands of documents have been released to the Law Clerk in seven batches: on
December 7, 2020, December 15, 2020, January 6, 2021 and January 20, 2021, February 4, 2021,
February 18, 2021 and April 9, 2021. (Another release to the Law Clerk is expected in the coming days.)
• The Law Clerk tabled rounds of documents on December 16, 2020, January 20, 2021, January 29,
2021, February 5, 2021, February 19, 2021, February 26, 2021, March 12, 2021, March 26, 2021, April
16, 2021, April 23, 2021, April 30, 2021, May 7, 2021, May 14, 2021, May 28, 2021, June 4, 2021 and
June 11, 2021. There are 6308 documents published on HESA’s website.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Since the December 7, 2020 deadline, we have only received a small volume of pages of relevant
records from the health portfolio. Why hasn’t the department complied with this order yet and when
are you going to provide us the material requested?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to continuing to work with provinces, territories,
municipalities, Indigenous communities, and the private sector to respond to the pandemic and keep
Canadians safe and healthy.
• We are committed to provide the Health Committee the thousands of requested documents as
quickly as possible so that it can undertake its important, independent work on studying Canada’s
response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have provided documents to the Law Clerk in the language in which they are available in
order to provide them as quickly as possible.
• To date, the Government has produced more than 24,500 pages to the Law Clerk.
• We will continue to provide records as they become available.
• Our review ensures that confidential and other sensitive information is reviewed to respects
contractual and legal obligations of the Crown.
IF PRESSED ON REDACTED VACCIN PROCUREMENT CONTRACTS
• My colleague the Minister of Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC) has tabled the
vaccine procurement contracts as requested by motion of this Committee and in accordance with our
commitment to open and transparent Government.
• Officials from PSPC have examined these contracts under the requirements of the Access to
Information Act and consulted implicated companies, as is required to ensure the appropriate safeguard
of their information.
• We are careful to avoid jeopardizing orders or compromising Canada's negotiating position,
given the volatility of the marketplace.
• I invite the Committee to discuss with my colleague, the Honourable Minister Anand for more
information.
IF PRESSED ON PROCESS FOR REVIEW
• We have completed the collection of documents related to the Motion for the Health Portfolio.
This represents hundreds of thousands of pages.
• We have released the maximum number of relevant documents that do not require redactions
as quickly as possible.
• Experts in the public service are now reviewing documents to protect national security
information, Cabinet confidences, solicitor-client privilege, and other sensitive information through a
rigorous and consistent process.
• The portfolio is making best efforts to complete the work as quickly as possible. Given the
considerable scope of the motion, the production of all relevant documents is a significant undertaking
which entails a substantial amount of time and resources.
If PRESSED ON THE NUMBER OF DOCUMENTS RELEASED COMPARED TO INITIAL ESTIMATES
• Initial estimates included all documents and records found after a wide search and that
appeared to be responsive to the October 26 Motion. Following these initial estimates, a thorough
review allowed departments to eliminate transitory drafts, duplicate documents and false matches,
which represented a large portion of the initial estimate.
• Officials have been processing over 74,000 documents since November and over 24,500 pages
have been provided to the Law Clerk.
IF PRESSED ON RESOURCES REQUIRED TO RESPOND TO THIS MOTION
• We will continue to comply with the order of the House of Commons to provide documents to
the office of the Law Clerk and Parliamentary Counsel in a timely manner as they become available.
• As the work of reviewing the requested documents progresses, we cannot provide a specific
figure for the resource implications. However, hundreds of employees across the health portfolio have
been mobilized and continue to be involved in this work, which entails a significant amount of time and
resources.
IF PRESSED ON TRANSLATION
• The Government’s goal is to provide documents as quickly as possible to the Law Clerk to
support his mandate from this House to review and table documents that respond to the Motion
adopted in October.
BACKGROUND
A motion adopted by the House of Commons on October 26 2020 directs government departments to
produce to the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health, certain documents relating to the
Government of Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
In response to this Motion, the Health Portfolio, including Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, have contributed nearly 17,300 pages of
documents to the Law Clerk as of June 4, 2021.
The pages released to date include a wide variety of documents such as, communications products,
meeting agendas, briefing decks, terms of reference for committees, and Global Public Health
Intelligence Network daily reports.
The response to this Motion involves 19 departments, including Innovation, Science and Economic
Development Canada (ISED); Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC); Health Canada; the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC); National Research Council (NRC); Treasury Board Secretariat; and
Department of Justice.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
SYNOPSIS
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life- threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices which pose significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, as well as Budget 2021, this includes working with willing provinces, territories and stakeholders
to establish a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases for launch in spring 2022.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement and the Speech from the Throne, as well as Budget 2021
referenced a rare diseases strategy, which was previously included as a commitment in Budget 2019.
Why has the Government not delivered on this strategy while Canadians with rare diseases desperately
wait?
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases to be launched in spring 2022.
• We also held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on
March 26th, 2021. Canadians - especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers -
were invited to provide their views on the national strategy by participating in a public town hall or
completing the online questionnaire.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. The
recent Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2021 highlight the Government’s continued commitment in
developing a national strategy.
• Our Government has also been working with key stakeholders to improve access by encouraging
the development and availability of drugs for rare diseases for Canadians. In 2019, 16 of the 35 new
drugs Health Canada approved were drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy for launch by spring 2022, starting with a comprehensive
engagement process in late 2020 and continuing into early 2021.
• The virtual engagement has now concluded. A What We Heard report summarizing key themes
and feedback that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement will be published in spring
2021.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. There have been approximately 150 drugs accessed through the program
for the treatment of rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH…
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
• Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They
are often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
• Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the
world. They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a
handful of individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare
disease.
• Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of
the public health care system.
HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical
need. Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare
diseases.
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to protect consumers
from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for
governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could
result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO HIGH COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and
overall quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
• Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government
drug plans, through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
• Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in
clinical trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases
where criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to
drugs that are unavailable for sale in Canada.
About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on high cost drugs for rare diseases,
including on new drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national
strategy.
• To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients
taking high-cost drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON HIGH-COST DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
• There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other
health system partners for federal funding for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
• Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs.
affordability vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also
help manage expectations around the limits of federal funding.
• In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their
officials to establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the
national strategy.
• A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and is continuing in early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting
research on rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research
initiatives, such as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate
medical breakthroughs for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22
countries. As of 2017, this international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and
therapies for rare diseases. Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting
in 2021- 2022, for the CIHR to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
• Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-
2022, in support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over
five years, starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-
start the new Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation
programming.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
Home Care
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety.
Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment that the Government of Canada made to take any action it
can to support seniors and vulnerable populations across the country.
• As highlighted in Budget 2021, the Government of Canada plans to continue its commitment of
$6B in funding over 10 years to provinces and territories to improve access to appropriate services and
supports in the home and community, including palliative and end-of-life care.
• This investment is expected to help more Canadians receive the care and services they need so
that they may remain at home longer, where they want to be.
• We are committed to working alongside the provinces and territories to help people stay in their
homes for as long as possible. We will continue to support equitable access to quality home care
services.
SYNOPSIS
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the first wave of the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care.
This situation increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
• In light of COVID-19, the federal government is taking additional actions to help people stay in
their homes longer while working alongside the provinces and territories.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the government doing to ensure that Canadians have access to quality home care
services during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over ten years directly to provinces
and territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• To support Canadians during the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada and
provincial/territorial governments also reached a $19B Safe Restart Agreement, which includes $740
million in funding to support our most vulnerable populations, including incremental infection
prevention and control measures to protect those receiving home care and palliative care, and those in
long-term care.
• Budget 2021 proposes a $90 million investment over three years, starting in 2021-22, to launch
the Age Well at Home initiative, which would assist community-based organizations in providing
practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• Budget 2021 proposes to establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC,
and funded by $960M over three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver
relevant training, and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health
sector, this would include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
• Our government will continue to take any action it can to support seniors while working
alongside the provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• In the Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada committed to fund up to $1 billion
for a Safe Long-Term Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people from COVID-19 and
support infection prevention and control in long-term care and assisted living facilities. This is in addition
to $740 million provided through the Safe Restart Agreements for provinces and territories to improve
measures to control and prevent infections in home care, long-term care, and palliative care facilities
and services.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care. This guidance was
developed through the National Advisory Committee on Infection Prevention and Control and endorsed
by the Pan- Canadian Special Advisory Committee.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding has been provided to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home
care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
• Through Budget 2021, the government is also proposing to increase Old Age Security for seniors
75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide funding of $27.6M over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-
Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees International Union Healthcare. The funding will
support incentives for worker participation. This will support retirement saving for personal support
workers.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3M over six years, and $7.7M ongoing, starting in 2021-
22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary
care, and pharmaceuticals.
BACKGROUND
COVID Impacts on Home Care
The Canadian Institute for Health Information has highlighted the following impacts COVID-19 has had
on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home Care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement.
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, and lay out the initiatives that
each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
Pesticides Used to Control Problem Animals (Strychnine, Compound 1080, and Sodium Cyanide)
SYNOPSIS
• In the interest of seeking Canadians’ views and input on the humaneness of pesticides used to
control predators, Health Canada published a consultation document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest
Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation period ending April 18, 2019.
• Health Canada received over 4000 responses, many of which revealed a lack of awareness of
federal and provincial roles and responsibilities with respect to pesticide regulation, wildlife
management and animal welfare, and the high degree of restriction placed on the use of these
products.
• On January 29, 2021, Health Canada published a consultation summary outlining the comments
received, as well as an information note to better inform Canadians on the strict label conditions that
must be followed, as well as the federal/provincial/territorial roles and responsibilities regarding
pesticide regulation, wildlife management and animal welfare.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Will the Government of Canada take immediate action to end the use of strychnine, Compound
1080, and sodium cyanide for killing wolves, and other predators?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety and the concerns of citizens very seriously.
• The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by
provincially authorized personnel in Alberta and Saskatchewan.
• These products are used as a last resort to protect endangered species, people living in remote
communities, and livestock.
• Health or environmental concerns raised during consultations on the use of these three
predacides are being taken into consideration in the current re-evaluation of these products, which was
initiated in January 2021.
BACKGROUND
• In Canada, pesticides are regulated under the Pest Control Products Act administered by Health
Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA). Health Canada published a consultation
document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation
period ending April 18, 2019.
• At this time, Health Canada will not take steps towards incorporating humaneness
considerations into the pesticide risk assessment framework. There are currently no internationally
recognized science-based parameters to evaluate the humaneness of pesticides, and no new
information on this topic was brought forward through the consultation process.
• To address concerns raised by Canadians through this consultation, Health Canada published an
information note in late January 2021 to improve awareness of federal and provincial/territorial roles
and responsibilities with respect to wildlife management and animal welfare, improve awareness of
predacide use restrictions and scenarios, as well as improve awareness of the legal requirements that
must be followed when using such products, and the systems in place for reporting incidents (such as
non-target animal deaths).
• In January 2021, Health Canada initiated a re-evaluation of strychnine, Compound 1080 (sodium
monofluoroacetate), and sodium cyanide as a cluster, based on the similarity of the use pattern and
toxicity profile. Information submitted during the humaneness consultation period relevant to the re-
evaluation (i.e., with respect to possible health or environmental risks) will be considered. This re-
evaluation will also take into consideration information related to non-target animal incident reports.
• There is another ongoing write-in campaign to the Minister of Health regarding the use of
predacides on large mammals. Health Canada is responding on behalf of the Minister to letters received
with Canadian addresses.
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH CARE SYSTEMS
SYNOPSIS
• Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Health
Canada and Indigenous Services Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health care
systems?
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous organizations
in the development of distinctions-based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care
systems.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health care needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
voices are heard through meaningful engagement across the Health portfolio.
IF PRESSED…
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous partners and health service providers to
identify and support distinctions-based Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism
across Canada’s health care system.
BACKGROUND
Systemic racism has no place in Canada. Unfortunately, Indigenous Peoples continue to experience
racism, discrimination, stigma and bias in many facets, including when interacting with the health care
system, which has been well documented in a number of reports. There are ongoing domestic and
international calls for Canada to implement measures that address racism and discrimination in the
health care system and to demonstrate timely and meaningful progress.
In September 2020, the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman from Manawan, Quebec,
sparked widespread indignation, media attention, a public coroner’s inquest, and a lawsuit from
Echaquan's family against the hospital where she suffered racist insults from hospital staff before she
died in Joliette, QC. On November 16th, 2020, the Manawan Atikamekw Council and the Council of the
Atikamekw Nation submitted Joyce’s Principle to the Prime Minister, as well as federal, provincial, and
territorial ministers, which demands that all Indigenous Peoples have an equal right to the highest
standard of physical and mental health, with a right to traditional medicines.
In response to Joyce Echaquan’s death, Ministers Miller, Bennett, Vandal and Hajdu held two national
discussions on October 16th, 2020, and January 27-28th, 2021, to listen to Indigenous patients and
health care providers regarding their lived experiences with racism, and to provide federal, provincial,
and territorial governments and health system partners a platform to present their past, ongoing, and
planned actions to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care system.
At the January meeting, Minister Hajdu announced $4M in funding to a National Consortium of
Indigenous Medical Education to work on improving the experiences of Indigenous Peoples in medical
school/practices. Minister Miller also announced plans to begin co-developing distinctions-based
Indigenous health legislation and funding of $2M to the Atikamekw Nation and Manawan First Nation to
implement Joyce’s Principle.
Following the January meeting, FPT leaders released a joint statement to express a collective
commitment to working with Indigenous communities, organizations, and leadership to address
Indigenous-specific racism in the health care system. The federal government also committed to hosting
a third national discussion in spring 2021, and its intention to continue to convene thematic,
distinctions-based, and regional roundtable discussions. Expectations are high for the federal
government to demonstrate timely action.
While the federal government is working with Indigenous partners on a number of health policy
initiatives, dedicated work must be undertaken to directly address anti-Indigenous racism in the health
care system. The Government has committed to responding to a number of high profile reports and
recommendations to address anti-racism, cultural safety, and safe and equitable care, including the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action and the Inquiry into Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women and Girls’ Calls for Justice. In addition, there are class action lawsuits on forced and
coerced sterilization of Indigenous women in multiple jurisdictions, and both the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health and the Senate Committee on Human Rights have undertaken studies on
this issue.
Budget 2021
The Government’s commitment to engaging with Indigenous Peoples has placed a heavy burden on
Indigenous organizations who may not have the capacity to participate in the multiple engagement
requests from the federal government, including Health Canada. This investment will support
Indigenous organizations to build capacity to engage with the Department and will support distinctions-
based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism. Distinctions-based measures contribute to a
meaningful reduction in racism, discrimination, bias and stigma experienced by Indigenous Peoples
when interacting with health systems.
Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Indigenous Services
Canada and Health Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination
where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe. Prior to this investment, there was no federal funding
available to specifically address anti-Indigenous racism in the health care systems.
NATIONAL INSTITUTE FOR WOMEN’S HEALTH RESEARCH
BUDGET 2021: $20 million over 5 years starting in 2021-22, to the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) to support a new National Institute for Women’s Health Research.
KEY MESSAGES:
• Mr. Speaker, women face unique challenges that need to be specifically researched in order to
improve their health outcomes.
• This includes cervical and ovarian cancer, sexual and reproductive health, gender- based
violence, and health during pregnancy to name a few.
• The creation of a National Institute for Women’s Health Research will advance a coordinated
research program that addresses under-researched and high-priority areas of women’s health and
ensure new evidence improves women’s care and health outcomes.
• This dedicated investment will help improve health outcomes and eliminate the gaps in quality
of care for women and will ensure future research will continue on these important issues.
BACKGROUND
The Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter includes the following commitment:
“Create a National Institute for Women’s Health Research, with the support of the Minister for Women
and Gender Equality and Rural Economic Development, that will bring together experts in women’s
health from across the country to tackle persistent gaps in research and care using an intersectional
approach.”
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
This investment will complement CIHR’s Institute of Gender and Health (IGH) and its expert Institute
Advisory Board, to support priority setting and capacity building in the area of women’s and girls’ health
research.
Research on women’s health funded through the Institute for Women’s Health would build on the
investments and expertise that are already being supported by CIHR and its IGH. This includes research
in areas such as cervical cancer, gender-based violence, ovarian cancer, women’s heart health, and
women’s brain health. It also includes initiatives to build capacity among women’s health researchers
(e.g. the Indigenous Gender and Wellness Initiative, the Women’s Health Clinical Mentorship Grant), and
to foster the integration of sex and gender within the broader health research ecosystem and deepen
our understanding of how biological and social influences interact to affect health and disease (e.g. the
Sex- and Gender-Based Analysis Policy-Research Partnerships, Sex and Gender Science Chairs).
Considerations
During FINA’s pre-Budget consultations 2020, the B.C. Women’s Health Foundation submitted a brief
that recommends “That the government provide funding in the amount of $50 million in an initial
capital investment, ongoing annual operating and research funding of $25-40 million for the National
Centre for Innovation + Excellence in Women’s Health Research.”
INTERNATIONAL ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO) and the
Pan American Health Organization (PAHO), to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to
global efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• I have been engaging with my G7 counterparts on a regular basis to share information on public
health measures, to learn from others’ experiences and best practices and to identify possible joint
actions to tackle this pandemic. I was pleased to continue these discussions at the G7 Health Ministers
meeting at the beginning of June.
• Bilaterally, I have engaged with key international counterparts, including the European
Commission, France, Germany, the United States and the United Kingdom, to discuss our respective
COVID- 19 responses. These discussions are valuable opportunities to learn from each other and
strengthen our domestic and international responses.
• Technical program staff within my Health Portfolio also regularly engage with their international
counterparts to exchange information and best practices to inform and enhance our response.
• Canada looks forward to continued engagement on global health issues with all relevant
partners as we fight the current COVID-19 pandemic and chart a path forward to strengthen our
collective capacities to prevent, prepare for and respond to future health emergencies.
IF PRESSED on bilateral engagement with the U.S.
• I am pleased to be engaging with my counterpart, the Secretary of the Department of Health
and Human Services, on areas of shared interest and to fulfill the commitments set out in the Prime
Minister’s Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada will continue to work with their
counterparts at the U.S. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, and Health and Human Services, to
strengthen our efforts to control the pandemic, collaborate on public health responses, and build
resilience against future outbreaks.
IF PRESSED on Allegations of Undue Chinese Influence in WHO
• We have valued the WHO’s global leadership and coordination during this pandemic, and have
confidence that the organization is working with all Member States, for all Member States.
• Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest in making it a strong, accountable,
inclusive and well-governed institution, whose actions and recommendations are guided by Member
States, and the best available science and evidence.
• We will continue to actively participate in oversight and accountability review processes.
• As the COVID-19 situation continues to evolve around the world, Canada will continue to work
closely with its international partners, including the WHO and China, to reduce risks to Canadians and
the global community.
IF PRESSED on Joint WHO-China mission on the origins of SARS-CoV-2
• Canada is fully committed to supporting the WHO in its scientific work, and welcomes the report
on the WHO-convened Global Study of Origins of SARS-CoV-2: China Part.
• The work of this joint WHO-China mission and its follow-up represent a key opportunity for
international scientific collaboration to advance global health security.
• We know that pinpointing the origins of SARS-CoV-2 will be a long- term endeavour. We must
learn as much as possible about the origins of the virus that causes COVID-19, as this understanding
could help prevent future pandemics.
• We are concerned, however, by reports that the independent experts on the mission did not
receive timely and complete access to data.
• That is why Canada joined the U.S. and 12 other countries in issuing a joint statement that
reaffirms the importance of transparency, openness and collaborative scientific inquiry for investigating
outbreaks of unknown origin, such as SARS-CoV-2.
IF PRESSED – FINDINGS FROM THE INTERNATIONAL PANDEMIC PREPAREDNESS AND REPOSNSE PANEL
• The Government of Canada welcomes the frank assessment and bold recommendations from
the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR).
• We thank the Panel members for their efforts to understand how a localized outbreak became a
global pandemic, and to assess how the international system responded.
• One of the Panel’s important conclusions is that the world was not prepared for the pandemic
on a number of fronts. We know there are many lessons from this pandemic, which we are learning
from to adjust our approach.
• Canada is committed to working with our international partners, including the WHO, to improve
global cooperation so that we remain well positioned and prepared to respond to future global health
events.
IF PRESSED on our working relationship with the WHO
• As a founding member, Canada is a strong supporter of the WHO.
• Canada engages with the WHO to advance domestic and international health priorities, share
Canadian expertise on health issues, and protect the health of Canadians and people around the world.
• The WHO has a critical role in the COVID-19 response as the key global public health body.
Canada values the WHO’s leadership and coordination role in the COVID-19 response, including their
role overseeing the International Health Regulations, driving collaborative global research efforts
towards new vaccines and effective treatments, working with all actors to address shortages of critical
medical supplies and personal protective equipment, and supporting the most vulnerable countries in
their preparedness and response efforts.
BACKGROUND
Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19,
which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S. On June 3-
4, Minister Hajdu participated in the G7 Health Ministers meeting to discuss COVID-19 measures, global
health security, clinical trials, digital health and antimicrobial resistance with her counterparts. G7
Health Ministers endorsed a Declaration on these topics, in addition to the G7 Therapeutics and
Vaccines Clinical Trials Charter. Canada has also participated in various G20 discussions on ways to
strengthen our collective capacities to prevent, prepare and respond to future health emergencies.
Given the magnitude of this pandemic’s impact across sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers
are engaging regularly with their international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs,
Agriculture and Employment.
In addition, technical staff of the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) have engaged with their
counterparts in a variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally (e.g., World Health Organization
(WHO), U.S. Centres for Disease Control Global Health Security Initiative, the Global Outbreak Alert and
Response Network (GOARN)), to exchange information and best practices that have informed and
enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Research and Development
Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), played a key role in establishing the
WHO global research and innovation roadmap on COVID-19. CIHR is also supporting the Canadian
Treatments for COVID-19 Trial (CATCO), which is contributing to the WHO SOLIDARITY trial to find
effective treatments for COVID-19. CIHR’s Scientific Director of the Institute of Infection and Immunity
currently co-chairs the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Diseases (GloPID-R), which
continues to be a key hub in facilitating the fast-moving collaboration that is needed across a multiplicity
of players domestically and internationally.
Global Equitable Access to COVID-19 Health Technologies
Canada co-hosted the Coronavirus Global Response launch event in May 2020 in support of the Access
to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator (ACT-A) – a global collaboration between governments, scientists,
businesses, philanthropists and global health organizations to accelerate development, production, and
equitable access to COVID-19 tests, treatments, and vaccines. Canada has pledged a total of $1.315
billion to support ACT-A’s goals, including the recent $375 million contribution announced by the PM in
May 2021 to help develop, produce, and distribute diagnostics, therapeutics, and vaccines to low-and-
middle-income countries. Canada is also a member (represented by Minister Gould) of the Facilitation
Council for the Accelerator, which provides support for its work through political leadership, advocacy,
and mobilization of additional resources.
Within ACT-A, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, the Coalition for Epidemic Preparedness Innovations (CEPI) and
the WHO are leading a pooled procurement mechanism for the purchase of COVID- 19 vaccines called
the COVAX Facility. This pools the resources of economies to make advanced purchase agreements for a
number of vaccines. The Facility includes both low- and lower-middle income countries, whose
purchases are financed by official development assistance through the COVAX Advanced Market
Commitment (AMC), and upper-middle and high-income countries who self-finance their own purchase
of vaccine doses for domestic use. The Facility is a strong multilateral mechanism that supports timely
access to vaccines for all participating economies.
In September 2020, Canada signed a binding commitment to participate in the Facility through an
optional purchase agreement that could see Canada acquire vaccine doses through the Facility for up to
20% of the Canadian population. Canada has committed an additional $545 million to the COVAX
Advance Market Commitment for vaccine procurement, distribution, and delivery for low- and middle-
income countries. By joining, Canada is contributing to collective efforts towards a safe, effective, and
affordable COVID-19 vaccine, in line with the Prime Minister’s commitment to help ensure that once a
vaccine is developed, it will be produced at a scale and cost accessible to all countries. As of December
15, 98 high-income economies have joined the Facility; alongside the lower-income countries eligible to
participate in the COVAX AMC, a total of 190 economies could benefit from the COVAX Facility. Thus far,
COVAX has shipped over 80 million COVID-19 vaccines to 129 participants.
On December 18, 2020, the Prime Minister confirmed Canada’s commitment to share potential surplus
COVID-19 vaccine doses with the world should Canada receive more than necessary. International
pressure continues to build for high income countries who have made significant progress in domestic
vaccine roll out to support equitable access goals by sharing doses or taking other actions to support
increased global supply.
World Health Organization (WHO)
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the WHO, averaging nearly $90
million annually for the past 10 years in assessed and voluntary contributions to support the work of the
organization.
The WHO has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the COVID-19
response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their preparedness and response efforts.
Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and evidence-based guidance during this rapidly evolving
pandemic. Canada continues to support the WHO regional office of the Americas (PAHO) in its critical
coordinating and technical role in responding to the health challenges that the region is facing.
On January 20, 2021, President Biden reversed the previous administration’s decision to withdraw from
the WHO and committed to resuming regular engagement and fulfilling its financial obligations to the
organization. On January 21, 2021, Dr. Anthony Fauci delivered a special address to the WHO Executive
Board expressing the renewed U.S. commitment to multilateralism, diplomacy, gender equality, sexual
and reproductive health and rights, and global health.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
Canada has consistently expressed support for an independent, comprehensive review of the global
response, which would consider the actions of all actors and partners, including the WHO, undertaken at
an appropriate time.
At the 73rd session of the World Health Assembly (WHA) in May 2020, Canada co-sponsored a
resolution on COVID-19 that called for an independent, comprehensive review of the WHO- coordinated
international health response to COVID-19. As follow up to the resolution, the WHO Director General
announced in July 2020 the creation of the Independent Panel on Pandemic Preparedness and Response
(IPPR), co-chaired by former New Zealand Prime Minister and UNDP Administrator Helen Clark, and
former President of Liberia, Ellen Johnston Sirleaf. Canadian physician and former president of MSF
International, Dr. Joanne Liu, was selected as one of the eleven panelists by the IPPR co-chairs in
September 2020.
On May 12th, 2021, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR) published
their final report and recommendations. The report concludes that the pandemic was a result of
“failures and gaps in international and national responses” at every juncture of preparedness for, and
response to, COVID-19. As a result, “February 2020 was a lost month when steps could have been taken
to curtail the epidemic and forestall the pandemic.”
The IPPPR suggests that the failure of countries to respond was a combination of two things: “they did
not sufficiently appreciate the threat and know how to respond”; and, “in the absence of certainty
about how serious the consequences of this new pathogen would be, “wait and see” seemed less costly
and consequential than concerted public health action.”
Countries that responded successfully to the pandemic were proactive and adopted aggressive
containment strategies (e.g. China, New Zealand, Korea, Singapore, Thailand and Vietnam) that included
rapid case identification, contact-tracing and providing designated isolation facilities, either for all or for
those unable to self-isolate. Social and economic support was provided to promote uptake of public
health measures. Unsuccessful countries had uncoordinated approaches that devalued science, denied
the potential impact of the pandemic, delayed comprehensive action, and allowed distrust to
undermine efforts.
The IPPPR also notes that stronger leadership and better coordination at national, regional and
international levels were needed to more effectively respond and recommend a more focused and
independent WHO, a pandemic treaty and a Senior Global Health Threats Council that would be led at
the Head of State and Government level. Among its recommendations, the Panel also recommends
greater investment in preparedness and stronger accountability mechanisms to spur action. They call for
improved surveillance and for the WHO to have authority to rapidly publish information and to dispatch
expert missions.
The Independent Oversight and Advisory Committee (IOAC) for the WHO Health Emergencies
Programme provides oversight and monitoring of the development and performance of the Programme,
and provided a report and set of recommendations at the 74th World Health Assembly in May 2021, as
a complement to the findings and recommendations of the IPPPR. Dr. Theresa Tam is a member of the
IOAC. Members serve in their personal capacity and exercise their responsibilities with full regard for the
paramount importance of independence.
Joint WHO-China COVID-19 Origins Study
On January 14, 2021 a team of WHO-convened international experts began an investigation into the
zoonotic origins of COVID-19. The joint international team was comprised of 17 Chinese experts and 17
international experts from ten countries (no Canadians), The full report of the Joint WHO-China mission,
released on March 30, 2021, concludes that of the four hypotheses explored, introduction to humans
from an animal host (likely a bat) via another intermediary host was the most likely scenario. Notably,
the report’s conclusions acknowledge significant data gaps, particularly on potential source animals,
location and linking that information to epidemiological studies. In the WHO Press Briefing that followed
the release of the report, the WHO Director General confirmed that the international team had
encountered difficulties in accessing raw data and that all four hypotheses were still under
consideration, with future studies required.
Following the release of the report, Canada joined the US, UK, Australia and 10 other countries to
release a joint statement that expressed concerns about the delays in the mission and the lack of access
to complete, original data and samples. The statement reaffirms the importance of transparency,
openness and collaborative scientific inquiry, for investigating outbreaks of unknown origin such as
SARS-CoV-2.
Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership
On February 23, 2021, following their introductory virtual meeting, Prime Minister Trudeau and U.S.
President Joe Biden released their joint “Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership”. The
Roadmap includes several joint commitments grouped within six priority areas: Combatting COVID-19,
Building Back Better, Accelerating Climate Ambitions, Advancing Diversity and Inclusion, Bolstering
Security and Defence, and Building Global Alliances.
Under “Combatting COVID-19”, the leaders committed to defeating the virus and supporting global
affordable access to vaccines, including through support for the COVAX facility. The statement
emphasizes the need to collaborate on public health responses and build resilience against future
outbreaks, and recognizes the importance of urgent global action to advance global health security and
counter biological threats. The leaders agreed to work to strengthen the WHO and PAHO, and leverage
existing platforms such as the North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza (NAPAPI) and the
Global Health Security Agenda (GHSA), to build global capacity for future pandemic preparedness and
response. They also agreed on the importance of a transparent and independent evaluation and analysis
of the origins of the COVID-19 outbreak.
The Roadmap recognizes the importance of taking a coordinated science-based approach to border
policies, and includes a commitment to strengthen the US-Canada Action Plan on Opioids. The leaders
also agreed to prioritize the provision of adequate support and services to individuals facing mental
health challenges or addiction. While there is no specific mention of medical supply chains, the
statement notes that two leaders have launched a strategy to strengthen overall Canada-U.S. supply
chain security.
EMERGENT BIOSOLUTIONS - ASTRAZENECA AND JANSSEN COVID-19 VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is a manufacturing site for the Janssen
vaccine, and previously manufactured AstraZeneca vaccines that were distributed in Canada. The U.S.
Food and Drug Administration (FDA) inspected the facility in April 2021 and found significant
deficiencies with good manufacturing practices.
The AstraZeneca vaccines imported from this site were determined by Health Canada to meet high
quality and safety requirements before being distributed in Canada.
The Janssen vaccines received on April 28 and intended for use in Canada contain an ingredient that was
manufactured at the Emergent site. On June 11, 2021, Health Canada issued a statement to
communicate that it has concluded its assessment of the quality of the Janssen vaccines shipped to
Canada. Due to remaining uncertainties around the quality of the vaccines, Health Canada will not be
releasing the vaccines.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure that vaccines coming from the Emergent site are safe?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians can be assured that Health Canada is taking all necessary steps to ensure that
vaccines coming from the Emergent facility are safe and effective before they are distributed in Canada.
• The AstraZeneca vaccines previously imported from this facility were confirmed to meet strict
safety and quality requirements prior to distribution in Canada.
• Health Canada has completed its assessment of the recent shipment of Janssen vaccines that
were made using an ingredient manufactured by the Emergent facility to confirm that they are safe
before they are distributed in Canada, and will inform Canadians about the outcome of its assessment
once completed.
• Due to remaining uncertainties around the quality of the vaccines, Health Canada will not be
releasing the shipment.
• Health Canada will continue to verify that all vaccines meet strict quality and safety
requirements before they are distributed in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ASSESSMENT OF THE EMERGENT SITE…
• The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is currently rated as compliant with
good manufacturing practices by Health Canada, based on an assessment of an inspection report from
the European Medicines Agency (EMA) - Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA).
• The facility is currently authorized by Health Canada to conduct fabricating, packaging, labelling,
and testing of vaccine materials. No other product types are authorized for this site.
• To ensure the safety of any future vaccine supply from this facility, Health Canada is planning an
onsite inspection, expected to take place this summer. Until this inspection has been completed, Canada
will not be accepting any product or ingredients made at this site.
IF PRESSED ON THE SAFETY OF THE ASTRAZENECA VACCINES ALREADY IMPORTED FROM THIS SITE…
• Canadians can be assured that all AstraZeneca vaccines imported into Canada from this facility
are safe and of high quality.
• The Department reviewed test results of all vaccine lots that came into Canada, as well as the
company’s quality control steps implemented throughout the manufacturing process to mitigate
potential risks of contamination.
• As with all vaccines imported into Canada, the AstraZeneca vaccines were only released for
distribution once Health Canada was satisfied that they met high quality, safety and efficacy standards.
BACKGROUND
The Emergent BioSolutions facility in Baltimore, Maryland is a manufacturing site for the Janssen
vaccine, and previously manufactured AstraZeneca vaccines that were distributed in Canada. In March
2021, the facility was reported to have mixed up the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines, resulting in the
disposal of millions of doses of the Janssen vaccine. The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
inspected the facility in April 2021 and found deficiencies with good manufacturing practices (GMPs).
The facility was rated as compliant by Health Canada earlier this year, based on a review of an inspection
report from the European Medicines Agency (EMA) - Italian Medicines Agency (AIFA). The 1.5 million
doses of AstraZeneca vaccines manufactured by this site and distributed in Canada were determined to
meet quality specifications prior to distribution in Canada.
On April 25, 2021 Health Canada issued a statement regarding the FDA recent inspection and reassured
Canadians that the Department was reviewing these findings, that it had verified that the AstraZeneca
vaccines distributed in Canada from this facility were of high quality and that the Janssen vaccines
produced at this facility had not entered Canada. The Department posted an updated statement on April
30th, advising that a drug ingredient used to manufacture the Janssen vaccine imported into Canada on
April 28th was made at the Emergent site.
On June 11, 2021, Health Canada issued a statement to communicate that it has concluded its
assessment of the quality of the Janssen vaccines shipped to Canada. Due to remaining uncertainties
around the quality of the vaccines, Health Canada will not be releasing the vaccines.
Safety, efficacy and quality requirements for vaccines
Whether a drug or vaccine is manufactured domestically or abroad, Health Canada verifies that both the
formulation and the facilities that make them comply with Canada’s high standards before approving
them for the Canadian market.
GMPs are a quality assurance system that is used to ensure that drugs and vaccines are consistently
made, packaged, labelled, tested, stored, imported and distributed in a manner that meets high safety,
efficacy and quality standards, and are recognized internationally.
All Canadian importers of drug products, including vaccines, must hold a valid Drug Establishment
Licence (DEL) for importation. When a drug is fabricated, packaged/labelled, or tested outside of
Canada, the foreign building where those activities occur must be listed on the Canadian importer’s DEL
to permit the importation of the product.
For the foreign building to be listed on the DEL, the building must be deemed compliant with GMP
requirements. To ensure they meet GMP requirements, Health Canada may conduct on-site inspections
of domestic or foreign facilities, or may rely on inspections conducted by trusted international
regulatory partners, to verify compliance.
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety. The
COVID-19 pandemic highlighted longstanding challenges in supportive care, including gaps in infection
prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, testing, and visitation policies.
• It has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in community settings,
specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’ residences.
• Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment made by the Government of Canada to take any
action it can to support seniors and vulnerable populations across the country.
• It proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories
in ensuring that standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• The federal government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories,
while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure
seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Health Portfolio Operations Centre, more
than 59% of COVID-19 deaths in Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities (with a proportion
varying from 0% in smaller provinces and territories, to 47% in Ontario, 67% in Nova Scotia, and 73% in
Québec. Eighty-one percent of the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (54%) and
Ontario (27%). Even residents of facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation
and reduced services.
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to support
residents and staff.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the federal government doing about working with provinces and territories to develop
national standards in LTC?
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic has tragically highlighted long-standing and systemic challenges in
Canada’s LTC system.
• The federal government has committed to working collaboratively with the provinces and
territories to take any action it can to support seniors.
• Budget 2021 includes a $3B investment over five years ($600M per year), starting in 2022-23, to
ensure that provinces and territories provide a high standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
• This is in addition to the 2020 Fall Economic Statement’s commitment of up to $1B through the
Safe LTC Fund to support infection prevention and control through making improvements to ventilation,
hiring additional, and topping up wages.
• The federal government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories,
while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure
seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• Throughout the pandemic, the Government of Canada has prioritized protecting vulnerable
Canadians, including those in LTC and supported provinces and territories extensively. The Government
of Canada has:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to
work with the provinces and territories to ensure LTC has access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least one dose.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low- income essential workers, which could include front line workers in hospitals and LTC
facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories to
address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick- start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Committed to working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize
those who neglect seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
• To help the LTC sector share learnings and strengthen pandemic preparedness, we provided
$8.6 million to Healthcare Excellence Canada to support LTC facilities across the country through the
LTC+ initiative. Over 1,000 facilities are participating in the program.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting
in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care,
primary care, and pharmaceuticals.
• Additional federal measures to support seniors and those receiving care from Budget 2021:
• provide $90M over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based
organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age
in place.
• increase Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• provide funding of $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to
support retirement saving for personal support workers.
• establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC, and funded by $960M over
three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and
connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would
include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long- term care facilities across the
country. The government welcomes the news that the Heath Standards Organization and Canadian
Standards Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada.
• The Health Standards Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with
governments, stakeholders, and Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing
discussions with provinces and territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
BACKGROUND
Third-party standards development process
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care, and the health infrastructure and environmental design
of long-term care facilities.
Speech from the Throne
In the September 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government of Canada committed to taking any
action it could to support seniors. These commitments included:
• Working with the provinces and territories to set new national standards for long-term care so
that seniors get the best support possible.
• looking at further targeted measures for personal support workers, who do an essential service
helping the most vulnerable in our communities; and
• Working with Parliament on Criminal Code amendments to explicitly penalize those who neglect
seniors under their care, putting them in danger.
Fall Economic Statement
In addition to the $1B in funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilities across Canada. The
goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks.
Participating teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to training sessions
and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number of organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improving LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
As well, the Health Canada-funded Healthcare Excellence Canada (formerly the Canadian Foundation for
Healthcare Improvement (CFHI) and the Canadian Patient Safety Institute (CPSI)) released a report in
summer 2020 outlining promising practices in six key areas that have the potential to help long-term
care and retirement homes prepare for possible future COVID-19 outbreaks, or mitigate their effects:
• Preparation;
• Prevention;
• People in the workforce;
• Pandemic response and surge capacity;
• Planning for COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 care; and,
• Presence of family.
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Vaccination campaigns in long-term care facilities and seniors’ residences have significantly reduced the
number of outbreaks in congregate living settings. While there have been some concerns about a low
uptake of COVID-19 vaccines among LTC employees, overall, the vast majority of residents and LTC
workers have been fully vaccinated. As of June 4, 2021, the number of outbreaks and cases in all PTs,
including the most affected provinces, ON and QC, has sharply decreased since its peak in January 2021.
The majority of PTs are not reporting any active outbreaks in long-term care facilities.
Several provinces and territories have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities,
including Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of
the ongoing investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results.
Long-Term Care Facility Ownership Breakdown
On September 24, CIHI released a breakdown of the type of ownership of publicly funded LTC homes
offering 24-hour nursing care across the country. Ownership of these facilities can be public or private.
Privately owned LTC homes can be subdivided into for-profit and not-for-profit organizations.
The proportion of private and publicly owned LTC homes varies by province/territory. Overall, 54% of
LTC homes in Canada are privately owned (28% for-profit, 23% not-for-profit and 3% no breakdown) and
46% are publicly owned.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
The last facility/hospital run by VAC was Ste Anne's Hospital in Quebec. It was transferred to the
province in April 2016. VAC now supports about 4,000 Veterans in over 1,150 provincially and privately
owned and operated long-term care facilities across the country. This can include subsidized
accommodation or meal costs or funding for facilities on an annual basis to support an enhanced level of
services and specialized programs for veterans.
Since 2007, Revera Inc. is a wholly-owned operating subsidiary of the Public Sector Pension Investment
Board (PSPIB), an independent Crown corporation established under the Public Sector Pension
Investment Board Act in 1999 and is registered under the Canada Business Corporations Act.
The PSPIB operates at arm's length from the federal government – i.e., it is not part of the federal public
administration. Its business affairs are managed by an 11-member Board of Directors, and investment
decisions are informed by a governance model outlined in the PSPIB Act.
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID) – PASSAGE OF BILL C-7
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The changes introduced through Bill C-7, which expanded access to MAID to more Canadians
suffering intolerably, underscored the need to support the evolution of Canada’s MAID framework.
• Budget 2021 will provide $13.2 million to Health Canada over five years, beginning in 2021-22,
with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the development of training and guidance materials for
practitioners, as well as a policy driven research agenda.
• This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to support safe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
SYNOPSIS
• Bill C-7 An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying) received Royal Assent
on March 17, 2021. In response to the 2019 Superior Court of Québec’s Truchon ruling, the new MAID
legislation removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order
to be eligible for MAID. It also includes additional safeguards for these new types of requests, as well as
the following short-term commitments:
• That a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent (i.e., by April 16,
2021). This review will address (but will not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature minors,
advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians
with disabilities.
• That the Ministers of Justice and Health initiate an independent expert panel tasked with
making recommendations by March 17, 2022 (within one year of Royal Assent) on protocols, guidance
and safeguards for MAID for persons suffering from mental illness.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, what is the Government going to do to ensure safe
implementation of the law?
KEY MESSAGES
• The new law introduces significant changes in Canada’s framework for MAID. These changes
arise from a Court decision and the views of Canadians expressed through public consultations and
debated fully in the House of Commons and the Senate.
• We recognize that the changes to the MAID regime present new challenges for provincial and
territorial governments and practitioners as they work to ensure safe, sensitive and consistent
interpretation and application of the law in health systems across the country.
• The Government will be working closely with provincial and territorial governments, medical
experts and other stakeholders over the next year and beyond to support the safe implementation of
Bill C-7.
IF PRESSED ON THE INCREASE IN MAID DEATHS IN 2020……
• In 2020, 7,595 cases of MAID were reported, accounting for 2.5% of all deaths in Canada.
• The number of MAID deaths in Canada is comparable to that of other permissive regimes, where
MAID deaths account for 0.3% - 4.1% of all deaths.
• The steady increase in MAID deaths over the last four years is expected as people become more
aware of assisted dying as a legal option and it gains greater acceptance by Canadians.
• The Second Annual Report on MAID that provides aggregated information on the delivery of
MAID in Canada in 2020 is anticipated to be released in July 2021.
• Recent changes to the MAID legislation authorize expanded data collection under the federal
monitoring regime. Following the passage of these regulations, annual reports will include even more
information on individuals requesting and receiving MAID, including information on race, Indigenous
identity and disability (as defined in the Accessible Canada Act) – as long as the individual consents to
providing this information.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that other important issues related to MAID remain to be
explored.
• As set out in the legislation, a parliamentary review of the MAID legislation will consider areas
such as the eligibility of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, palliative care and the
protection of Canadians living with disabilities.
• The Government will do whatever is required to support this work.
IF PRESSED ON THE TOPIC OF MAID FOR PERSONS WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS…
• The Government of Canada recognizes the concerns and the challenges associated with allowing
MAID for individuals suffering solely from mental illness.
• That is why the new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID
requests where mental illness is the sole condition. This is accompanied by a requirement to initiate an
independent review to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards that would be applied to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness.
• Minister Lametti and I are working together to set up the expert panel that will undertake this
work. A final report containing the panel’s conclusions and recommendations will be completed within
the year.
• Parliamentarians will then have another year to consider whether additional safeguards should
be legislated, and it will provide professional regulatory bodies and associations with the information
they need to develop appropriate guidance and resources.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVATE MEMBERS BILL C-268: PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT…
• The Criminal Code already provides significant protection for health care professionals in
relation to MAID.
• The current legislation explicitly states that nothing in the MAID legislation compels a health
care provider to provide or assist in the provision of medical assistance in dying.
• This is not changed in the new legislation.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs (Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governments of Canada and Quebec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new law responds to feedback from over 300,000 Canadians, experts, practitioners, stakeholders,
provinces and territories, provided during the January and February 2020 consultations. It is also
informed by the testimony of over 120 expert witnesses heard throughout Bill C-7’s study by the House
of Commons and the Senate.
During the period of suspension of the Truchon ruling (September 11, 2019 to March 17, 2021), Quebec
residents meeting all eligibility requirements (other than a reasonably foreseeable natural death) were
able to make an application to a court for an individual exemption to have their request for MAID
considered. A total of 19 Quebec residents received exemptions during this period (in addition to the
two plaintiffs Jean Truchon and Nicole Gladu).
The new MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months,
and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
As outlined in the previous legislation, the 2016 law was to be referred to one or more Parliamentary
Committees by June 2020, but this did not take place as a result of the pandemic. The new legislation
requires that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal Assent. The first
meeting of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying was held on Monday May 17,
2021. The Committee will meet every Monday until the House rises on June 23, 2021 (to resume in the
Fall).
The joint Chairs will be Dr. Hedy Fry (Lib) and Senator Martin (CPC). A workplan has not yet been agreed
upon, but the review is expected to address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities. The Committee must submit its report to Parliament no later than one year
after the start of the review.
MENTAL ILLNESS: SUNSET CLAUSE AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW
The new legislation includes a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests where mental
illness is the sole condition. The sunset clause is accompanied by a legislative requirement that an
independent review be initiated to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID
requests by persons who have a mental illness. Individuals with a mental illness would be required to
meet all other eligibility criteria including those that define a grievous and irremediable medical
condition. A report containing the conclusions and recommendations of the independent review must
be provided no later than 12 months after the day Bill C-7 comes into force (i.e., by March 17, 2022),
and made public very shortly thereafter.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID require the federal Minister of Health to produce an annual
report of MAID data. The first report was released in July 2020. The second annual report is anticipated
to be released in July 2021 and will cover data collected for the 2020 calendar year.
The second annual report indicates that, in 2020, there were 7,595 reported cases of MAID, accounting
for 2.5% of all deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This
represents an increase of 34.2% over 2019 when there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID. All provinces
have experienced a steady year over year growth in the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all
data sources are considered, the total number of medically assisted deaths reported in Canada from the
enactment of federal legislation to December 31, 2020 was 21,589.
A slightly greater proportion of men (51.9%) than women (48.1%) received MAID. The average age at
the time of MAID being provided was 75.3 years. Cancer (69.1%) remains the most commonly cited
underlying medical condition.
Importantly, it also found that the majority of individuals receiving MAID (82.8%) were reported to have
received palliative care services. Of those MAID recipients who did not access palliative care services
before receiving MAID, the majority (88.5%) would have had access to these services according to the
reporting practitioner. Similarly, 90.0% of persons receiving MAID who were deemed to require
disability support services had received them.
Federal reporting regulations setting out requirements for physicians, nurse practitioners and
pharmacists came into force in November 2018. Under that reporting regime, data is collected on all
written requests for MAID and its provision.
Changes to the MAID regulations following the passage of Bill C-7 will expand the collection of data to
include information on on race, Indigenous identity and disability (as defined in the Accessible Canada
Act) – as long as the individual consents to providing this information. However, regulatory changes will
take time (i.e., up between 18 to 24 months), in order to adequately consult on what data should be
collected under the expanded regime.
CHANGES TO DATA COLLECTION
Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, Health Canada will be amending the regulations to align
with the revised eligibility criteria and safeguards as well as other data collection requirements set out in
the new legislation. Bill C-7 requires that data be collected with respect to race or Indigenous identity
and disability. Expanding the MAID monitoring regime in this way will help demonstrate the presence of
any inequalities or disadvantages based on these or other characteristics in the provision of MAID. In
amending the MAID monitoring regulations, the Government will consult with a broad range of
stakeholders, including groups representing persons experiencing inequalities, to help identify the
appropriate information that needs to be collected and how collection can be undertaken in a way that
is respectful, inclusive and does not impose an unreasonable burden on clinicians who are legally
obligated to provide the data.
BILL C-268 PROTECTION OF FREEDOM OF CONSCIENCE ACT
Bill C-268, the Protection of Freedom of Conscience Act, proposes to amend the Criminal Code to create
two hybrid offences to protect the conscience rights of healthcare providers in relation to MAID: (1) an
offence prohibiting the use of violence or threats of violence, coercion or intimidation to compel a
healthcare professional to participate, directly or indirectly, in the provision of MAID; and an offence
prohibiting firing or refusing to employ healthcare professionals because they refuse to take part in
providing MAID.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS DURING COVID-19
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government has allocated $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
• The Government will provide $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support
projects for innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted by
COVID-19, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and
racialized and Black Canadians
• The Government will provide $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support a
trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for populations
at high risk of experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought about by
COVID-19
• The Government has allocated an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for the Wellness Together
Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support mental
health and well-being.
SYNOPSIS
• The Government remains committed to increasing access to mental health and substance use
resources and supports so that Canadians can get the help they need, when they need it.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government’s plan to enhance access to mental health care to support Canadians
through the pandemic and recovery period?
KEY MESSAGES
• COVID-19 continues to create stress, anxiety, and isolation for many Canadians, particularly
those who do not have access to support networks. That is why the Government launched an online
portal that provides access to mental health and substance use supports.
• Wellness Together Canada is the first national program of its kind, providing 24/7 access to free
and confidential evidence- based tools and resources.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals across the country can access supports ranging
from self-assessment, self- guided programming, and peer support, to confidential sessions with social
workers, psychologists and other professionals.
• Wellness Together Canada supports existing provincial and territorial services, and does not
replace them.
• All services are available in both official languages, and phone counselling sessions are
supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and dialects.
• To date, the Government of Canada has invested $68 million in Wellness Together Canada.
Through Budget 2021, the Government has allocated an additional $62 million in 2021-22 towards this
initiative.
IF PRESSED ON PREVIOUS INVESTMENTS
• As part of the Safe Restart Agreement in July 2020, $500 million was also provided directly to
provinces and territories for immediate mental health and substance use service needs.
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help
Phone to provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million
to support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE SERVICE
STANDARDS
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to set
national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the support
they need, when they need it.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government will provide $45 million over two years to help develop
national mental health and substance use service standards, in collaboration with provinces and
territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The COVID-19 pandemic is particularly challenging for families who may be especially vulnerable
to stress given the uncertainty and disruption to their daily routines.
• As part of the Consortium managing the Wellness Together Canada portal, Kids Help Phone is
providing support to young people via phone, text and live chat.
• We are also investing an additional $7.5M in Kids Help Phone to support their ongoing services
for youth, as a leader in responding to the needs of young Canadians.
• In addition to these actions, the Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to
provinces and territories via negotiated bilateral agreements to help them expand access, which
includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS…
• Health care workers and other front line personnel are an important population for Wellness
Together Canada. That is why the portal features a dedicated text line for frontline workers that
provides immediate access to supports.
• Frontline workers can also access free counselling and a range of self-guided programming on
the portal anytime at their convenience. This includes resources tailored for healthcare workers.
• In addition, the portal features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers and other
Canadians in accessing portal resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SERVICES TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS…
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal based on client feedback to ensure
an inclusive portal experience, tailored to meeting the needs of varying age groups and diverse
populations.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, which includes 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness, which provides Indigenous
peoples with access to immediate mental health counselling and crisis intervention.
• The portal also supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote
areas, facing stigma or financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• As of June 1, 2021, over 1.3 million individuals across all provinces and territories have accessed
the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 4.1M web sessions since launch.
• Approximately 40% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than
usual male engagement.
• Approximately 46% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an age
group that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services.
• For phone sessions, 89% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 86% of
texters were highly satisfied with the service.
• Based on a client feedback survey, 24% indicated they have no other options for support, if not
for the portal.
• WTC is currently working to develop an app that will facilitate access to the portal and ease of
use. The app is scheduled to be available by the end of June 2021.
• Health Canada will monitor the WTC portal by supporting data collection, reporting and
evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA...
• The portal strictly adheres to all privacy and health information legislation and standards to
maintain the security and confidentiality of personal information.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
• For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling by phone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals with the grief
they face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impact Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada has invested $130 million over two years in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician- researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Mental Health and Substance Use Service Standards
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government has allocated $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop national mental health and substance use service
standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so
that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to the Public Health Agency of Canada to
support projects for innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted
by COVID-19, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and
racialized and Black Canadians
• $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada to support a trauma and post-
traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for populations at high risk of
experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought about by COVID-19.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500M targeted immediate mental health
and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce, targeted
programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the pandemic by
providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is currently leading a COVID-19 and Mental Health
Research Initiative in collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. This work is
guided by an Expert Advisory Panel composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and
substance use. New knowledge generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will
inform policy making in a timely manner.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is providing $21 million over five years to the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis Services Canada. This
service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained
responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for Suicide
Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing stigma,
disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report planned for release
in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived- experience.
COVID-19 MODELLING
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture. Modelling is used
for planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The Government uses data and modelling to
guide Canada’s response to COVID-19, and to help inform public health and policy decisions to control
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic. Some provincial and territorial public health authorities are also
conducting their own modelling to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19 related cases and
deaths to aid in their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and provincial
governments?
KEY MESSAGES
• Modelling is one of the tools that supports planning our response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
We use models to illustrate possible outcomes to help us to plan the right combination and stringency
of public health and individual measures to slow the spread.
• Longer-range forecasts combine real-life case data together with our knowledge of how the
virus behaves to show what could happen in different scenarios. For example, increasing or decreasing
public health measures.
• Current modelling, as well as our experience with this pandemic to date, underscores the need
to follow all recommended public health measures to continue to maintain control of the pandemic as
new variants spread, until enough of the population is vaccinated.
IF PRESSED…
• Data shared with federal officials by the provinces and territories supports national COVID-19
models. Provinces do their own modelling to reflect their unique situations.
• The methods used by the Public Health Agency of Canada to develop national models are being
published in peer-reviewed journals, and the models are being made publicly available via the National
Collaborating Centre for Infectious Diseases.
• Many factors contribute to regional differences in the epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
• These include differences in the timing and patterns of community spread, changes in
laboratory testing practices, and differing timelines for the introduction of a range of public health
measures.
• Restrictive closures last year, the beginning of this year, and in the spring controlled waves of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Relaxing public health measures and the increasing spread of new variants in March of this year
contributed to a resurgence in many jurisdictions.
• Modelling predictions at the time accurately forecasted the resurgence.
• Current modelling shows a decline in the epidemic with continued high vaccine uptake in all age
groups and cautious easing of public health measures, however there are concerns regarding the
possible spread of the Delta (B.1.617.2) variant of concern as public health measures are eased.
IF PRESSED on Modelling
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s latest modelling takes into account a number of factors,
including the impact of public health measures and increased transmissibility of variants of concern.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) regularly uses data to update models for guiding public
health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates in the short-
term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing of public health measures to
control the pandemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic models. Forecasting
models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in Canada to estimate forward on how
many new cases might be expected in the coming week.
Dynamic models use case data and the knowledge of how COVID-19 is transmitted, from the emerging
literature. Dynamic models permit a longer-term view based on our knowledge of how the virus behaves
– this helps us to visualize potential pandemic growth scenarios and impacts of control measures that
mitigate growth over time.
Different models are being used for different purposes. Detailed models are being used to model the
public health measures needed to control the pandemic, with and without transmission of more
contagious variants of concern, and to model what measures are needed during the roll-out of vaccines.
A different model is being used to provide longer-range forecasts, with non-variants as well as with new
variants of concern. This model uses a simplified method to account for changes in public health
measures. So far, it does not account for vaccination given our uncertainty of how the vaccines perform
at preventing infection, and the expected low proportion of the population that will be vaccinated
during the period of the forecast. Vaccinations will need to be considered as greater proportions of the
population are vaccinated.
NACI’S RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE USE OF COVID-19 VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) provides recommendations on the use of
authorized COVID-19 vaccines to support provinces and territories in planning vaccine rollout in Canada.
NACI has updated its recommendations on the interchangeability of authorized COVID-19 vaccines.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What are NACI’s updated recommendations on the interchangeability of COVID-19 vaccines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization’s (NACI) updated recommendations
support mixed vaccine dose schedules as a safe and effective approach to COVID-19 vaccination.
• Canadians have been awaiting information on options for their second dose after receiving a
first dose of AstraZeneca vaccine and NACI’s guidance provides this, based on scientific evidence.
• Public health decision-makers in all jurisdictions rely on NACI for their expert guidance.
• Provinces and territories are already beginning to adjust their immunization programs.
• COVID-19 vaccines, authorized for use in Canada, are saving lives and are essential to ending the
pandemic.
• Canada’s vaccine rollout continues to accelerate, and we remain on track to fully vaccinate
everyone who wants to receive a vaccine by this September.
IF PRESSED on whether mRNA vaccines are preferred over the Janssen and AstraZeneca viral vector
vaccines:
• Health Canada has determined that the benefits outweigh the risks of all vaccines used in
Canada. The strict regulatory requirements for safety and efficacy have been met as the basis for
authorization of COVID-19 vaccines for use in Canada.
• Vaccine safety and effectiveness monitoring is built into vaccine rollout so that any safety signals
are detected and acted on immediately.
• I encourage Canadians to have confidence in the immunization programs offered in their
province or territory.
IF PRESSED on interchangeability of COVID-19 vaccines:
• Updated recommendations are based on current evidence and NACI expert opinion. Recent
studies from Germany, Spain and the United Kingdom on the safety of, and immune responses
produced by mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules provide the evidence for vaccine interchangeability.
• NACI recommendations on mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules provide flexibility for provinces
and territories as they begin offering second doses.
• More results from ongoing studies on mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules are expected soon.
NACI continues to closely monitor the evolving evidence and will update recommendations as needed.
BACKGROUND
Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts in the
fields of pediatrics, infectious diseases, immunology, pharmacy, nursing, epidemiology,
pharmacoeconomics, social sciences and public health, which provides independent advice to the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) on the optimal use of vaccines in Canada.
NACI is providing Recommendations on the Use of COVID-19 Vaccine(s) to help inform the ethical,
equitable and effective rollout of COVID-19 vaccines in the context of staggered authorization and
supply of vaccines.
As regulator, Health Canada rigorously evaluates safety and efficacy data from clinical trials before
authorizing vaccines, but does not dictate practice of medicine or make recommendations on how the
vaccines should be used in different age groups and sub-populations for public health impact.
When developing its recommendations, NACI assesses how best to use an authorized vaccine to achieve
the greatest public health benefits. It analyzes the spread of COVID-19 in Canada and the risks for
population subgroups; applies real-world data on the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines; and
develops advice on the equitable use of vaccines given vaccine supply. NACI may make
recommendations that are broader or narrower than the conditions of use approved by the regulator.
NACI also reviews evidence as it evolves, which is why recommendations may change.
NACI’s guidance is advisory in nature, as immunization program planning and delivery decisions fall
under provincial and territorial responsibilities. Provincial and territorial governments will ultimately
consider their unique needs and circumstances when planning and implementing immunization
programs.
NACI Recommendations on the use of COVID-19 vaccines
Since the authorization of the first COVID-19 vaccine in Canada in December 2020, NACI has been
providing recommendations to help inform the ethical, equitable and effective rollout of COVID-19
vaccines in the context of staggered authorization of vaccines. To date, NACI has published
recommendations on the use of the Pfizer- BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca, and Janssen COVID-19
vaccines, as well as guidance on subjects such as extended dose intervals and the interchangeability of
vaccines.
There have been confirmed cases of rare but serious blood clots with low levels of blood platelets after
receipt of the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines, a condition referred to as Vaccine-Induced Immune
Thrombotic Thrombocytopenia (VITT). NACI has weighed the benefits of the AstraZeneca and Janssen
vaccines in saving lives and protecting populations against serious complications of COVID-19 against the
risk of developing VITT.
In early clinical trials, individuals who were immunosuppressed due to disease or treatment, have an
autoimmune condition, are pregnant or are breastfeeding, were either excluded or were represented by
small numbers of participants. Based on this limited clinical trial data, NACI recommended that
authorized COVID-19 vaccines may be offered to individuals in these populations in some circumstances,
on a case-by-case basis, if the benefits outweighed the risks.
Additional evidence is now available from international real world use of COVID-19 vaccines, primarily
mRNA vaccines, in these populations. In May 2021, NACI reviewed vaccine safety data, as well as COVID-
19 risks for these groups. Evidence showed COVID-19 vaccines are safe and effective in these
populations. As such, NACI recommendations for these populations are now the same as
recommendations for the general adult population.
Current Recommendations
NACI continues to preferentially recommend a complete series with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine should
be offered to individuals in the authorized age group, including those who are immunosuppressed, have
an autoimmune disease, are pregnant or are breastfeeding, without contraindications to the vaccine. If
an mRNA vaccine is contraindicated, another authorized COVID-19 vaccine should be offered. NACI
preferentially recommends mRNA vaccines due to the excellent protection they provide and the
absence of the VITT safety signal.
NACI recommends that a complete series with the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine should be offered
to adolescents 12 to 18 years of age.
At this time and based on current evidence, NACI recommends a complete series with a viral vector
COVID-19 vaccine (AstraZeneca, Janssen) may be offered to individuals 30 years of age and older
without contraindications if the individual prefers an earlier vaccine rather than wait for an mRNA
vaccine, and if all the following conditions apply:
• A benefit-risk analysis determines that the benefit of earlier vaccination with a viral vector
vaccine outweighs the risk of the individual getting COVID-19 while waiting for an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine;
• The individual provides informed consent once the benefits and risks of VITT compared to
COVID-19 are clearly outlined, including how long the individual will have to wait for an mRNA vaccine
and what public health measures the individual is able to take to minimize their exposure to the COVID-
19 virus; and
• The individual will have to wait a long time in order to receive an mRNA vaccine.
The public health benefit-risk analysis for the use of the AstraZeneca and Janssen vaccines may vary
between jurisdictions. Provinces and territories should adapt NACI’s recommended age threshold based
on their unique circumstances, including local COVID-19 epidemiology; local vaccine supply and logistics;
and equity considerations. Health officials can refer to the Risk Assessment Tool in the updated
statement to help determine how to use the viral vector vaccines.
Healthcare professionals should be aware of VITT, including how to diagnose and treat the condition.
Individuals who receive the AstraZeneca or Janssen COVID-19 vaccine should monitor their health and
immediately seek medical attention if they develop symptoms of VITT.
At this time, NACI continues to recommend that people previously infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus
be offered a complete series of a COVID-19 vaccine.
NACI will continue to closely monitor the evolving data on authorized COVID-19 vaccines, including data
on VITT, and update their recommendations as needed.
Extended intervals
In February 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada and the Chief Medical Officers of Health from
across the country asked NACI to revisit their dose interval recommendation, given new real-world
evidence of the protection of one dose of COVID-19 vaccines and the need for jurisdictions to
implement vaccine intervals beyond six weeks.
In response to this request, NACI thoroughly reviewed all available evidence regarding efficacy (clinical
trials), effectiveness (real-world use) and duration of protection of the first dose of COVID-19 vaccines,
including in sub- populations (e.g., older adults). NACI also assessed the impact of extending the interval
between the priming (first) dose and boosting (second) dose on the immune response; the impact of
extended dose intervals on variants of concern; and the population-level impacts of rapidly providing
more people with a first dose of a COVID-19 vaccine.
On March 3, 2021, NACI released a rapid response recommending that in the context of limited vaccine
supply and ongoing pandemic disease, jurisdictions should maximize the number of individuals
benefiting from the first dose of an effective COVID-19 vaccine by extending dose intervals of all
authorized two-dose COVID-19 vaccines up to four months. Due to the urgency for jurisdictions to
consider implementing extended dose intervals, the rapid response statement contained an abridged
rationale. On April 7, 2021, the full advisory committee statement explaining NACI’s rationale for the
recommendation, including updated detailed evidence summaries and references, was published.
NACI’s recommendations have not changed since the March 3 Rapid Response publication.
In May 2021, NACI reviewed up to date information on vaccine effectiveness from Canada and the
United Kingdom, where extended intervals are also being used. Evidence continues to suggest good
protection against COVID-19 symptomatic infection, hospitalization and death following one dose of all
COVID-19 vaccines authorized for use in Canada. A second dose is still required to provide optimal and
longer-lasting protection.
NACI continues to recommend jurisdictions maximize the number of individuals benefiting from the first
dose of a COVID-19 vaccine by extending dose intervals of all authorized two-dose COVID-19 vaccines up
to four months. At this stage in the pandemic, and with Canada’s increasing vaccine supply, second
doses should be offered as soon as possible with priority given to those at highest risk of severe illness
and death after or at the same time as first doses are offered to all remaining eligible populations.
The extended dose interval recommendation is based on:
• Clinical trial evidence that demonstrates very good vaccine efficacy from the first dose;
• New real-world evidence that suggests good vaccine effectiveness against symptomatic disease
and asymptomatic infection and very good effectiveness against hospitalization, including among older
populations (there is currently no evidence that this protection decreases over time);
• Mathematical modelling, which demonstrates that accelerating vaccine coverage by extending
dose intervals would have substantial population-level benefits by reducing symptomatic disease,
hospitalizations and deaths while there is limited vaccine supply;
• Knowledge of vaccines, which indicate that a longer interval between the first and second dose
generally results in a better immune response after the second dose;
• Experience with other multi-dose vaccines, which suggests that protection from first dose of a
vaccine series can last six months or longer, while second doses extend protection even longer;
• Public health principles of ethical decision-making, including equity, feasibility and accessibility,
which favour extending intervals, especially while cases of COVID-19, hospitalizations, and severe illness
and deaths, are high, and faster progress towards population protection will help to protect vulnerable
populations; and
• NACI’s expert opinion that within a global pandemic setting, reducing the risk of severe disease
outcomes in the majority of the population and decreasing transmission in the community will have the
greatest public health impact.
The impact of extending the interval between doses on variants of concern is unknown; however, there
is currently no evidence that an extended interval between doses will either increase or decrease the
emergence of variants of concern. COVID-19 mRNA vaccines and the AstraZeneca vaccine have shown
promising early results against variant B.1.1.7, first detected in the United Kingdom. As effectiveness of
the first dose against other variants of concern is emerging, ongoing monitoring will be conducted.
NACI will continue to closely monitor the evidence on effectiveness of extending dose intervals,
including on variants of concern, and will update its recommendations as needed.
Vaccine Interchangeability
On June 1, 2021, NACI released updated recommendations on the interchangeability of authorized
COVID-19 vaccines. These recommendations were urgently needed for provinces and territories to
consider as they plan the rollout of second doses.
Updated recommendations are based on current evidence and NACI’s expert opinion. Recent studies on
the safety of and immune responses produced by mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules provide the
evidence for vaccine interchangeability. A study from Germany and the CoM-CoV clinical trial from the
United Kingdom report on the safety of mixed schedules, and the Spanish CombiVacS trial reports on
both the safety and immune responses produced from mixed COVID-19 vaccines. Current evidence
suggests a first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine followed by a second dose of an mRNA vaccine (Pfizer-
BioNTech was used in the studies) has a good safety profile at shorter (4 week) and longer (8 to 12
week) intervals. There is a possibility of increased short-term side effects when using mixed COVID-19
vaccine schedules, especially with shorter intervals. These side effects are temporary and resolve
without complications.
NACI also considered the risk of VITT associated with the AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine, Canada’s
current and projected mRNA vaccine supply and principles of ethical decision-making.
NACI recommends that the same mRNA vaccine administered for the first dose should be offered for the
second dose. If the same mRNA vaccine is not readily available or unknown, another mRNA vaccine can
be considered interchangeable and should be offered to complete the vaccine series.
NACI guidance indicates individuals who received a first dose of the AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine
may receive either the AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine or an mRNA vaccine for their second dose. In
making this recommendation, NACI considered:
• The risk of VITT associated with the AstraZeneca viral vector vaccine but not the mRNA vaccines;
• The possibility of increased short-term side effects with mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules; and
• Available data on the immune responses produced by a first dose of the AstraZeneca vaccine
followed by a second dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine.
NACI recommendations on mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules provide flexibility for provinces and
territories as they begin offering second doses to their populations. They also provide flexibility and
choice to individuals who received a first dose of the AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine. Provinces and
territories will determine the best way to manage their vaccine supply.
More results from ongoing studies on mixed COVID-19 vaccine schedules are expected soon. NACI
continues to closely monitor the evolving evidence and will update recommendations as needed.
COVISHIELD
NACI has not conducted (nor have they been asked to conduct) an external review of the COVISHIELD
vaccine, Serum Institute of India (SII) version of the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine. As such, NACI’s
updated recommendations do not include recommendations on the use of the SII COVID-19 vaccine;
however, Health Canada has determined the AstraZeneca and SII COVID-19 vaccines are comparable.
Indigenous Communities
The Government of Canada continues to engage Indigenous leaders on planning for vaccine programs,
and to determine how to best serve Indigenous peoples, many of whom live in crowded multi-
generational housing. Given the particular challenges some of these communities face, special
consideration will be given to vaccine rollout in these communities.
THE COMMISSIONER OF THE ENVIRONMENT AND SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT’S AUDIT OF THE
NATURAL HEALTH PRODUCTS PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
• On April 22, 2021, at 10 a.m. EDT, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable
Development tabled an audit report of the Natural Health Products Program. Health Canada agrees with
the findings and recommendations, and is committed to implementing measures to improve the
oversight of natural health products and implement proactive risk-based activities.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• Are the natural health products on the market safe to use?
• What is the Department doing in response to the audit?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of ensuring that natural health products available for
sale in Canada are safe and effective.
• The audit focussed on natural health products available for sale in Canada to ensure that they
are safe, effective and accurately represented to consumers.
• The audit found that Health Canada licensed natural health products appropriately, based on
evidence of safety and efficacy prior to licensing. It also found that when an issue was brought to Health
Canada’s attention, immediate action was taken.
• It also concluded that Health Canada acted appropriately to increase the supply of alcohol-based
hand sanitizers in response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The audit also identified areas for improvement. Health Canada agrees with the
recommendations from the Commissioner.
• The department is already working to address all of the recommendations and is taking steps to
accelerate its efforts to strengthen the Natural Health Products Program, including increased oversight
of quality, advertising and labelling.
IF PRESSED…
Are the natural health products on the market safe to use?
• Canada has one of the best regulatory systems in the world for natural health products, with
some of the most stringent requirements.
• For many Canadians, natural health products are an important part of maintaining a healthy
lifestyle.
• While manufacturers are ultimately responsible for ensuring the safety of the natural health
products they sell in Canada, Health Canada assesses the products for safety, efficacy and quality prior
to issuing a license.
• While the audit identified areas for improvement, it found that overall, Health Canada’s
approach to assessing safety and efficacy of natural health products prior to licensing is appropriate. The
audit also found that when an issue was brought to Health Canada’s attention, once the product was on
the market, the Department took appropriate action to mitigate any risks to Canadians.
• Our department is already working to address all of the audit recommendations, including
strengthening the oversight of online advertising, launching an inspection pilot program intended to
inform the development of a permanent inspection program, and helping ensure that the department
has the tools to protect the health and safety of Canadians when a serious health risk arises.
IF PRESSED….
What were the recommendations and the Department’s response?
• The audit recommendations include; increased oversight of the quality of natural health
products, greater monitoring of labels and advertising, improved product labelling, developing a risk-
based inspection program, and introducing proactive risk-based activities for compliance and
enforcement.
• Health Canada’s response focuses on strengthening the oversight of online advertising to ensure
that Canadians have accurate and reliable information to inform their choices, launching an inspection
pilot program intended to inform the development of a permanent inspection program, and bringing
forward a regulatory proposal to improve labelling so product labels are clear, consistent and legible for
consumers.
• The department will work to ensure it has the tools to protect the health and safety of
Canadians when a serious health risk arises by considering the expansion of Vanesa’s law authorities to
natural health products.
• Health Canada is also working on stabilizing funding by developing a proposal to implement cost
recovery for key regulatory activities related to natural health products in order to sustain increased
oversight of these products, including through inspections of the facilities that make or import them.
IF PRESSED….
How long will it take Health Canada to implement the recommended changes?
• In many of the areas of recommendation, work to address gaps has already begun. For example:
o An inspection pilot program was recently launched to promote and verify compliance of licence
holders across Canada.
o The Department is also expanding its oversight of online advertising of natural health products
through a pilot program to ensure advertisements are providing Canadians with accurate and reliable
information to inform their choices.
o The Department is on track to publish a regulatory proposal to improve the labelling of natural health
products for consultation later this spring.
• Other elements of the Department’s response will take more time to implement, such as the
Department’s plans to take steps to propose fees for natural health products and expanding Vanessa’s
Law to natural health products. To implement this, the Department will develop a proposal which will be
subject to comprehensive stakeholder consultation prior to implementation.
BACKGROUND
In 2019, the Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development (CESD) began an audit of
Health Canada’s Natural Health Products Program. The period covered by the audit is from January 2017
to May 2020. The purpose of the audit was to determine whether Health Canada ensured that natural
health products available for sale in Canada are safe and accurately represented to consumers. In June
2020, the audit scope was expanded to include Health Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic
specific to the Natural Health Products Program.
Health Canada regulates natural health products sold in Canada to ensure they are safe and effective.
Natural health products include products such as vitamins and minerals, herbal remedies, homeopathic
products, traditional products (such as traditional Chinese medicines), and probiotics. Particularly
relevant in the context of COVID-19, natural health products also include alcohol-based hand sanitizers.
The auditors made five recommendations, all of which the Department has accepted. The
recommendations support the direction that the Department has been taking to improve the oversight
of these products. Work to address many of these areas had already begun. The Department has
developed a detailed action plan in response to the audit, which is expected to be implemented over the
next three years.
The Department is committed to addressing the audit findings by implementing measures to improve
the oversight of natural health products, including enhanced enforcement tools and more proactive risk-
based monitoring activities.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT AND PERSONAL PROTECTIVE EQUIPMENT
AND MEDICAL DEVICE PROCUREMENT
SYNOPSIS
The global COVID-19 pandemic resulted in an initial unprecedented shortage of personal protective
equipment (PPE), medical equipment, and supplies. To support the needs of Canada’s frontline
healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in coordination with the provinces and territories,
launched a significant bulk procurement and bolstered the pandemic stockpile, engaging a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers both internationally and through the Government of
Canada’s domestic “Call to Action” to increase domestic production.
As a result of these efforts, the Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving shipments on a daily basis by
air, land and sea, and Canada is now successfully producing Made-in-Canada PPE, medical equipment
and supplies to address the urgent needs of frontline workers, and the safety of Canadians at large.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare workers with the PPE
required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of COVID-19?
• What is the Government of Canada doing to prepare for resurgence and/or mass vaccination
campaign scenarios?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada is continuing to receive a steady supply of PPE with shipments arriving daily, which are
rapidly allocated to provinces and territories.
• As of May 25, Public Services and Procurement Canada has confirmed contracts for a variety of
PPE, medical equipment and supplies including:
o over 191 million N95 respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95 respirators; FFP2);
o 451 million surgical masks;
o 1.5 billion pairs of gloves;
o 153 million protective gowns; and
o 40 thousand ventilators.
• We allocate PPE and supplies based on an 80/20 formula, with 80% being allocated to provinces
and territories to distribute within their jurisdiction and 20% to replenish the inventory of the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile. This formula was developed in consultation with provinces and
territories.
• In response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories, we are also
deploying PPE, medical equipment and supplies from the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS WORKING TO SECURE A SUFFICIENT QUANTITY
OF PPE IN CANADA
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work with Health Canada, and provinces and
territories to review the supply and demand of PPE, medical equipment and supplies, based on worst-
case epidemiological scenarios, to determine maximum needs.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada are also continuing to work with
provincial and territorial partners to identify supply gaps and ongoing procurement needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE DISPOSAL OF PPE PRIOR TO THE PANDEMIC
• In 2018 and 2019, the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile disposed of quantities of personal
protective equipment such as N95 respirators, gloves and gowns that had past their limit of acceptable
use as recommended by the manufacturer.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada has approved the use of expired N95
respirators with certain considerations, which has facilitated NESS deployment of expired assets.
• For N95 respirators being deployed to the provinces and territories for healthcare settings, the
Public Health Agency of Canada is required to show evidence that the N95s have passed testing and
quality verification requirements and meets the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for
healthcare settings, prior to any distribution.
• For other types of expired PPE, manufacturers must receive approval from Health Canada after
demonstrating the product is usable beyond the initial expiry period.
IF PRESSED ON THE MADE-IN-CANADA VENTILATORS
• As part of the Plan to Mobilize Industry to fight COVID-19, contracts were awarded to five
Canadian suppliers for the procurement of ventilators.
• Current modelling suggests an oversupply of ventilators. The Government of Canada is currently
working with manufacturers to reduce volumes.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorial governments to
develop an allocation strategy for these ventilators.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will also be retaining an inventory of ventilators in the
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to meet future needs of the healthcare sector.
IF PRESSED ON CANADA’S DONATION TO INDIA
• Canada donated 350 Baylis Medical ventilators from the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
and 25,000 vials of remdesivir, an antiviral drug, as India confirmed a need for these critical supplies and
drugs.
• The Baylis ventilator (model: V4C-560) was authorized by Health Canada in June 2020, under the
Interim Order respecting the importation and sale of medical devices for use in relation to COVID-19 for
the treatment of patients.
• The ventilators and remdesivir donated to India will not compromise continued efforts to
support the COVID-19 response in Canada. Current modelling indicates that Canada has successfully
secured over and above an appropriate stockpile of ventilators to meet its potential needs in a worst-
case COVID-19 surge scenario.
IF PRESSED ON KN95S DISPOSABLE RESPIRATORS FROM TANGO COMMUNCATION MARKETING INC.
• As this file is in litigation, I cannot speak to the specifics of the file.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and territories
(PTs) can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters and other
public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items
such as: medical equipment and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and
blankets.
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of the frontline health care response to
COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach of interdepartmental
coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, National
Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the Department of National Defense, Public Services and
Procurement Canada (PSPC), Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Canada (ISED).
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to be able to respond in a reasonable manner to the
most common emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement
and management of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• It provides surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient; and
• It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health emergencies, for example,
costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
PHAC acknowledges that the pandemic created unprecedented demand for certain types of supplies.
Canada, like most countries, is applying the lessons learned from the COVID-19 outbreak to our
stockpiling strategies and considering all options going forward to ensure that the most effective
stockpile practices are implemented and maintained.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and warehouses strategically
located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved from nine warehouse locations across Canada
to six. An independent assessment indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’
role as timely surge capacity support.
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS has added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 1 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to a new location, while obsolete and expired
supplies are disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
NESS Funding
In 2010-11, the ongoing annual base funding for the NESS, including salary and operating costs was $5.6
million. By 2012-13, the annual base funding for the NESS was reduced to $3 million. Additional funding
has historically been provided to the NESS through internal reallocation decisions and incremental
funding decisions through which PHAC has received funding linked to specific purchases, such as a four-
year investment in medical countermeasures against smallpox and anthrax that began in 2015-16.
More than $5.8 billion has been invested in the NESS since the onset of the COVID-19 outbreak in
Canada for the procurement of PPE, medical equipment and supplies and for logistics and warehousing.
PPE Procurement, Domestic Capacity Building and Distribution
At the beginning of the pandemic, PHAC led a bulk procurement process of PPE, medical equipment and
supplies on behalf of the federal government and PTs. This bulk procurement was to support the large-
scale effort to combat COVID-19 and was agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health. PHAC allocated bulk
procured PPE using an 80/20 formula: 80% is distributed to PTs on a per capita basis and the remaining
20% replenishes the NESS inventory, including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada to support
the requirements of First Nations on reserve.
Products from the bulk procurement continue to arrive daily at NESS warehouses and are rapidly
allocated to PTs to support healthcare workers across the country. In parallel, PHAC is bolstering its
stockpile of PPE and medical devices so that it can respond, when needed, to the surge capacity needs
of PTs above the allocation they receive from the bulk procurement process.
Procurement and distribution of PPE for other government departments is led by PSPC.
In addition to original bulk procurement efforts, ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian
industries to increase domestic manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce
equipment and supplies including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role, conducting
technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of Canada technical specifications
for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell website.
Access is further facilitated by Health Canada, by expediting regulatory approvals of products through
the Interim Order (IO) for Medical Devices signed by the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. On
March 1, 2021, Health Canada introduced Interim Order No. 2 respecting the importation and sale of
medical devices for use in relation to COVID-19, which replaced and repealed the first Interim Order. As
the regulatory authority, Health Canada also continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
medical devices for use in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
Health Canada also continues to actively engage the medical device industry as well as provinces and
territories to monitor for any signals of supply disruptions in Canada. Manufacturers and importers are
also required to notify the Minister of Health of medical device shortages considered critical.
Health Canada is closely monitoring the supply of any potential treatments for COVID-19 and working
with companies to help ensure continued supply in Canada.
Health Canada is also modelling PPE, medical equipment and supplies, and supply and demand at
provincial and territorial, as well as pan-Canadian levels, to understand and plan for possible pressure
points across different sectors of the economy and to inform future procurement plans of PPE, medical
equipment and supplies.
In addition, the government is also exploring opportunities for more environmentally conscious federal
PPE, medical equipment and supply procurement.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers and manufacturers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before distribution to PTs. If
PHAC cannot account for the quality of equipment, it is not distributed to PTs for frontline healthcare
response. This process is supported by testing capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with suppliers to address
issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers in the future once issues are
identified.
Health Canada continues to monitor authorized medical devices for safety and effectiveness after
authorizing them for use in Canada. If concerns arise, Health Canada takes appropriate action to protect
the health and safety of Canadians.
KN95 Respirators
On May 8, 2020, the CBC reported that of the approximately 11 million KN95 respirators received by the
Government of Canada and sourced by a Montreal-based supplier out of China, 8 million did not meet
the Government of Canada’s technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response, 1
million met specifications, and 1.6 million were pending testing results. The number not meeting
specifications has since increased to approximately 10 million. Where possible, supplies that do not
meet specifications are subsequently assessed for potential use in non-healthcare settings.
Canada’s Action against Tango Communication Marketing Inc
On May 6, 2021, Canada brought an action against Tango Communication Marketing Inc. for $81M. In
the spring of 2020, Canada purchased 37 million KN95 respirators from Tango. Large upfront payments
were commonplace at the beginning of the pandemic when PPE was urgently sought. Canada’s position
is that a large number of the respirators did not meet the contractual requirements.
Disposal of PPE
In response to a question raised at the Government Operations Committee, the Public Health Agency of
Canada reported on disposals of personal protective equipment in the calendar years of 2018, 2019 and
2020. This disclosure indicated that in 2018, PHAC disposed of 6,930,696 units of PPE, which included
N95 respirators, gloves and surgical masks. In 2019, PHAC disposed of 1,909,246 units of PPE, including
N95 respirators, gowns, gloves and surgical masks. All units of PPE had passed the limit of acceptable
use, as recommended by the manufacturer. No units of PPE were disposed of in 2020.
Health Canada, in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, approved the use and has allowed the
deployment of expired N95 respirators with certain considerations. For N95 respirators being deployed
to the provinces and territories for healthcare settings, PHAC is required to show evidence that the N95s
have passed testing and quality verification requirements and meets the Government of Canada’s
technical specifications for healthcare settings, prior to any distribution.
For other types of expired PPE, manufacturers must receive approval from Health Canada after
demonstrating the product is usable beyond the initial expiry period.
Taking into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC is currently working on a
strategic long-term plan that will focus on capacity and readiness of the NESS to support responses to
future public health emergencies. This is expected to include a focus on key areas such as optimizing
operations, including logistics and life-cycle management; enhancing infrastructure and systems;
working closely with PTs and other key partners to strengthen Canada’s overall preparedness; and,
conducting ongoing analysis on asset requirements.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19. Each has
been contracted to provide made-in-Canada ventilators (for a total of up to 38,520): FTI Professional
Grade (FTI), CAE, Canadian Emergency Ventilators/Starfish, Vexos and Thornhill Medical.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Updated information and modelling
indicate that Canada has successfully secured an appropriate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet
its potential needs.
As of March 25, 2021, the Government of Canada has successfully secured 27,689 ventilators. Thanks to
the efforts of our suppliers and based on latest modelling estimates, Canada now has more ventilators
than would be needed in a worst-case COVID-19 resurgence scenario. As a result, PSPC and PHAC are
working with the manufacturers to identify opportunities to reduce the volumes.
CAE Ventilators
CAE is one of five companies contracted by the Government of Canada to domestically manufacture
ventilators. While the company initially received authorization from Health Canada under the Interim
Order in June 2020, Health Canada and PHAC identified quality issues associated with the initial
shipment of ventilators delivered in July 2020. Health Canada required CAE to issue an amendment to
address issues identified. Further to the amendment submitted by CAE, Health Canada authorized the
CAE Air 1 version 1 on September 28, 2020. CAE also submitted an application for the CAE Air 1 version
2, which Health Canada authorized on November 18, 2020.
PHAC has identified concerns with ventilator quality and reported observations to Health Canada for
regulatory consideration. In December 2020, Health Canada requested and assessed information from
CAE relating to their quality system. The review concluded CAE has an adequate quality management
system in place.
In January 2021, PHAC reported issues with backup power modules within the CAE ventilators. Health
Canada’s assessment of this issue is ongoing.
Canada’s Donation to India
Due to a significant surge in COVID-19 cases in India, the Government of Canada is sending up to 25,000
vials of the antiviral Veklury (remdesivir) and up to 350 Baylis Medical ventilators from its National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) to help respond to the critical situation in India. Up to 2,500 Baylis
Medical ventilators are available from NESS.
A delivery on May 5 included an immediate 50 ventilators as part of an initial supply of up to 350
ventilators. However, the ventilators require a different electrical cord for use in India. The ventilator
manufacturer, Baylis Medical, was able to secure the power cords required for the immediate shipment
of 50 ventilators; with remaining ventilators subsequently being shipped with adaptors.
Canada is also sending up to 25,000 vials of the antiviral Veklury (remdesivir), which is used for the
treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19. 25,000 vials is equivalent to more than 4,000
courses of treatment.
The donation of these supplies to India will not compromise continued efforts to support the COVID-19
response in Canada. Updated information and current modelling indicate that Canada has successfully
secured over and above an appropriate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet its potential needs in
a worst-case COVID-19 surge scenario.
OVERDOSE CRISIS
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• Canada continues to face an opioid overdose crisis that has devastated lives and communities
across the country.
• To support efforts in communities, Budget 2021 proposes to provide an additional $116 million
over two years, building on $66 million invested in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, to support a
range of innovative approaches to harm reduction, treatment, and prevention.
SYNOPSIS
• The overdose crisis continues to be a serious and unrelenting public health threat. Tragically, the
COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions across the
country reporting increases in overdose deaths and harms. In addition, people who use drugs are also
facing additional barriers and risks related to the toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to
health and social services, including life-saving harm reduction and treatment.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government addressing the overdose crisis in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s recent history.
• Tragically, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated long-standing challenges regarding
substance use and the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose
deaths and harms.
• Our government has taken urgent action to address the overdose crisis using a public health-
focused approach, guided by our federal drug strategy – the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy.
We continue to support efforts to improve access to treatment services; increase access to harm
reduction services; strengthen enforcement to help reduce the toxic illegal drug supply; increase
awareness and prevention efforts; and, build the evidence base through investments in research and
surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
frontline service providers and people with lived and living experience to advance solutions to save lives
and help reverse this national public health crisis while recognizing that problematic substance use must
be treated as a health condition.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL COVID-19-SPECIFIC MEASURES…
• The Government of Canada has taken swift action to address the unique challenges posed by
the COVID-19 pandemic.
• We have taken urgent action to enable the health system to better meet the needs of people
struggling with problematic substance use and avert the harms associated with the increasingly toxic
supply of street drugs and challenges associated with accessing treatment and harm reduction services.
• For example, we removed regulatory barriers to make it easier for people with substance use
disorder to access the medications they need and have also made it easier for overdose prevention sites
to be established rapidly in temporary community shelters and other locations.
• We have also provided $500 million under the Safe Restart Agreements with Provinces and
Territories to address immediate needs and gaps in the support and protection of people experiencing
challenges related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
• Recently, we announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of naloxone kits and opioid
overdose response training to support communities across Canada that have been particularly affected
by the opioid overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those
struggling with substance use.
• That is why we have approved the use of new medications to treat opioid use disorder and
facilitated their prescribing and dispensing through regulatory amendments; supported the
development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist treatment; and encouraged the
provinces and territories to increase their uptake of these evidence-based treatments.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has also provided $150 million in Budget 2018 through
the Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• The evidence is clear, harm reduction measures help reduce harms and save lives.
• That is why we have funded innovative pilot projects for safer supply models as an alternative to
the toxic illegal drug supply; have passed the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act to provide some legal
protection for people who seek emergency help during an overdose; have exemptions in place for 37
operating supervised consumption sites; and have increased access to naloxone, including to remote
communities and isolated First Nations and Inuit communities and to the sector serving individuals who
are experiencing homelessness.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention efforts, including
awareness building.
• That is why we have invested in prevention campaigns to engage youth and young adults on the
facts of substance use, expanded public awareness around opioids and the harms of stigma via public
health campaigns; supported school-based approaches that enhance student well-being to prevent
problematic substance use amongst youth; and supported the development of opioid-prescribing
guidelines and treatment guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our government is aware that the pandemic has led to a more uncertain and dangerous illegal
drug supply, resulting in tragic increases in overdose-related deaths across the country.
• For this reason, we have taken a number of actions to reduce barriers to providing people who
use drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• For example, we have allowed pharmacists and practitioners to extend, renew and transfer
prescriptions to make made it easier for people to access the medications they need during the
pandemic.
• In addition, the Government of Canada is providing funding to support safer supply projects in
British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. The evaluation of these innovative
projects will continue to build the evidence base and support the scaling up of effective models.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• International and Canadian evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms
and save lives.
• These sites reduce risk of overdose death and of transmission of infection. In addition, they
provide access to other health and social services for people who use drugs, including opportunities to
access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces and territories, service providers, people with lived and
living experience, and other stakeholders to take appropriate measures to maintain and expand access
to supervised consumption services in communities that need them.
IF PRESSED ON ENFORCEMENT/TOXIC DRUG SUPPLY…
• Our government recognizes that the toxic illegal drug supply is the leading cause of opioid
overdose harms and deaths, and that substance use requires a public health-centered approach.
• We continue to work closely with domestic and international partners to reduce the illegal
fentanyl supply; equip border agents with tools to intercept fentanyl; and, work with private sector
partners to address money laundering of the proceeds of fentanyl trafficking.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH AND SURVEILLANCE…
• Our government recognizes that in order to have an effective response to the ever-changing
crisis, a strong understanding and evidence-base is required to make informed and timely decisions.
• That is why, we have collected and published data on opioid-related deaths and harms; used
modelling to show how the opioid overdose crisis may change as a result of the COVID-19 pandemic;
conducted rapid knowledge synthesis; and, developed a range of guidance documents to support
evidence-based interventions.
IF PRESSED ON DECRIMINALIZATION…
• Our Government recognizes that substance use is first and foremost a health issue.
• We have lost too many Canadians to drug overdoses, and an increasing number of stakeholders
are saying criminalizing personal drug possession is hurting, not helping.
• We are looking at ways to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice system
and towards health and social supports, such as supervised consumption sites and drug treatment
services.
• The Public Prosecution Service of Canada has issued a directive to only pursue charges for
possession of illegal drugs in the most serious cases. In addition, this Government has announced
amendments to federal drug laws in Bill C-22 that would further support actions to treat simple drug
possession more as a health issue, rather than as a criminal one.
• We will continue to work with other levels of government and stakeholders to help save lives
and better support the needs of people who use drugs during this crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE SECTION 56 EXEMPTION REQUEST FROM THE CITY OF VANCOUVER AND BRITISH
COLUMBIA THAT WOULD DECRIMINALIZE THE PERSONAL POSSESSION OF DRUGS…
• Health Canada is working with the Province of British Columbia and the City of Vancouver. We
will continue our work to get Canadians who use substances the support they need.
• Health Canada is committed to carefully reviewing any request for an exemption under the
Controlled Drugs and Substance Act on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential benefits and
risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE’S PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE CRIMINAL CODE AND
THE CONTROLLED DRUGS AND SUBSTANCES ACT (BILL C-222, INTRODUCED FEBRUARY 18, 2021)…
• This Bill represents a step forward in treating substance use as a health issue and addressing
systemic issues in the criminal justice system that disproportionately affect Indigenous peoples and
Black Canadians.
• The Bill would require police and prosecutors to consider alternative measures - including
diverting individuals to addiction treatment programs, giving a warning or taking no further action -
instead of laying charges or prosecuting individuals for simple possession of an illegal drug.
• We understand that many stakeholders are continuing to call for full drug decriminalization.
• We remain committed to saving lives and better supporting the needs of people who use drugs
during the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• Our government recognizes the close links between people who live with pain, substance use
and the overdose crisis.
• That is why we created the Canadian Pain Task Force to better understand these links and to
identify potential actions to better prevent and manage chronic pain in Canada.
• In early May, the Canadian Pain Task Force published their final report which includes
recommendations on key areas to ensure people with pain are recognized and supported, and that pain
is understood, prevented and effectively treated across Canada.
• We will continue to work with our partners to explore implementing the recommendations and
potential next steps.
• We have also invested over $175M in pain-related research through the Canadian Institutes for
Health Research and close to $19M in funding for 12 initiatives focused on improving opioid prescribing
practices and pain management through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP).
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 19,355 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and September 2020. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the crisis
with as many as 82% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2020 (January to September)
involving fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with
death most common among males and individuals aged 20 to 49 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing increased risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Available information indicate at least five provinces and
territories have observed record-breaking numbers of deaths in April to September 2020.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be the
most impacted region of the country. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,724
illegal drug toxicity deaths, a 75% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally, the crisis in
BC continues into 2021 with 680 illicit toxicity deaths recorded in the first four months, a 73% increase
from the same period in 2020. This is the largest number of suspected deaths ever recorded in the
month of April (176 deaths). Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people in BC have also
surged, almost doubling between January and May 2020 compared to the same period in 2019. In 2020,
Alberta also experienced a 61% increase in opioid overdose deaths among First Nations people, as
compared to the same time period in 2019.
Other jurisdictions across the country are reporting similar trends. Ten provinces and territories (ON, AB,
SK, MB, QC, NB, PEI, NL, YK, and NWT) are also reporting increases in toxicity of the illegal drug supply,
overdose deaths and/or emergency department or medical service (EMS) calls.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of nearly
$700M to address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products and tools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statement (December 2020) to help support community-based
organizations responding to substance use issues address the additional challenges posted by the
COVID- 19 pandemic. In March 2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the
distribution of naloxone kits and opioid overdose response training to support communities that have
been particularly affected by the opioid overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving
health outcomes of their residents.
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action to make it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for frontline service
providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
OUTBREAK MONITORING
SYNOPSIS
The Government of Canada is working with provincial, territorial and international partners to detect
signals and investigate transmission patterns to closely monitor the emergence and spread of COVID-19
in communities across Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How is the federal government monitoring new outbreaks of COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of continued outbreak monitoring.
• Multiple data sources are used to monitor the current situation in Canada, including daily case
information by province and territory, and any developing outbreaks.
• Provinces and territories share data with the Public Health Agency of Canada, which are
analyzed daily to monitor patterns of transmission.
• We continue to use early warning systems to collect and exchange timely information on illness
clusters in Canada and internationally.
• The Canadian Network for Public Health Intelligence platform is also facilitating the secure,
timely exchange of information between local, regional, provincial, territorial and federal public health
officials related to events of public health concern.
BACKGROUND
Outbreak monitoring and response is part of the core work of the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC). Existing initiatives are based on many years of epidemiological expertise and include both
technological solutions as well as communication channels. Initiatives include:
• Public Health Alerts (PHA), administered and distributed by the Canadian Network for Public
Health Intelligence (CNPHI), facilitate secure, timely exchange of information between local/regional,
provincial/territorial (PT) and federal public health officials regarding events of public health concern.
• FluWatch is an online health surveillance system that helps track the spread of influenza and
influenza-like illnesses across Canada and is an important part of Canada's national influenza
surveillance program.
• The Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) scans publicly available information in
order to give early-warning of illness clusters in Canada and internationally.
• Outbreak intelligence is gathered via “web scraping” (in-depth scanning) of PT websites/press
releases and media coverage, and information is assessed daily by epidemiologists.
• A new system for standardized, routine reporting of outbreaks from PTs to PHAC is in
development.
These initiatives have been leveraged to effectively monitor and respond to this pandemic. This includes
collecting granular and near real-time data, and the use of new and complementary data streams.
Engagement with PTs
PHAC works closely with PTs to monitor and respond to outbreaks. PTs report case level data to PHAC,
which are analyzed on a daily basis in order to monitor epidemiological trends for early detection of new
patterns of transmission.
PHAC also supports PTs with the management of outbreaks of national concern. PHAC is called upon by
PTs to investigate and to provide additional technical expertise or specialized skills as required. This
includes deployment of personnel (including field epidemiologists and public health officers) to support
the investigation of outbreaks.
PHAC provides ongoing national coordination and federal leadership for multijurisdictional COVID-19
outbreaks, or complex single jurisdiction COVID-19 outbreaks. Since early May 2020, PHAC has been
involved in the investigation of a number of multijurisdictional or complex outbreaks, including:
• industrial worksite outbreaks;
• outbreaks associated with social gatherings;
• agricultural sector outbreaks; and
• outbreaks amongst those in communal living settings and institutions.
PHAC is promoting rigorous epidemiologic investigations of COVID-19 outbreaks in Canada in order to
respond more effectively to these outbreaks and to increase our understanding of COVID-19
transmission dynamics and risks, and is developing guidance for epidemiologic investigation of COVID-19
outbreaks.
From a national perspective, there is considerable interest in monitoring case clusters and outbreaks
related to COVID-19, especially during the winter respiratory illness season. PHAC, in collaboration with
PT partners, produced guidance on outbreak investigations in schools to support a systematic approach
to outbreak responses in this setting.
Defining an “Outbreak”
The purpose of the “outbreak” definition is to trigger management activities (e.g., an investigation of the
source, and implementation of measures to control spread). The definition of an outbreak of an
infectious disease is contextual – it is typically defined as the occurrence of disease cases in excess of
what is usually expected. As COVID-19 is a novel disease, the threshold required to initiate public health
management activities is low; in other words, every case detected remains of public health interest and
triggers active prevention and control activities.
Outbreak definitions for COVID-19 may differ across PTs depending on settings. PTs have varying
definitions of outbreaks for different settings, typically with a minimum of 1-2 cases occurring in a
setting within a certain period of time. In closed populations or settings with vulnerable individuals (e.g.,
correctional facilities, long-term care facilities, shelters), there tends to be a lower threshold, where only
one confirmed case may be needed to declare an outbreak.
To ensure consistent terminology is applied in national COVID-19 surveillance and monitoring activities,
PHAC and PTs developed a definition for a “multijurisdictional COVID-19 outbreak”. A multijurisdictional
COVID-19 outbreak is one that:
• occurs in more than one Canadian province or territory;
• occurs in Canada and involves another country/countries; and/or
• the management of the outbreak involves multiple PT or international public health agencies or
authorities.
PALLIATIVE CARE
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting Canadians’ health and safety. The
COVID-19 pandemic has strained resources and exposed gaps and systemic vulnerabilities in palliative
care delivery across all settings.
• Our Government is investing $29.8M over six years as part of Budget 2021 to provide Canadians,
including those living in long-term care and their families, with better palliative and end-of-life care,
including culturally sensitive care.
• Starting in 2021-22, the government, through Health Canada, will use this investment to
advance the Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on long-
term and supportive care needs, improving access to quality palliative care.
SYNOPSIS
• On August 27, 2019, Health Canada released an Action Plan on Palliative Care, which builds on
the 2018 Framework on Palliative Care in Canada. The Action Plan lays out Health Canada’s five-year
plan to tackle issues identified in the Framework. Using federal levers, it aims to help improve quality of
life for people with life-limiting illness, address concerns of families and caregivers, and enhance access
to quality palliative care, through improved health care system performance.
• Many of the planned initiatives in the Action Plan will require ongoing collaboration with
partners for successful implementation. The Action Plan complements financial support to provinces
and territories under the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
• Budget 2021 provides a federal investment of $29.8M over six years starting in 2021-22, to
advance the government’s Action Plan on Palliative Care and lay a better foundation for coordinated
action on long-term and supportive care needs, improving access to quality palliative care.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to improve access to palliative care in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians approaching the end of their lives deserve to receive care in the setting of their
choice and live out their days in comfort and dignity. Never has this been more important than now.
• That is why our Government has worked collaboratively with partners, such as the provinces
and territories, to develop a Framework and a targeted Action Plan on Palliative Care.
• To support this Action Plan, our Government is investing $29.8M over six years as part of Budget
2021 to provide Canadians, including those living in long-term care and their families, with better
palliative and end-of-life care, including culturally sensitive care.
• Initiatives could include: raising awareness of the importance of palliative care; providing public
education on grief; improving palliative care skills and supports for health care providers, families,
caregivers, and communities; enhancing data collection and research; and improving access to culturally
sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
IF PRESSED… about why the federal government doesn`t compel provinces and territories to provide
more palliative care:
• As highlighted in Budget 2021, in order to support improvements to palliative care in Canada,
our Government continues its commitment of $6 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to
improve access to home and community care, as well as palliative care. Our government will continue to
work with provinces, territories and health partners to improve access to home and palliative care.
• The Framework and Action Plan complement this investment. They build on the strategies and
policies already in place in provinces and territories, and provide a useful reference point to help identify
opportunities, address gaps and share promising practices.
IF PRESSED… about what the federal government has done to support palliative care delivery during the
pandemic:
• While continuing to work with health partners to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care,
Health Canada has invested $10.3M in funding for Action Plan initiatives that respond to urgent needs
created by the pandemic. These projects will leverage virtual tools and caring communities to improve
palliative care delivery across all settings, including at home and in the community.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
• While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to palliative
home care services.
• Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care unit.
BUDGET 2021
Initiatives under the Budget funding could include:
• raising awareness of the importance of palliative care;
• providing public education on grief;
• improving palliative care skills and supports for health care providers, families, caregivers, and
communities;
• enhancing data collection and research; and
• improving access to culturally sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE: BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK ON PALLIATIVE CARE IN CANADA
While all governments, communities, and Canadians have a role to play in improving end-of-life care,
the Action Plan lays out the federal role. Budget 2021 investments in the above areas align with the
priority areas of Health Canada’s five-year Action Plan to implement the Framework on Palliative Care.
The Action Plan complements current financial support to provinces and territories under the Common
Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, as described below.
RESPONDING TO NEEDS CREATED OR EXPOSED BY COVID-19
Health Canada and its partners are working to support and implement initiatives identified in the Action
Plan, as well as new initiatives that will contribute to the delivery of palliative care in the new
environment created by the pandemic. They will respond to current priorities including symptom
control, information sharing, virtual care, advance care planning, and isolation. Current activities
include:
• Funding projects in support of palliative care delivery:
o The Canadian Hospice Palliative Care Association received an additional $612,829 to develop
advance care planning tools and resources for long-term care residents and family, as well as tools and
resources for health care providers and workers in long- term care facilities;
o The Canadian Virtual Hospice has received $586,534, in addition to the $2M already committed,
to develop a series of online learning modules for caregivers and palliative care patients; host discussion
forums for healthcare professionals; raise public awareness; and to develop modules to provide grief
support to care providers.
o William Osler’s RELIEF Project received $1.4M to facilitate palliative care delivery to vulnerable
populations through the use of technology to enable Remote Self-Reporting of Symptoms by Patients
with Palliative Care Needs;
o University of British Columbia received $2.25M for its Volunteer Navigation in Palliative Care:
Adapting and Expanding the Nav-CARE program - a program in which trained volunteers provide
navigation services to persons living at home with life-limiting illness using a palliative and
compassionate community approach; and
o Pallium Canada received $450,000 to provide webinars, training and other resources to
clinicians responding to the pandemic. In addition, Pallium will receive new funding of $5M for Project
ECHO. This project will build local palliative care capacity among health care providers through the
delivery of information, resources, and ongoing supports, such as how to effectively deliver virtual
palliative care services.
Indigenous Peoples
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years to improve home
and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. During the development of the Framework
and Action Plan, National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) indicated their interest in discussing
Indigenous-led engagement processes toward the development of a separate distinctions-based
framework on palliative care. This engagement is planned in collaboration with ISC. Engagement with
Indigenous groups will be a complex and multi-faceted process. ISC has begun the engagement process
with First Nations and Inuit peoples on long-term care, including palliative care. Plans for other streams
of engagement by Health Canada (e.g., Indigenous health providers, Métis peoples, urban Indigenous
populations) are also underway.
OTHER FEDERAL INVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
In 2017, the GoC committed $6B/10 years to P/Ts to improve access, as part of its $11B/10 year
commitment to strengthen health care. In August 2017, F/P/T Ministers of Health agreed to the
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities (CSOP), which set out agreed- upon actions
to improve access to home and palliative care supported by federal investments:
• Spreading and scaling evidence-based models for home care and community care that are more
integrated and connected with primary health care
• Increasing support for caregivers
• Enhancing access to palliative care and end of life care at home and in hospices
• Enhancing home care infrastructure, i.e., digital connectivity, remote monitoring technology and
facilities for community-based service delivery
Following agreement on the CSOP, GoC negotiated the first of two consecutive bilateral agreements
with each jurisdiction, based on the CSOP agreed-upon priorities. The bilateral agreements provide
details on each jurisdiction’s initiatives supported by federal investments related to home and palliative
care. F/P/T governments also agreed to report on progress through a set of 12 common indicators, five
of which relate to home and one to palliative care.
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), is supporting the Canadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centers
of Excellence Program, with an investment of $47.8 million between 2012-13 and 2021-22. This network
aims to improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through the development,
evaluation, and implementation of health care technologies. Moreover, between 2013-14 and 2017-18,
CIHR invested more than $8.2 million in the area of palliative care in cancer. In addition, CIHR is
currently investing approximately $2.8 million over 4 years in two research teams focused on Late Life
Issues.
PEDIATRIC CANCER
BUDGET 2021: $30M over 2 years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to address gaps
in pediatric cancer research and ensure sustainable funding in this area.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to supporting the brave children and their families who are going
through the devastating experience of pediatric cancer.
• That is why we are committing $30 million dollars over two years to the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research to fund targeted research into pediatric cancer.
• This funding will support promising research projects with the greatest potential for fighting
pediatric cancers, and will establish research networks across Canada to address knowledge gaps in
pediatric cancer research.
• Mr. Speaker, these investments will help improve health systems and health outcomes for
pediatric cancer patients and their families.
• It will lead to funding priority-driven research that leads to better healthcare and health
outcomes, enhances job creation and acts as a strong lever to stimulate economic growth.
BACKGROUND
Cancer is one of leading causes of disease-related deaths in Canadian children over the age of one
month. While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it was
estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019. In
general, it is recognized that cancers in children act differently and are found in different organs than in
adults while tumors in children tend to grow and spread throughout the body more quickly. In
recognition of the significant impact that pediatric cancer has on both individuals and their families and
caregivers, additional support is needed to increase access to clinical trials, the development of a
pediatric cancer drug discovery program and increased funding for pediatric cancer research. As
Canada’s federal health funding agency, CIHR’s strong connections to the pediatric cancer research and
advocacy communities in Canada ideally position it to deliver on this important priority and enhance
pediatric cancer research from a national perspective.
With this new investment, CIHR will design and launch targeted multi-year, multi- component research
initiatives on pediatric cancer. CIHR will leverage its suite of funding mechanisms including capacity
building grants, team grants, network grants and knowledge dissemination grants to generate the
evidence needed to address gaps in knowledge concerning pediatric cancer. Working closely with the
pediatric cancer research community CIHR will identify the most pressing gaps in pediatric cancer
research and develop targeted initiatives to mobilize the research community on topics including but
not limited to:
• supporting clinical trial infrastructure;
• ensuring access to novel therapeutics;
• supporting precision oncology;
• incentives to finding new therapeutics for pediatric cancer, and;
• Indigenous child cancer research.
It is important to note that support for priority-driven research in pediatric cancer will not only allow
identifying innovative solutions to support pediatric cancer patients and their families but also create
positions for highly qualified personnel in universities and research institutions and act as a strong lever
to promote economic stimulation and growth.
PHARMACARE
SYNOPSIS
• In February 2020, the NDP introduced Private Member’s Bill C-231 to implement single- payer
universal pharmacare, as well as a motion that passed with Government support in March 2020. On
February 24, 2021, Bill C-231 was defeated at second reading.
• In Budget 2019 and 2021, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and the Fall Economic Statement,
the Government committed to implement national pharmacare, beginning with the creation of a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary and a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare program?
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• We have done more than any government in a generation to lower drug prices.
• The Government of Canada is committed to working together with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to build on the foundational elements of national universal pharmacare that are already in
progress so that Canadians have the drug coverage they need.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for high-cost drugs for
rare diseases in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders and the public.
IF PRESSED ON THE STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS
• We have already taken action to improve access and affordability of medicines. For example, we
modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will save Canadians billions
over the next decade.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
• On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact
the Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative
framework for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213
was defeated on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
• On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don
Davies (Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the
Hoskins Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the
immediate initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new,
dedicated fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term,
predictable, fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage,
which protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians;
and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while
making life more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with
Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders
through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12,
2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national
universal pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
• Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal
investments to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing effectiveness
and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better
access to the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canada Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement
and Budget 2021.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
• In August 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its mandate to
protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will
result in billions of savings for governments and private payers over the next 10 years. However, the
brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
• On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court issued a ruling in IMC v Canada that maintained most of the
regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information On
December 18, 2020, a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the
Attorney General of Canada. These decisions are currently being appealed.
Support for Canadian Blood Services’ Domestic Plasma Collection for the Health and Welfare of
Canadians
BUDGET 2021:
• Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the security of Canada’s
supply of plasma-derived products. Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with the
national blood and plasma agency is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area for the
health and safety of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 commits $20 million over three years beginning in 2021-22, which allows Canadian
Blood Services to build eight (8) new dedicated plasma collection sites across Canada.
BACKGROUND
Plasma-derived products (PDPs) are needed by thousands of Canadians to treat immune deficiencies,
rare blood disorders, and other conditions. PDPs are manufactured from plasma through multiple
processing steps. Most plasma products used worldwide are made from paid plasma donations and
collected by the commercial sector. As the federal regulator, Health Canada is responsible for
maintaining the safety of Canada’s blood supply and the plasma used in the production of drugs. Any
establishment that collects plasma must hold a HC authorization and license, as well as meet the strict
safety requirements under the Food and Drugs Act.
The need to enhance domestic plasma collection has been a long-standing issue given Canada’s
dependence on paid-donor plasma from the United States. Prior to the pandemic, provinces and
territories (PTs), except Québec, approved three new proof-of-concept sites – Canadian Blood Services
(CBS) opened two of these sites in 2020, and the third is on track to open in Spring 2021. However, the
COVID-19 pandemic exacerbated existing supply costs and other issues. In July 2020, CBS provided its
perspective on the current and future state of its plasma supply in the context of COVID-19 and
continued efforts to meet the needs of Canadian patients who rely on PDPs, namely Immune Globulin
(IG). The organization sought PT DMs support to increase domestic plasma collection capacity by
opening eight further sites over 2021-24 to achieve 22% domestic sufficiency.
This investment in CBS provides opportunities for Canadians, including for construction of site
enhancements and necessary refurbishments, as well as high quality, permanent jobs staffing the
centres. The investment will also increase domestic plasma collection capacity and security of critically
important therapeutics for Canadians, and has the potential to help mitigate rising healthcare costs for
PTs within a decade.
In mid-May Health Canada received a submission from Canadian Blood Services to implement
behaviour- based criteria for MSM for collection of source plasma. If authorized, this approach will be
phased into plasma donor centres (including the eight new plasma collection sites funded with Budget
2021 investments), and will provide real-world evidence in the Canadian context relating to the deferral
period for whole blood.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’) to provide the PMPRB with new tools and information needed
to protect Canadians from excessive prices of patented medicines.
• On October 23, 2020, the PMPRB published its final Guidelines to operationalize the
Amendments.
• As the COVID-19 pandemic continues to challenge all stakeholders, the coming-into-force date
of the Amendments has been delayed by an additional six months, from January 1, 2021 to July 1, 2021.
This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations and familiarize
themselves with the final Guidelines.
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry have challenged the Amendments in Court, and have
expressed concerns that they could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to
medicines. The Courts ruled to maintain most of the Amendments, but struck down the collection of
confidential rebate information. The rulings are currently the subject of an appeal by the applicants and
cross-appeal by the Crown.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why does the Government insist on continuing with the amendments to the Patented
Medicines Regulations when it impacts Canadians’ access to new medicines?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains committed to increasing the affordability and accessibility of
prescription drugs, including patented medicines, to improve the health of Canadians and better meet
health care system needs.
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices
negatively affect the ability of patients to access new medicines. These regulatory amendments will help
Canadians to afford the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are
launched in major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are well
below those in Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy and Norway are examples of this.
If Pressed on the ATIP release of PMPRB’s Communications Plan
• While we are aware of concerns from some stakeholders that regulatory changes will adversely
impact drug launches in Canada, it is important to underscore that there is no evidence to substantiate
such claims.
• Nevertheless, we recognize the pressing need to improve access and affordability of prescription
drugs, particularly for many Canadians who require them to treat rare diseases, where the cost of these
medications can be astronomically high.
• That is why our Government has engaged Canadians – especially patients with rare diseases,
their families and their caregivers – in consultations to develop a national strategy for high-cost drugs
for rare diseases.
If Pressed on the Coming-into-Force Date
• The COVID-19 pandemic has increased demands on the pharmaceutical industry and we are
mindful that all stakeholders continue to be challenged with the current situation. For that reason, the
Government has delayed the coming into force of the amendments until July 1, 2021.
• This delay gives stakeholders more time to prepare for the new reporting obligations introduced
by these Amendments. It will also provide industry more time to familiarize themselves with the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines which were published in October 2020.
If Pressed on the Access to COVID-19 Patented Medicines (Drugs and Vaccines):
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its final Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to specified
patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-wide effort
to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19 diagnosis,
treatment, mitigation or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry and Drug Access
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
If pressed on impact on pharmaceutical investments in Canada
• Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical industry investments, while having
considerably lower prices than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times more investment
dollars than Canada despite prices being 20% less.
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products, and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
If pressed on recent litigation
• The Government of Canada is pleased that the courts have upheld the majority of the
Amendments.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to these regulatory amendments and as the
matter is still before the court, no further comments will be made.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines Consultation Process
• The PMPRB made revisions in response to the significant stakeholder feedback it received, and
published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The PMPRB has published all written submissions it received during its consultations with
stakeholders and the public on the draft Guidelines.
• Moving forward, stakeholders are encouraged to participate in the PMPRB’s consultation to
develop their Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan.
BACKGROUND
• The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the
government, reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian
market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions, or hold public
hearings to determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of
excess revenues.
• The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire
into any matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister.
Additionally, the Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the
Patented Medicines Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
• On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada
Gazette, Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft
Guidelines that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020
and published its final Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
• The coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed twice in response to the
increased demands and challenges on industry stakeholders due to COVID-19. On March 29, 2020,
stakeholders were informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021, and most recently, the
coming-into-force date was delayed further to July 1, 2021. These delays provide additional time for
stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final
Guidelines.
• In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, on January
15, 2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definition of Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance. On April 16, 2021, the Board
revised its decision on the latter, reverting the compliance timeline back to two filing periods. Thus, the
operative date for assessing compliance has been shifted to July 1, 2022.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB is committed to developing and implementing a comprehensive
Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (GMEP) to assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any
future adjustments required to ensure that they are working as intended. The GMEP will be used to
monitor four different areas: impact on prices, impact on access, impact on the ecosystem and impact
on PMPRB processes. On May 3, 2021, PMPRB launched its consultation on the GMEP, inviting
stakeholders to comment on the proposed plan. The consultation concludes June 21, 2021.
• The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In
the Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-
name companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the
Court upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information.
• On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently
needed for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating
that special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against
COVID-19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim
Orders will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the
federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is reflected in
the PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
NEONICOTINOID PESTICIDES
SYNOPSIS
• On May 19, 2021, Health Canada released the final re-evaluation decision for the neonicotinoid
pesticide, imidacloprid. This followed the recent special review decisions related to aquatic organisms
for two neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam, released by Health Canada on March
31, 2021. Previously, Health Canada had consulted publicly on a proposal to cancel all outdoor uses of
these pesticides. Over 47,000 comments were received, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data. In order to protect the environment, in
this final decision, Health Canada cancelled some uses of imidacloprid, and introduced additional
mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered, which is consistent
with the recent Special Review decisions for clothianidin and thiamethoxam.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Neonicotinoids are affecting the environment. Why has the Government not proceeded with a
complete ban?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions.
• Health Canada reviewed more than 47,000 comments, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data that were received on the environmental
risks of neonicotinoids.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of neonicotinoids, and
introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the situation and take action if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA – WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES – IS TAKING
A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSURE FROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR:
• Health Canada has concluded that a complete ban on neonicotinoid pesticides is not warranted.
• As part of the public consultation on its decisions, Health Canada received more than 47,000
comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces. As
well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from various
sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these
neonicotinoid insecticides in Canada.
BACKGROUND
NEONICS AND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
• On November 23, 2016, Health Canada proposed to phase out all agricultural uses of
imidacloprid due to unacceptable aquatic risk. This proposed decision led to a special review on the
aquatic risks of two other neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. At the time,
concerns were identified by Health Canada from available scientific information that these two
pesticides were frequently being detected in aquatic environments in Canada at concentrations that
could pose a risk to aquatic insects.
• Health Canada consulted on proposed special review decisions on risks to aquatic insects for
clothianidin and thiamethoxam in the fall of 2018. This review proposed the cancellation of all outdoor
uses based on risks to the aquatic environment, similar to the previous consultation on imidacloprid.
Health Canada then reviewed the more than 47,000 comments that were received via the consultation,
as well as a substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data
from various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities.
Approximately 65% of the water monitoring information considered in the special reviews was new
since the publication of the proposed decisions.
• The final special review decisions related to aquatic insects for clothianidin and thiamethoxam,
and the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, originally targeted for fall 2020, were delayed
until March 31, 2021 and May 19, 2021 respectively, due to the unprecedented volume of information
received during consultation and the challenges of COVID-19.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of clothianidin,
thiamethoxam and imidacloprid, and introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on
some of the uses that remain registered.
NEONICS AND BEES
• On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluation decisions for the
neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. The implementation timelines
outlined in the thiamethoxam decision were challenged by several organizations in proceedings against
the Minister of Health. The Federal Court dismissed the application in December of 2019.
• The special reviews for squash bees are currently ongoing. Health Canada plans to complete the
proposed special review decisions related to squash bees in 2021.
NEONICS AND HUMAN HEALTH
• Based on data reviewed for the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, the assessment
did not identify human health concerns. This included additional data received following publication of
the proposed decision, along with consideration of the proposed interim decision on neonics by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
• All available information will be considered in Health Canada’s ongoing cyclical re- evaluations of
clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Health Canada is expecting to publish the proposed cyclical re-
evaluation decisions of clothianidin and thiamethoxam in spring 2022.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• The US EPA expressed similar concerns regarding aquatic insects in their preliminary ecological
risk assessments of the neonicotinoids in 2017. The EPA published a proposed interim decision for
acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, imidacloprid, and thiamethoxam on January 30, 2020. It contains
new measures to reduce potential ecological risks, particularly to pollinators, and to protect public
health. A final decision from the US EPA is expected later in 2021.
• The European Union voted to prohibit all agricultural uses of neonicotinoids except in
greenhouses. This measure came into effect on December 19, 2018. This decision was driven by
unacceptable risks to bees and other pollinators. Emergency use is permitted in some European
countries.
• Health Canada cannot speak to the decision-making process in other countries with regards to
neonicotinoids. Each country takes into account its own legislative requirements, policies, and scientific
analysis before making a decision. In Canada, pesticides are allowed on the market only after a full
scientific analysis is completed based on Canadian use, and the risks are found to be acceptable as per
the requirements of the Pest Control Products Act.
PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL VACCINE ALLOCATIONS
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada is committed to securing and deploying a sufficient supply of safe
and effective vaccines for all persons in Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the government doing to make sure the provinces and territories have the vaccines they
need?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada worked with the provinces and territories and Indigenous communities to develop a
vaccine rollout strategy that focuses efforts, in the context of a limited initial vaccine supply, on
protecting those at greatest risk of severe illness, hospitalization, or death.
• On June 14, the Government surpassed the milestone of over 33 million doses of the Pfizer-
BioNTech, Moderna and AstraZeneca vaccines delivered to provinces and territories, and federal
partners.
• We are continuing to work closely with provinces and territories and with our Indigenous
partners to ensure that as supply increases so does their capacity to administer vaccine to Canadians.
• With over 62% of the Canadian population having received at least one dose, jurisdictions are
starting to pivot their campaigns to mass second dose deployment. Canada will support provinces and
territories to ensure sufficient supply by mid-summer to offer two- doses to all eligible persons in
Canada.
• To ensure management of vaccine distribution on a national scale during a pandemic, the Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) developed VaccineConnect, a vaccine management IT platform built on
existing PHAC capabilities.
• VaccineConnect is supportive of and complementary to the provincial/territorial IT systems and
processes. It will provide the information and support that provinces and territories need for planning,
management, and reporting.
BACKGROUND
On December 8, 2020, Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan was released. The plan put an emphasis
on six main principles—Science-driven Decision-making; Transparency; Coherence and Adaptability;
Fairness and Equity; Public Involvement; and Consistent Reporting.
Based on this model, Canada has remained adaptable, keeping in mind equity and fairness in respect to
all aspects of the vaccine supplies and distribution to the provinces and territories.
Canada has remained engaged and involved with provinces and territories (PT) in order to address any
potential gaps in vaccine allocations, keeping in mind that PT governments are responsible for
administering vaccination programs and determining public health requirements in their jurisdictions.
Canada has secured contracts with vaccine suppliers and conducted regulatory reviews to ensure the
safety of its authorized vaccines. Furthermore, by providing logistics services and by covering the costs
of vaccines, Canada will continue to provide support to PTs, which includes, but is not limited to,
enhancing PT cold-chain capacity.
We will continue to coordinate the delivery of vaccine supplies and will work with PTs to unlock and
optimize resources across the country. Furthermore, federal, provincial and territorial officials, along
with Indigenous leaders, are continuing to meet frequently to refine plans for the distribution and
administration of vaccines throughout Canada. Canada’s engagement to date ensures equitable access
to First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples as well as distribution of vaccines to Canada’s northern
territories and other remote and isolated areas.
Canada does not have a centralized vaccine tracking system since health care comes under provincial
authority and this has resulted in individual systems that differ from province to province. Management
of vaccine distribution on a national scale during a pandemic, such as COVID-19, necessitated a new
system that would build on existing PHAC capabilities to enhance vaccine distribution, administration
and reporting. The system has been newly branded as VaccineConnect, from the previous National
Vaccine Management IT Platform .The initial release of VaccineConnect was launched in early February
2021, with continued enhancements and releases being delivered during the succeeding months.
COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity
initiative to assist provinces and territories in managing the impacts of COVID- 19 outbreaks. This
initiative is part of a collaborative whole of government approach to responding to the COVID-19 surge
capacity needs across Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• How is the Government of Canada assisting jurisdictions with surge capacity needs?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada’s top priority remains protecting the health and safety of Canadians
from the COVID-19 virus and variants of concern.
• Canada has been working across federal, provincial, territorial, and municipal governments to
support a collaborative, whole-of- government response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
• As part of our ongoing support to provinces and territories, we have established a COVID-19
Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative.
• This initiative is complemented by the Safe Restart Agreements, which provide provinces and
territories with over $19 billion in federal investments to support:
- Health care system capacity;
- Outbreak management, testing, contact tracing; and
- Other social services to support Canadians.
• The Government of Canada has recently established the Health Human Resources Assistance
Program. The HHRAP will provide up to $20 million per provincial/territorial jurisdiction in support of
their deployment of resources to other jurisdictions in need.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT GIVEN TO PROVINCES/TERRITORIES…
• Provinces and territories are responsible for prioritizing requests from their local jurisdictions.
• The Government of Canada triages requests received based on the needs and capacity available
at the time of the request.
• We are currently providing support in the form of testing supplies and equipment to all
provinces and territories.
• We remain engaged with all provinces and territories on their ongoing needs.
• Our current support includes:
o Approximately 153 Canadian Red Cross personnel deployed to address outbreaks or to provide
emergency testing sites, from a roster of about 1,450 available personnel. This roster will continue to
increase in size over the coming months.
o Six federal labs to supplement testing capacity.
o Supplying laboratory and testing equipment to all provinces and territories.
o Processing approximately 5,800 calls a day to assist with contact tracing.
o Committing $113 million for safe voluntary isolation sites across the country.
o Providing access to federal staffing inventories to assist provinces and territories in hiring the
personnel they need.
• In addition, the federal government has over 100 subject matter experts ready for rapid
deployment to assist provinces and territories with assessing local outbreaks.
• The Government of Canada has also committed $35 million for the Canadian Red Cross to
supplement testing.
• The Fall 2020 Economic Statement committed a further $150 million to support the Canadian
Red Cross and other non- governmental organizations with enhancing their surge capacity workforce for
Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment, as well as medical equipment and supplies, and expedite the delivery of this equipment to
our frontline healthcare workers.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT WIDE SUPPORT GIVEN TO SUPPORT SURGE CAPACITY NEEDS IN
ONTARIO…
• We have been working closely with our Ontario partners to share expertise and best practices
and to provide support to augment the province’s capacities to respond.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided biomedical equipment to Ontario to support
capacity in acute care settings.
• Equipment such as CardioHelp systems, oxygen units, and ECMO systems to oxygenate blood,
among others, have been delivered by the Agency to support Ontario in providing medical care.
• The Government of Canada has also deployed 2 mobile health units to provide additional
support to hospitals in some of the hardest hit regions.
• Ontario has accessed the federal stock of treatments and therapeutics as well, to supplement
their own supply.
• The Government of Canada through the support of the Canadian Armed Forces, is providing
logistical and local coordination support to the Ornge vaccination program in remote First Nation
communities in Northern Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY INITIATIVE SUPPORT GIVEN TO
SUPPORT ONTARIO…
• Our current support for Ontario with this initiative includes:
• Approximately 46 Canadian Red Cross (CRC) personnel deployed to address outbreaks or to
provide emergency testing sites, from a roster of about 1,450 available personnel. CRC is currently
supporting Ontario with Epidemic Prevention and Control training and support.
• Federal laboratory support to supplement testing capacity – almost 17,000 samples have been
processed in support of Northern Ontario.
• $73 million committed for safe voluntary isolation sites in Ontario for fifteen active sites in nine
communities: Toronto, Peel Region, Ottawa, Waterloo, Durham Region, York Region, Windsor-Essex,
Thunder Bay, and Sault Ste. Marie. Requests from other jurisdictions have also been received and are
under review.
• 300 federal government contact tracers are assigned to Ontario and make an average of 700-
800 calls per day.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY INITIATIVE SUPPORT GIVEN TO
SUPPORT ALBERTA…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Alberta to offer surge support assistance to
address their needs, including rapid testing through the National Microbiology Laboratory.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also working with Health Canada and Indigenous Services
Canada to meet the needs of Indigenous populations, such as vaccination and testing.
IF PRESSED ON GOVERNMENT WIDE SUPPORT GIVEN TO SUPPORT SURGE CAPACITY NEEDS IN
MANITOBA…
• We have been working closely with our Manitoba partners to offer federal supports such as
various health human resources, air assets and air medical human resources through the Canadian
Armed Forces and additional public health supports for First Nations in Manitoba.
• We have deployed federal nurses, as well as Canadian Red Cross critical care nurses.
• The Canadian Armed Forces has also deployed general nurses, medical technicians, medical
officers, a medical surgeon, and air evacuation specialists.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working with the Government of Manitoba on
safe voluntary isolation sites in Winnipeg, Brandon, and other communities across the province.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 PUBLIC HEALTH RAPID SURGE CAPACITY INITIATIVE SUPPORT GIVEN TO
SUPPORT MANITOBA…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with Manitoba to offer surge support assistance,
including lab testing assistance through the National Microbiology Laboratory and Canadian Armed
Forces, and epidemiologists to support outbreak management and analysis.
• An additional 50 contact tracers are being provided to the province of Manitoba, for a total of
up to 120 Statistics Canada employees, to help trace people who have been in contact with someone
who has tested positive for COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON SAFE VOLUNTARY ISOLATION SITES SUPPORT FOR TIMMINS, ONTARIO…
• The Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program is being offered by the Public Health Agency of
Canada as part of the COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity Initiative.
• The Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program helps address the needs of the most at-risk
populations and the efforts of provincial and territorial public health partners in response to the COVID-
19 pandemic.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working with the Cochrane District Social Services
Administrative Board to review their funding request to create safe voluntary isolation sites in Cochrane,
Timmins and the surrounding communities.
BACKGROUND
Through the COVID-19 Public Health Rapid Surge Capacity initiative, rapid response surge capacity is
being offered for potential deployments across Canada, including rural and remote locations as well as
Indigenous communities.
Under this initiative, the Government of Canada has developed eight fields to respond:
• Public Health Rapid Response Team;
• Outbreak Management and Vaccine Support;
• COVID-19 Patient Testing;
• Laboratory Services;
• Laboratory Equipment;
• Contact Tracing;
• Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites; and
• Human Resources Recruitment.
The initiative leverages federal resources as well as the existing Public Safety Canada contribution
arrangement with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC).
Resource Management (as of June 09):
Services Total Available Capacity Committed Capacity
1. Public Health 108 individuals Nil
Rapid Response
Team
2. Outbreak Full Support team: 1 488  ON: 46 personnel to support 5
Management & individuals sites
Vaccination  PEI: 42 personnel to support 5
Support (CRC) vaccine administration sites
 NB: 21 personnel to support 1 site
 MB: 44 personnel to support 1 site
3. COVID-19 Patient ~400 staff, 10 teams  Nil
Testing (CRC)
4. Laboratory 12,000 tests per day  NML Winnipeg: ~102 tests per day
Services (supporting MB, ON & federal
point of entry testing)
 CFIA Lethbridge: ~ 322 tests per
day (supporting AB, federal point
of entry testing)
 NML Guelph: ~946 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 DFO Moncton: ~81 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 CFIA Ottawa: ~206 tests per day
(supporting federal point of entry
testing)
 ECCC Vancouver: ~299 tests per
day (supporting federal point of
entry testing)
5. Laboratory  Abbott IDNow (rapid point of  Abbott IDNow: 3,190 units to all
Equipment care diagnostic testing); PTs
 BioFire (multiplex diagnostic  BioFire: 118 units to 10 PTs
panel testing for patients with (except QC, AB, SK)
respiratory illness  GeneXpert: 162 units to 10 PTs
symptoms); (except NB, NS, PE)
 GeneXpert (point of care  Kingfisher: 39 units to 8 provinces
diagnostic testing); (AB, BC, MB, ON, QC, NB, NL,
 KingFisher (automated PE)
sample extraction for
analysis by the diagnostic
instruments).
6. Contact Tracing 17,020 calls per day Average over the last 5 days:
 AB: 32 calls per day
 MB: 463 calls per day
 ON: 764 calls per day
 QC: 185 calls per day
 BC: 381 calls per day
 SK: 555 calls per day
 NB: 467 calls per day
 NL: 848 calls per day
 NT: 458 calls per day
 ISC: 133 calls per day
 PHAC Travel Monitoring: 1,557
calls per day
7. Safe Voluntary $113M over 2 years Government of Nova Scotia: $4.2M
Isolation Sites over 12 months (April 1, 2021 -
March 31, 2022)
Ontario:
 Toronto: $13.9M over 12 months
(August 27, 2020-August 31, 2021)
 Peel: $6.5M over 16 months
(December 1, 2020-March 31,
2022)
 Ottawa: $4.7M over 7 months
(December 1, 2020-June 30, 2021)
 Waterloo: $4.1M over 15 months
(December 2020-March 2022)
 Government of Ontario: $23.7M
over 6 months (January 1, 2021 –
June 30, 2021)
 Sault Ste. Marie & Algoma District:
$0.34M over 13 months (February
1, 2021 – March 31, 2022)
 Windsor Essex: $17.8M over 12
months (April 1, 2021 – March 31,
2022)
 Thunder Bay: $1.5M over 6
months (April 1, 2021 – September
30, 2021)
Government of Saskatchewan:
$11.6M over 15 months (January 27,
2021 – March 31, 2022)
8. Human Resources 4 federal personnel  AB: 41 referrals made to support
Recruitment inventories: data entry needs in AB
 Post-Secondary Recruitment
BC:
 Indigenous Career Pathways
 Federal Student Work  10 referrals made to support
immunizer positions.
Experience Program
 2020 Volunteer Recruitment  76 referrals made to support
clerical/administrative positions.
Campaign
MB:
Total HHR on the ground: 12
 6 Critical Care CRC nurses
(combination ICU/med surgical
experience).
 4 additional nurses arrived on Jun
7, 2021 as well as 2 Federal
Nurses at the Health Service
Centre
HHR to be deployed:
 9 additional nurses to be deployed
June 16,
 CAF support with health
designations
 7 x general nurses
 27 x Medical Technicians
 2 x medical officers/doctors
 1 x medical officers/surgeons
 8 x Air Evac specialists (flight
nurses and technicians)
NU:
 4 federal nurses deployed June 9,
for 4 weeks; 3 in Iqaluit and 1 in
Iglootik.
 PHAC and HC are each providing
one nurse, and ESDC is providing 2
nurses.
ON:
 2 nurses to support Osler Health (1
in Brampton, 1 in Etobicoke) for up
to 4 months for respite support.
The Government of Canada is also continuously working to secure critical personal protective
equipment (PPE), as well as medical equipment and supplies. Canada is receiving a steady supply of PPE
with shipments arriving daily, and the inventory is rapidly allocated to the provinces and territories.
More information on the Government’s efforts in this area can be found in the “National Emergency
Strategic Stockpile Management and Personal Protective Equipment and Medical Device Procurement”
QP note.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
SYNOPSIS
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
quickly develop and rollout safe vaccines and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and return
to a more normal life.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
• What is the government doing to participate in this unprecedented international effort?
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic.
• Since March, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $250 million
in more than 400 research projects, including 128 international collaborations, which focus not only on
vaccines, but also on other therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics, and other priority areas as
they emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Enabled by this investment, CIHR and partners across Canada collaborated to inform the
implementation of promising interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness
within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that $2 million of this investment is supporting Indigenous communities
as they lead strengths-based and solutions-focused research that is bold and innovative.
• Further, our government is moving to scale up research to increase our understanding of
persistent and emerging gaps and priority areas - including variants - and provide decision makers with
rapid guidance and evidence by investing an additional $144 million through CIHR.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will bring the evidence we need to help
Canada address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID- 19
and is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
Medical countermeasures funding accounts for 53 of the 100 projects funded for a total of $36.5M,
including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and clinical
management. The social and policy countermeasures funding accounts for 47 of the 100 projects funded
for a total of $17.7M, including research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health
response and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
CIHR subsequently launched the Sex as a Biological Variable Supplement funding opportunity to provide
additional funding to researchers, funded through the first rapid research response, to investigate
potential molecular and cellular mechanisms underpinning observed sex differences in SARS-CoV-2 viral
pathogenesis and its associated immune response. This represents a total investment of $665K to 14
researchers to offset the costs associated with incorporating, comparing and analyzing male, female
and/or intersex biological samples, including cells, tissues and animals, into the proposed research
program.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures
against COVID-19. Building on the March 2020 investment, the majority of this investment enables
researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and social
countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
• Approximately $100M of this $114.9 million investment was allocated to the second COVID- 19
Rapid Research Funding Competition. In collaboration with its partners, CIHR was able to support 153
grants representing a total investment of $123.5 million. Twenty-two of these were funded in
partnership with the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, and focus on improving our understanding of
COVID-19 immunity in Canada, a $12.4 million investment.
• Approximately $10 million of the $114.9 million investment was allocated to CIHR’s COVID- 19
and Mental Health Initiative. In collaboration with PHAC and Health Canada, this initiative supports 101
research projects, representing a total investment of $13.5M from CIHR and partners. New knowledge
generated through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely
manner.
• This investment also secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials
responsive to WHO priorities to increase the understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines,
therapeutics, mental health supports and clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR – in partnership with PHAC - funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi- disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short- and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
Though vaccines are becoming available, support for research on treatment options and large clinical
trials must continue to ensure that these treatments are successful. CIHR is working tirelessly with its
partners to find ways to do this.
Further, medical countermeasure funds will also allow the Government of Canada, under the leadership
of CIHR, to set up a Centre for Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies Research that will lay
the groundwork towards more nimble domestic and global pandemic research coordination. The Centre
will allow CIHR to support real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the
research community and decision-makers alike, as well as to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHR funded network) produced national guidance
documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines related to prescribing,
dispensing, and delivery of opioids and other narcotics during the COVID-19 pandemic to support people
who use drugs.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR and partners have invested
$1.8M to date, to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement and the Canadian Patient
Safety Institute.
In October, CIHR completed an independent review of the Canadian International Surveillance Border
Study (led by McMaster Health Labs) which is part of the Government of Canada’s continued research
response to address the health challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic. In partnership with Health
Canada, $2.5M in funding is being provided to McMaster Health Labs to help determine the
effectiveness of an airport-based COVID-19 surveillance program.
On April 8, 2021, CIHR announced approximately $2 million in support of thirteen strengths-based,
solutions-focused research projects that focus on a wide range of topics and use diverse methods,
forming a strong base to study and understand the experiences of First Nations, Inuit, Métis, and Urban
Indigenous communities throughout the COVID-19 pandemic. The research, which is bold, innovative
and Indigenous community-led, will address the consequences of COVID-19 and inform future
preparedness. The findings will be used by Indigenous communities, researchers and decision-makers.
Finally, building on the priorities from CIHR’s recent COVID-19 investments, CIHR has launched several
rapid response competitions to support emerging priorities. This includes:
• The COVID-19 Knowledge Synthesis Network Funding Opportunity, to support collaboration and
rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge and evidence across the full breadth of
Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health measures, clinical management, health-
system arrangements, and economic and social impacts). This $1M investment was announced on
January 13, 2021.
• The Network of Clinical Trials Networks Funding Opportunity, to expand existing national and
international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on interventions to prevent, detect, manage,
and/or treat COVID-19. This $6M investment was announced on January 20, 2021.
• Supplementary funding for CIHR funded COVID-19 researchers studying variants to accelerate
research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align efforts in this field. This
initiative represents an investment of $4.9 and was announced on January 29, 2021.
• Funding of a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research that will enable the rapid
support of research activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and population
health threats of emerging variants of concern. This $9M investment was announced on February 12,
2021.
• Priority funding of applications to the Fall 2020 Project Grant competition to invest in
applications specifically addressing persistent evidence gaps such as variants of the virus, vaccine
development and uptake, testing, mental health, and the ways in which the COVID- 19 pandemic is
having specific impacts on women, racialized populations, and Métis, Inuit and First Nations Peoples.
This initiative represents an investment of approximately $25.2 million in 52 research projects, and was
announced on March 12, 2021.
• Going forward, CIHR will also invest in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative
way in consultation with partners. These investments will target key emerging research priorities and
gaps to contribute to Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way. While
most competitions under this series are set to roll out throughout the 2021-22 fiscal year, the first
competition was launched on March 3, 2021. The total funding amount available for this and upcoming
COVID-19 Research Gaps and Priorities competitions is approximately $119M. The amount invested in
this competition will not be the full amount and will depend on the number and quality, as assessed by
peer review, of applications received. Results are expected later this Spring.
RESPIRATORS: QUALITY AND COUNTERFEIT ISSUES
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in the increased importation, sale and use of varying kinds
of medical devices in order to protect healthcare workers and treat patients. While most of these
medical devices have functioned properly, a subset of Class I medical devices, including personal
protective equipment (PPE) such as respirators, have been found to be of substandard quality,
misrepresented or counterfeit. Respirators that do not meet required standards may not provide
consistent and adequate protection.
• Health Canada will continue to actively monitor information related to the safety and
effectiveness of respirators and will take prompt and appropriate action if needed to protect the health
and safety of Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure the quality of respirators used by Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• The quality, effectiveness and safety of health products is a top priority for the Government.
• The Government of Canada verifies the effectiveness of all respirators it procures to confirm
that they meet performance standards before they are distributed to the provinces and territories for
frontline healthcare workers.
• We continue to assess and take action when respirators do not meet safety and effectiveness
standards. This includes directing companies to recall and re-label respirators for use in settings where
standards, such as 95% filtration, are not required. Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are
removed from the market and are not permitted to be sold in Canada.
• Health Canada maintains a list of manufacturers and respirators that are subject to recall/re-
labelling on its website, as well as a list of confirmed counterfeit respirators so that Canadians can make
informed decisions when purchasing PPE.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT HEALTH CANADA IS DOING TO PROTECT CANADIANS…
• Health Canada assesses all sources of information related to respirators that may not meet
safety and effectiveness standards, including testing conducted by the National Institute for
Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH), the Public Health Agency of Canada and other laboratories.
• Health Canada also conducts inspections of licensed importers/distributors and assessments of
referred shipments at the border to prevent the sale of non-compliant respirators in Canada.
• The Department has directed companies that have imported or distributed respirators that do
not meet safety or effectiveness standards to stop sale and re-label those products where appropriate.
This includes respirators where claims of 95% filtration are not met, which can be re-labeled and used in
settings where this level of filtration is not required.
• Respirators that are confirmed to be counterfeit are removed from the market and are not
permitted to be sold in Canada.
• Health Canada continues to provide guidance to industry on the detection of substandard,
misrepresented and counterfeit products.
• Health Canada has warned Canadians about the risks of using counterfeit respirators through a
public advisory. The Department will continue to keep Canadians informed of issues impacting their
health and safety.
IF PRESSED ON RESPIRATORS PURCHASED BY THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA
• PPE and medical supplies received by the Government of Canada, whether donated or procured
internationally or domestically, are verified by the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to ensure
they meet Government of Canada technical specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19
response.
• If PHAC cannot account for the quality of devices, they will not be allocated to the provinces and
territories for frontline healthcare response.
• Provincial and territorial health authorities and health care institutions have been advised to
review their inventories of respirators to confirm that they meet the Government of Canada technical
specifications for healthcare settings for COVID-19 response on a regular basis.
IF PRESSED ON SUSPECTED COUNTERFEIT 3M RESPIRATORS…
• Health Canada is aware of cases involving the sale and distribution of suspected counterfeit 3M
respirators.
• The Department is taking action to remove products confirmed to be counterfeit from the
Canadian market. Officials are working with 3M Canada and the Canada Border Services Agency to help
ensure the supply of safe and effective respirators.
BACKGROUND
Regulation of Medical Devices in Canada
All medical device products, including N95 and KN95 respirators and other Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE), are subject to the safety and effectiveness requirements of the Medical Devices
Regulations. Manufacturers of medical devices are responsible for ensuring that they are safe and
effective.
Most PPE (e.g., respirators, gowns, masks) are classified as Class I devices in Canada. Class I devices are
considered the lowest risk Class of devices and do not require pre-market authorization by Health
Canada, which means they are not assessed by the Department for safety and efficacy prior to import or
sale in Canada.
A Medical Device Establishment Licence (MDEL) is required to import and distribute Class I devices.
MDELs are issued based on an attestation to requirements related to documented procedures for
complaint handling, distribution records, recalls and problem reporting.
In October 2020, Health Canada issued a guidance document to help explain the circumstances under
which certain respirators would be subject to the regulatory framework for medical devices during the
COVID-19 pandemic: Regulatory considerations on the classification of respirators (October 20, 2020).
Improving Access to Medical Devices During COVID-19
Health Canada has implemented three different measures to expedite the availability of medical devices
in support of COVID-19 response efforts:
1. Interim Order No.2 Respecting the Importation and Sale of Medical Devices for Use in Relation
to COVID-19 - provides an expedited authorization pathway for medical devices for sale in Canada.
Health Canada reviews the scientific evidence provided by the manufacturers through this pathway to
support the safety and effectiveness of devices before issuing authorizations for these devices. This
interim order replaces the March 2020 Interim Order Respecting the Importation and Sale of Medical
Devices for Use in Relation to COVID-19.
2. Interim Order No.2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose
in Relation to COVID-19 - facilitates access to alternative supplies of health products to help prevent and
alleviate shortages resulting directly or indirectly from COVID-19. Under this Interim Order, companies
must report shortages of medical devices related to COVID-19 to Health Canada to help the health care
system prepare for supply disruptions. This interim order replaces the March 2020 Interim Order
Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19.
3. Expedited review and approval of MDEL applications for companies applying to supply medical
devices in support of COVID-19 response efforts. Health Canada continues to expedite the review of
MDEL applications related to COVID-19 products and, to date, has authorized 3286 MDELs to support
the response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Suspected counterfeit 3M respirators
Health Canada is aware of cases involving the sale and distribution of suspected counterfeit 3M N95
respirators. The Department is working with 3M Canada, federal partners including the Canada Border
Services Agency, and provinces and territories to address the issue. Health Canada is taking action to
remove products confirmed to be counterfeit from the Canadian market.
Since mid-February 2021, the Department has seized close to 330,000 counterfeit 3M-branded N95
respirators from Canadian distributors and detained nearly 365,000 at the border.
The models of the seized and detained 3M N95 respirators are 1860, 1860S and 1870+.
3M has published information online advising that they have been receiving increasing reports of fraud,
including reports of counterfeit product, as well as fraudulent offers where product is offered but not
delivered. The company has also established hotlines and published information on its website to help
customers worldwide identify, prevent and report suspected fraud. 3M has alerted its Canadian
customers regarding this issue, as well as the provinces and territories, and other federal departments.
CHARGES LAID – RYDING-REGENCY MEAT PACKERS LTD., BEEF BOUTIQUE LTD., CANADIAN SELECT
MEATS INC. and Ellen Cosman, Anthony Petronaci and Chuck Oulton Anthony Petronaci et Chuck Oulton
SYNOPSIS
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency has filed an Information before the Ontario Court of
Justice in Guelph jointly charging Ryding-Regency Meat Packers Ltd., Beef Boutique Ltd.,, Canadian
Select Meats Inc., and Ellen Cosman, Anthony Petronaci and Chuck Oulton for allegedly failing to report
E.coli positive lab results to the CFIA, for allegedly making a false or misleading statement to the CFIA
and for allegedly providing false information to the CFIA, and for allegedly selling a food that contained a
poisonous or harmful substance, E.coli positive meat.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why did the Canadian Food Inspection Agency file these charges?
KEY MESSAGES
• Food safety is a key priority for our government.
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) takes appropriate enforcement actions to protect
the health and safety of Canadian consumers.
• On June 10, 2021, as a result of an investigation by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA),
charges were laid against Ryding- Regency Meat Packers Ltd., Beef Boutique Ltd., Canadian Select Meats
Inc. and three associated individuals.
• The accused allegedly: (1) failed to report E.coli positive lab results to the CFIA immediately after
determining that the food presented a risk of injury to human health; (2) made false and misleading
statements and provided false information to the CFIA; and (3) sold E.coli positive meat products.
IF PRESSED…
• The Safe Food for Canadians Act licences issued to the three corporate accused were cancelled
on December 2, 2019 for non- compliances under the Safe Food for Canadians Act.
• The accused are scheduled to appear in the Ontario Provincial Court of Justice on August 10,
2021.
BACKGROUND
• In August 2019 the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) Veterinarian in charge at Ryding-
Regency was conducting a verification task for E.coli by examining and verifying records.
• As a result of this task, several discrepancies were identified with Certificates of Analysis for
E.coli. Over the next 3 weeks, the CFIA continued their inspection activities into these discrepancies.
• In September 2019, after multiple requests by CFIA Veterinary Inspectors, Ryding- Regency
provided the CFIA with 9 positive Certificates of Analysis for E.coli. Ryding- Regency had previously
provided allegedly fabricated “replacement certificates” that had shown negative results.
• In September 2019, the CFIA requested and received forty one (41) Certificates of Analysis
directly from BV Labs showing nine (9) samples of meat submitted by Ryding- Regency, along with an
additional thirteen (13) samples from Beef Boutique and nineteen (19) samples from Canadian Select
Meats had all tested positive for E.coli between the dates of May 1, 2018 to September 20, 2019.
• Three Search Warrants were executed by the CFIA on June 16, 2020 at Ryding-Regency located
at 70 Glen Scarlett Road, Toronto, Ontario, Beef Boutique and Canadian Select Meats, both located at
145A Bethridge Road, Toronto, Ontario.
• The CFIA, after the Public Prosecution Services of Canada (PPSC) decided to prosecute these
charges, laid the charges on Thursday June 10th, 2021 against Ryding-Regency Meat Packers Ltd., Beef
Boutique Ltd., Canadian Select Meats Inc. and ] Ellen Cosman, Anthony Petronaci and Chuck Oulton
jointly for the following contraventions:
1. Section 15 of the Safe Food for Canadians Act: provide to an Inspector of the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency false or misleading information;
2. Section 82(2) of the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations: fail to immediately notify the Minister
and take immediate action to mitigate the risk after establishing that food presents a risk of injury to
human health.
3. Section 4(1)(a) of the Food and Drugs Act: selling an article of food that had in or on it any
poisonous or harmful substance.
SAFETY OF THE ASTRAZENECA AND JANSSEN VACCINES
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada has evaluated potential safety issues related to the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and
Janssen vaccines and has concluded that the benefits continue to outweigh the risks.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the current status of the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is aware of very rare reports of blood clots with low levels of blood platelets
following vaccination with the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen COVID-19 vaccines.
• As of June 4, 2021, there have been 46 cases of these events reviewed by the Public Health
Agency of Canada and Health Canada following vaccinations with the AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD
vaccines with more than 2.3 million doses of the vaccines administered.
• After a thorough, independent assessment of the currently available scientific data from the
manufacturers and international regulatory partners, Health Canada has concluded that these rare
events may be linked to use of the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines. This is in line with
the findings of other regulators, such as the European Medicines Agency.
• As a result, Health Canada has updated warnings in the product information for each of these
vaccines to inform Canadians of the possible side effects, and has issued risk communications that
provide advice to Canadians and healthcare professionals about signs, symptoms and when to seek
medical assistance.
• Based on a comprehensive review of these rare events, no specific risk factors have been
identified. Therefore, Health Canada is not restricting the use of these vaccines in any specific
populations at this time.
• Health Canada continues to review all the available safety data as it becomes available. We will
take appropriate action, if required, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• The rapid detection of these rare events thanks to ongoing international cooperation with
partners like the United States, Europe and the UK shows that Canadians can trust that our post- market
monitoring system is working well.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXTENSION OF EXPIRY DATE
• Health Canada approved an extension requested by AstraZeneca to the expiry dates of two lots
of the AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine by 30 days, from May 31, 2021 to July 1, 2021.
• The approval to extend the shelf life was supported by scientific evidence.
• This change will ensure that provinces and territories are able to use up their existing inventory
and provide Canadians access to much needed doses of the vaccine.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER APPROVED VACCINES
• In addition to the AstraZeneca, COVISHIELD and Janssen vaccines, there are two other vaccines
authorized for use in Canada – Pfizer and Moderna, which give us additional tools to fight this pandemic
as quickly as possible.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through a robust vaccine safety monitoring
system.
• Health Canada will continue to work with the Public Health Agency of Canada and international
regulators to monitor all COVID 19 vaccines for any potential adverse events.
• While an adverse event may occur soon after immunization, this does not mean that it was
caused by the vaccine, which is why such events are carefully reviewed to determine if any action should
be taken.
• Should any safety issue be confirmed, the Department will take appropriate action immediately.
BACKGROUND
Summary of Regulatory Actions for AstraZeneca and COVISHIELD Vaccines
On February 26, 2021, Canada authorized 2 manufacturers of the ChAdOx1-S vaccine:
• AstraZeneca (brand name AstraZeneca COVID-19 Vaccine)
• Verity Pharmaceuticals and Serum Institute of India (SII) in collaboration with AstraZeneca
(brand name COVISHIELD Vaccine)
AstraZeneca COVID‐19 Vaccine (manufactured by AstraZeneca) and COVISHIELD (manufactured by
Serum Institute of India) are ChAdOx1-S recombinant vaccines developed by AstraZeneca and Oxford
University. Health Canada reviewed the manufacturing information for these vaccines and found them
to be comparable.
The vaccine is approved for people who are 18 years of age and older. It is given by 2 separate intra-
muscular injections of 0.5 mL each. The second dose is given 4 to 12 weeks after the first.
Recent Adverse Events for AstraZeneca vaccine
Throughout March, Health Canada has been participating in ongoing assessment of very rare adverse
events reported in Europe of thrombosis (blood clots) with thrombocytopenia (low blood platelets) or
vaccine-induced immune thrombotic thrombocytopenia (VITT) occurring after immunization with the
AstraZeneca vaccine.
In Canada, the provinces have administered over 2.3 million doses of the AstraZeneca or COVISHIELD
vaccine. As of June 4, there have been 46 confirmed or suspected reports of VITT in Canada. Based on
available evidence to date, PHAC has estimated the rate of these events in Canada could be as high as 1
in 50,000 doses administered.
Following reports of these very rare adverse events in Europe, Health Canada has worked closely with
European regulators to review the evidence. A series of statements were issued to keep Canadians
informed of the situation.
• March 18, 2021: A statement was issued indicating that the benefits of AstraZeneca vaccines
continue to outweigh the benefits
• March 24, 2021: Health Canada communicated about updates to the product monograph and
issued guidance for healthcare professionals and vaccine recipients on the potential symptoms to
monitor.
• March 29, 2021: Health Canada issued a statement on its issuance of new terms and conditions
which require that the manufacturers conduct a detailed assessment of the benefits and risks of the
vaccine by age and sex in the Canadian context.
• On April 14, 2021: Health Canada provided an update on the safety review of the AstraZeneca
and COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccines, which concluded that these very rare events may be linked to the
vaccine though no risk factors were identified.
• April 19, 2021: Health Canada published a Summary Safety Review that provided an overview of
safety information to date.
Health Canada is aware that researchers in Europe have indicated that they have identified a possible
cause for these very rare events observed in AstraZeneca COVID-19 vaccine recipients; however, little
information is available about this emerging research. Health Canada will be reviewing this evidence
when available.
Health Canada is also consulting with scientific experts in Canada and internationally to discuss the very
rare events, and continues to be in regular contact with international regulators and the manufacturer
of the AstraZeneca vaccine to review all evidence as it becomes available.
On June 11, 2021, the European Medicines Agency advised that people with a previous history of
capillary leak syndrome should not receive the AstraZeneca vaccine. The product labelling is being
updated. This action results from an assessment of 6 cases of this very rare, serious condition.
Health Canada is evaluating this information. No events of capillary leak syndrome have been reported
in Canada.
Summary of Regulatory Actions for Janssen Vaccine
On March 5, 2021, Health Canada authorized the Janssen COVID-19 Vaccine (Ad26.COV2.S).
The Janssen vaccine is approved for people who are 18 years of age and older. A single 0.5mL dose of
the vaccine is given by intra-muscular injection.
Recent Adverse Events for Janssen Vaccine
Janssen has provided Health Canada with information on recent reports from the United States, of
thromboembolism with thrombocytopenia, and additional cases with other thromboembolic events.
Health Canada has now assessed the available data on these very rare events and has concluded that
there is a possible link with use of the Janssen vaccine. As a result, on April 26, 2021, Health Canada
made updates to the product monograph to reflect the risk of thrombosis with thrombocytopenia.
However, as no specific risk factors for these events have been identified, Health Canada has not
implemented specific restrictions on the use of the product.
Health Canada continues to conclude that the benefits of the Janssen vaccine against COVID- 19
outweigh the risks of this very rare event.
COVID-19 SAFE VOLUNTARY ISOLATION SITE PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
Through the Fall 2020 Economic Statement, the Government of Canada established the Safe Voluntary
Isolation Sites Program ($100 million over 2 years), as part of Canada’s rapid response tools against the
spread of COVID-19. The program aims to decrease community transmission of COVID-19 by addressing
gaps identified for individuals who live in housing that may be crowded or have insufficient space for
proper distancing from household contacts to self-isolate. The voluntary isolation sites will help reduce
the risks of spread of the virus among household contacts, especially in Canada’s most densely
populated cities, municipalities and health regions.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
How will funding voluntary isolation facilities help with our fight against COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is taking action to support individuals who lack the space and means
to undertake an effective isolation.
• The availability of voluntary isolation sites is expected to help lower the rate of COVID-19
community spread via reduced transmission among those living in crowded housing.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing funding for these sites across Canada.
• We are working to identify cities and municipal regions that would benefit from this program.
IF PRESSED on voluntary isolation sites vs. Designated Quarantine Facilities
• Voluntary isolation sites are different from Designated Quarantine Facilities.
• Designated Quarantine Facilities are for individuals who are ordered to stay under the
Quarantine Act. This includes travellers who arrive in Canada without a valid pre-departure molecular
test, are symptomatic upon arrival, or do not have an appropriate quarantine plan upon entry into
Canada. These facilities are operated under federal jurisdiction.
• Voluntary isolation sites are meant for individuals who cannot safely isolate at their usual place
of residence due to crowded housing or resource constraints. These sites are operated under the
direction of local, municipal, or provincial health partners.
IF PRESSED on the location of selected sites
• The program exists to fill a gap for cities, municipalities, and health regions that are at risk of
high rates of transmission due to factors such as crowded housing.
• The first site under this program was launched in the City of Toronto as a pilot on September 12,
2020.
• With the creation of the national program, the Government of Canada has committed a total of
$89.2 million to fund voluntary isolation sites in various locations across Ontario, Saskatchewan, and
Nova Scotia.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to review funding requests from jurisdictions and
work with cities and municipalities that could benefit from a voluntary isolation site to reduce
community transmission of COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on the occupancy rates of the different voluntary isolation sites
• Since opening, the voluntary isolation sites have accommodated a steady stream of people from
their respective communities. To date, over 6,100 individuals have sought isolation support at a
federally-funded voluntary isolation site.
• The sites continue to provide safe self-isolation rooms to their residents while operating with
strong infection prevention and control measures in place.
• Eligibility criteria to access the sites is determined by local public health officials.
BACKGROUND
Context for Safe Self-Isolation
When presenting with symptoms of COVID-19, self-isolation is one of the most effective ways of
reducing the risk of spreading the virus. However, for some Canadians, crowded housing conditions and
restrictive costs can make it unsafe or impossible to effectively self-isolate at home.
Within the context of the broader COVID-19 pandemic response, evidence has emerged that individuals
facing socio- and economic challenges are at higher risk of contracting COVID-19. Evidence suggests that
densely populated neighbourhoods have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including its
most severe outcomes. Individuals from these neighbourhoods may have more difficulty properly
isolating themselves due to factors such as overcrowding and/or resource constraints. The
establishment of voluntary self-isolation sites aims to assist in addressing this issue.
Role of Eligible Recipients
Sites selected under the Program will provide a centralized location where identified individuals can
safely self-isolate for the required period. Regular monitoring and reporting will be conducted in
coordination with local public health officials. The sharing of best practices will be encouraged among
the selected sites to optimize effective site operation and administration of services under the
objectives of the Program.
Costs Covered by Federal Funding
Federal funding will include: transportation to and from the site, lodging, meals and incidentals such as
bedding and other necessities for residents, as well as on-site security and cleaning personnel for the
facility. It is also understood that related activities may be required, such as those performed by public
health professionals in the context of infection prevention and control.
Eligibility to access the self-isolation site
Through its case and contact management process, local public health officials will identify individuals to
be offered transfer to the isolation site on a voluntary basis.
For example, if a person is COVID-19 positive and lives in a home where there is no separate room in
which they can isolate, they may be considered as a candidate for the voluntary self- isolation site.
Individuals who are household contacts will also be considered if, for example, the individual cannot
isolate safely from positive case(s). Those awaiting test results may also be considered.
Locations of voluntary isolation sites
In collaboration with 10 funding recipients, voluntary isolation sites are now operating in the following
communities and regions:
• Ontario: Toronto, York, Region of Peel, Durham, Ottawa, Region of Waterloo, Thunder Bay,
Windsor-Essex, and Sault Ste. Marie.
• Saskatchewan: Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Nipawin, Lloydminster, North
Battleford, La Ronge, and Yorkton.
• Nova Scotia: Halifax, Dartmouth, Sydney, North Sydney, Wolfville, and Bridgewater.
SUPPORTING ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
BUDGET 2021 KEY MESSAGES:
• To improve access to sexual and reproductive health care support, information and services,
including protecting access to abortion care, Budget 2021 proposes to provide $45 million over three
years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada to fund community- based organizations that help make
sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for vulnerable
populations.
• These organizations support activities such as producing inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, carrying out public awareness activities, and providing travel
and logistical support to individuals who have to go long distances to access abortion care.
• In addition, there are currently no existing resources that collect comprehensive data on a wide
range of sexual and reproductive health indicators in Canada, limiting our ability to target supports.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $7.6 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics
Canada to develop and implement a national survey on sexual and reproductive health that captures
data on race, household income, and sexual orientation–information often not captured in existing
surveys. Better information will help ensure governments understand the challenges and improve the
support they provide.
• These investments will set the foundation for significant improvements for Canadians across the
country to have better access to the health care information and services they need for their sexual and
reproductive health.
SYNOPSIS
• Currently, women, youth, LGBTQ2 people, racialized Canadians, and Indigenous populations
face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support,
information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the same quality of care, particularly if they are
from marginalized communities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What will the federal government do to improve the sexual and reproductive health of
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We are proposing to invest $45 million over three years to help make sexual and reproductive
health care information and services more accessible to Canadians.
• We will fund community-based organizations to produce inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, work with providers to develop and implement best practices,
carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to access abortion care.
• We are also proposing to invest $7.6 million over five years for Statistic Canada to collect data
that will fill existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health
supports for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH TRANSFERS TO PTS…
• The Government is committed to collaboration with provinces and territories to strengthen our
health care system, ensuring equitable and appropriate access to a full suite of reproductive and sexual
health services, in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer funding discussions.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO ABORTION SERVICES…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Canada Health Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory
deduction to federal health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICES IN NEW BRUNSWICK…
• The Canada Health Act is clear, whether abortion services are received in hospital or at Clinic
554, patients should not be required to pay out of pocket to receive medically necessary health services.
• This Government is committed to upholding the Canada Health Act, and will continue to levy
mandatory deductions where evidence of patient charges exist.
BACKGROUND
• The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist
lens, and realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights. The 2019 Mandate Letter for
the Minister of Health outlines the need to ensure that Canadians have access to the full suite of
reproductive services across the country.
• Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and
reproductive health services remain. Women, members of LGBTQ2 communities, youth, racialized
Canadians and Indigenous peoples face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest
barriers to accessing support, information, and services.
• Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow
range of indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based
decision-making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including
prevalence of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual
knowledge and behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services in New Brunswick
• Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered extra- billing and
user charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and
comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. In New Brunswick, Regulation 84- 20 of the NB Medical Services
Payment Act limits coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals
currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who
receive these services at the private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. In March
20201, NB’s CHT payments were reduced by $64,850 in light of patient charges for medically necessary
abortion services in Clinic 554 during fiscal year 2018-2019.
Smoking and Tobacco Use in Canada
SYNOPSIS
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. Smoking has negative effects on many
systems in the body. Smoking compromises the immune system and increases the risk for pulmonary
infections, as well as negatively affecting the functioning of the lungs and causing chronic lung disease,
cancer and cardiovascular diseases.
• Almost 5 million Canadians still smoke cigarettes – about 15% of the population over the age of
15.
• The Government has an ambitious target to reduce tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by
2035. Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, with a $330M investment over five
years, starting in May 2018.
• The Strategy includes funding for enhanced scientific and surveillance activities; grants and
contributions programming directed at increasing the reach and effectiveness of prevention and
cessation programming; public education; collaborative activities with the provinces and territories; and
partnership and engagement with domestic, international and multi-sector stakeholders.
• The emergence of COVID-19 has raised concern about the potential of increased risks posed by
smoking. Cigarette smoking has negative effects on many systems in the body that are also affected by
COVID-19. Smoking negatively affects the function of the lungs, causing inflammation and impairing the
ability of the lungs to clear mucus. In addition, smoking can increase the spread of COVID-19 as hand-to-
mouth behaviour creates an opportunity for the virus to enter the body.
QUESTION POSSIBLE
• What is the Government of Canada doing to address smoking and tobacco use in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country. The Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and non-smokers. Through Canada’s Tobacco Strategy, we are working to drive
down tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Canada has a long history in tobacco control. We are a global leader in the regulation of tobacco
products and have implemented many internationally-recognized practices in tobacco control. The
Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling and promotion of
both tobacco and vaping products. The TVPA includes significant restrictions to prevent the uptake of
tobacco and vaping products by youth and adults who do not use these products.
• Building on the strong foundation provided by the TVPA, we will continue to strengthen
regulations to prevent youth and non- smokers from becoming addicted to nicotine and to provide
Canadians with health information on tobacco use.
• We are engaged with our provincial and territorial partners to find new and innovative ways to
increase quit attempts and make it easier for Canadians who smoke to access the support and resources
they need to quit and reduce the harms to their health.
• On May 31, 2021 Health Canada announced funding for a new tobacco cessation project. The
Canadian Cancer Society, the Canadian Lung Association, the Canadian Public Health Association, and
the Heart & Stroke Foundation of Canada are receiving more than $3 million over 26 months to
encourage those 35 to 64 to quit smoking through a national social marketing campaign.
• We are continuing work to prevent the appeal and access of tobacco products to youth and
supporting specific initiatives for populations that face higher rates of tobacco use.
• Budget 2021 put in place new measures to reduce tobacco use in Canada. Effective April 20,
2021, the tobacco excise duty rate increased by $4 per carton of 200 cigarettes, along with increases to
the excise duty rates for other tobacco products.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEW TOBACCO CESSATION PROJECT…
• On May 31, 2021, during World No Tobacco Day 2021, Health Canada announced funding for a
new tobacco cessation project funded through the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP).
• The Canadian Cancer Society, the Canadian Lung Association, the Canadian Public Health
Association, and the Heart & Stroke Foundation of Canada are receiving more than $3 million over 26
months to encourage those 35-64 to quit smoking through a national social marketing campaign.
• Health Canada will continue to work with its partners to to drive down tobacco use to less than
5% by 2035.
IF PRESSED ON EXCISE TAX ON TOBACCO…
• We know that increasing tobacco taxes and price are an effective way to prevent and reduce
smoking, especially among youth.
• Budget 2021 put in new measures to reduce tobacco use in Canada.
• Effective April 20, 2021, the tobacco excise duty rate increased by $4 per carton of 200
cigarettes, along with increases to the excise duty rates for other tobacco products.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR SMOKERS…
• The Government of Canada is concerned with the risks posed to Canadians by smoking.
• We urge Canadians to consider quitting smoking. We know that when you give up cigarettes,
your body starts to renew itself as early as the first day of quitting. Quitting will improve your life in
ways you will see and feel, both now and later, including reducing your chance of developing heart
disease, cancer, breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help Canadians quit and reduce the harms of smoking.
• We urge Canadians to contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can
help them develop a quit smoking plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and
services in their community where available. The quitline can be reached by phone at 1-866-366-3667 or
online at https://www.canada.ca/fr/sante-canada/services/tabagisme-et- tabac/cesser-fumer/services-
provinciaux-territoriaux.html.
IF PRESSED ON NEW AND PLANNED REGULATORY MEASURES FOR TOBACCO
• In 2019, the Government of Canada implemented the Tobacco Products Regulations (Plain and
Standardized Appearance) to standardize the appearance of tobacco packages and tobacco products.
• Tobacco packages and the products they contain are powerful promotional vehicles. Evidence
shows that plain packaging is perceived as less appealing, particularly among young people.
• These Regulations apply to all tobacco packages and products. The measures include requiring a
standard colour, font, and font size on all tobacco packages, and removing distinctive and attractive
features such as the use of logos, graphics and promotional information on packages. Cigarette
packaging will be standardized to a slide-and-shell format, and the appearance of cigarettes and other
tobacco products will be standardized as well.
• We are also working to finalize new regulations that update and expand requirements for
Health Warning messages for tobacco products to ensure that these labels remain noticeable,
memorable and engaging. These new labels will enhance public awareness of the hazards of all tobacco
products while also providing information to Canadians who currently use tobacco about information
and resources they can access to help them quit.
• In October 2018, Health Canada sought feedback on options for new health labelling for tobacco
products including labelling on cigarettes. Comments received through this consultation are being
carefully considered as Health Canada continues to develop new health-related labelling for tobacco
products.
IF PRESSED ON WORK WITH INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES…
• The rates of use of commercial tobacco for Indigenous peoples are two to five times higher than
the overall Canadian rate. The Government is committed to working with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis
organizations to co-develop distinct and high quality approaches to address high rates of commercial
tobacco use.
• Indigenous Services Canada and Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs are investing
$45M over five years to support community-based tobacco use programming and the co- development
process.
BACKGROUND
Tobacco use in Canada
Data released on August 5, 2020 from the 2019 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS) shows a
continued downward trend in smoking over the past three decades for Canadians 12 years of age and
older. Smoking declined to 14.8% (4,684,400) from 15.8% (4,926,800 Canadians) in 2018 and from 17.7%
(5,344,100 Canadians) in 2015. Daily smoking also declined to 10.0% (3,160,100) from 10.9% (3,392,700
Canadians) in 2018 and from 12.6% (3,809,500 Canadians) in 2015. Daily smoking for youth aged 12-17
is less than 1% (10,300). While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking,
reminding us that, despite decades of effort to deter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public
health problem in Canada. Tobacco use is still the leading cause of premature death in Canada, killing
half of all long-term daily smokers. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit
are up to four times higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released a report entitled “Canadian
Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015 – 2017”. The report identifies the enormous burden tobacco use
places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use to society was
approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the deadliest
substance by far accounting for approximately 48,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per
day or 17% of all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• Five COVID-19 vaccines have now been authorized by Health Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION0
• What is the current status of COVID-19 vaccines expected to be available for Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
• With five vaccines now authorized - Pfizer, Moderna, AstraZeneca vaccines, and Janssen - we
have additional tools to fight this pandemic as quickly as possible.
• Health Canada has also approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15, and has
begun to review data for use of the Moderna vaccine in children aged 12-17.
• In addition, there are two other vaccines currently under review by Health Canada, from
Novavax and Medicago.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON DIFFERENCES BETWEEN THE AUTHORIZED VACCINES
• The Janssen vaccine is the first single-dose COVID-19 vaccine to be authorized in Canada. All
other authorized vaccines require two doses. As with the AstraZeneca vaccine, the Janssen vaccine can
also be stored and transported at refrigerated temperatures, between 2 and 8˚C for at least three
months, giving greater flexibility in how it can be distributed across Canada.
• With the exception of the Pfizer vaccine, which is authorized for people 12 years of age and
older, the authorized vaccines are currently only for use in adults (18 years and older).
• The authorization of additional vaccines to fight this pandemic can only help. They provide
additional tools to fight COVID-19 as quickly as possible, and will provide more supply to the market.
IF PRESSED ON EFFICACY OF JANSSEN AND ASTRAZENECA COMPARED TO HIGHER EFFICACY OF MRNA
VACCINES
• Each vaccine has unique characteristics and all authorized vaccines are helpful in the fight
against COVID-19.
• Canada has negotiated a broad and diverse COVID-19 vaccine portfolio to ensure we have
sufficient supply for everyone in Canada, while also mitigating risks of supply disruptions.
• Having additional vaccines from different manufacturers can help meet volume requirements to
get more people vaccinated sooner and offers more vaccination options.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
• On May 5, 2021 Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15.
• This information was also been submitted to the US FDA and the European Medicines Agency.
The expanded indication was approved by the US FDA on May 10, 2021 and by the EMA on May 28,
2021.
• On June 4, Health Canada received a submission for use of the Moderna vaccine in children aged
12-17.
• Pfizer has an ongoing study in children aged 6 months -12 years.
• Moderna also has ongoing pediatric studies.
• Manufacturers of other authorized vaccines have pediatric studies planned, but these have not
yet started or are currently on hold.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS IN GENERAL
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Interim Order signed by the
Minister of Health in September, which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness
and quality to Health Canada as it becomes available.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submission depends on the outcomes of the companies’
ongoing clinical trials, as well as the finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian
supply.
• As the manufacture of vaccines is being scaled up globally, the sites making vaccines for Canada
may be different from sites making vaccines for Europe or the US. These differences may result in
different timelines for authorization.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
IF PRESSED ON TIMING OF OTHER DECISIONS
• Health Canada continues to review the Novavax and Medicago vaccines. We aim to issue a
decision in general alignment with those of our major regulatory partners.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines by
allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as it becomes available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Advance purchase agreements
The Government has announced agreements to secure millions of doses of seven leading vaccine
candidates, including those being developed by AstraZeneca, Sanofi/GlaxoSmithKline, Johnson &
Johnson, Novavax, Moderna, Pfizer, and Medicago.
The supply of any of these vaccines is dependent on successful completion of clinical trials and
authorization by Health Canada.
Health Canada is actively working with the manufacturers of the vaccine candidates recommended by
the Vaccines Task Force. While regulatory approvals are separate from the procurement process, Health
Canada is expediting all vaccine drug submissions.
Status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer vaccine on December 9, 2020, a week after the UK authorized it,
two days before the US FDA, and almost two weeks before Europe.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna vaccine on December 23, 2020, 5 days after the US, and the
Janssen vaccine 6 days after the US.
Health Canada, Europe, the UK, and other jurisdictions have now authorized the AstraZeneca vaccine.
Health Canada worked closely with the European Medicines Agency on that review.
Health Canada continues to engage with all of the vaccine manufacturers to ensure that data is
submitted to Canada at the same time it is provided to other major regulators, which is supporting
similar completion timelines.
Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 12-15 on May 5, 2021 ahead of
the US and EMA.
SUICIDE PREVENTION IN CANADA
Budget 2021:
Budget 2021 proposed robust investments in many areas of mental health to support various projects in
mental health promotion. This includes $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support
projects for innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted by
COVID-19, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and
racialized and Black Canadians.
Budget 2021 also proposed to invest $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to invest $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support
a trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for
populations at high risk of experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought
about by COVID-19.
Furthermore, launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides free and confidential online
mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official
languages. Budget 2021 proposes to provide an additional $62 million, in 2021- 22, for the Wellness
Together Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support
mental health and well-being.
SYNOPSIS
• Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across
Canada. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is supporting the implementation of a fully
operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service, which provides 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government recognizes the impact suicide has on families and communities.
• That is why we are investing $21 million over 5 years for the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health, and its partners, to implement a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
• The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity
of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR COVID-19
• Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides free and confidential online mental
health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official
languages.
• In Budget 2021, the Government proposes to provide an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for
the Wellness Together Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and
services to support mental health and well-being.
• Also, in Budget 2021, the Government proposes to provide $50 million over two years, starting
in 2021-22, to support a trauma and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health
programming for populations at high risk of experiencing COVID-19 trauma (including those exposed to
various trauma brought about by COVID-19).
• On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help
Phone to provide crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing additional funding for the Canada Suicide
Prevention Service to support the increased demand for crisis support at this time.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPLEMENTATION OF A 3-DIGIT NUMBER FOR SUICIDE PREVENTION CRISIS
SUPPORT
• As demonstrated by the recently passed motion calling on the federal government to set up a
national 988 number, there is great interest in exploring the implementation of a three-digit number in
Canada.
• As a first step, there is a need to gain a better understanding of the regulatory, technological
and resource implications in the Canadian context.
• The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission has launched a regulatory
proceeding to consult on a proposed three-digit hotline so Canadians have a memorable number they
can call when they need help.
BACKGROUND
Over the past 10 years, there was an average of 4,000 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which
resulted in 10 to 12 people that died by suicide every day. Suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully explains or predicts suicide; a
combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness, physical health, personal
issues and loss, childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has provided proof of concept funding to Crisis Services
Canada in the amount of $5.46 million over five years (2015-16 to 2020-21) to support the development
of the Canada Suicide Prevention Service, a national phone, text and chat suicide prevention service that
links existing telephone, distress and crisis infrastructures throughout Canada. Quebec is serving its
residents through its provincial suicide prevention line: 1-866-APPELLE.
PHAC is providing $21 million over five years, starting in 2020-21, to the Centre for Addiction and Mental
Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention service.
CAMH will lead this initiative in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis
Services Canada.
The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention (the Framework) was made publicly available in
November 2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and
data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework were released in 2016 and 2018 on Canada.ca, with the most recent
report made publicly available in a Minister’s Message posted in December 2020.
Motion 174 – A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan
In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the
Government to establish a national suicide prevention action plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians
voted unanimously in favour of M-174, though it is non-binding. The proposed actions in the plan are
aligned with the Framework. PHAC will facilitate the coordination and collaboration on elements of the
action plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders through its convening role on the
Framework. An update on M-174 was included under the Framework progress report from December
2020.
3-Digit Suicide Prevention National Telephone Line – 9-8-8 Campaign in Canada
In line with efforts of the U.S. and the U.K. to designate memorable 3-digit numbers for national suicide
prevention lines, on December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of a motion
sponsored by MP Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia) calling on the federal government to
act immediately to set up a national 988 number to consolidate all existing suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) is responsible for
establishing any three digit abbreviated codes. The CRTC has launched a regulatory proceeding to
consult on a proposed three-digit hotline so Canadians have a memorable number they can call when
they need help. The public consultation was launched on June 3, 2021 and will end September 1, 2021.
As highlighted in Budget 2021, the government is supportive of these efforts, including ensuring funds
are available to support the creation of this hotline.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
Demand for crisis support has increased significantly since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak. Through
the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of Canada announced a $50 million investment to
bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress
centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of funds were retained for a second round of grants in fiscal
year 2021-22. This will be available for recipients with remaining or emerging needs, or for eligible
organizations not included in the first round of funding. In addition, some of this funding will support the
development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of diverse and vulnerable
populations.
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Additional Budget 2021 Mental Health Investments
Budget 2021 proposes $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects for
innovative mental health interventions for populations disproportionately impacted by COVID-19,
including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, Indigenous people, and racialized and
Black Canadians
The Government also proposes to provide $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help
develop national mental health service standards in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders, so that Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support.
The Government will provide $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support a trauma and
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD) stream of mental health programming for populations at high risk
of experiencing COVID-19 trauma and those exposed to various trauma brought about by COVID-19.
Understanding the Mental Health Impact of the Pandemic
Through its COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) is currently supporting more than 100 research projects on COVID-19 and Mental Health,
including problematic substance use ($13.5 million from CIHR and partners). These important projects
will look at mental health during and after the pandemic and will generate new evidence to inform the
Mental Health response to the pandemic. Ultimately, these initiatives will help offer new evidence-
based treatments and services to all Canadians, especially for priority populations that may be
experiencing acute mental health concerns associated with COVID-19.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events
PHAC is currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and self-
harm. The analysis will seek to estimate the prevalence of suicide ideation among the population in
Canada during the COVID-19 pandemic and compare this to pre-pandemic prevalence, while also
identifying those groups that may potentially have a higher risk of suicide than the general population.
SWITCH HEALTH
SYNOPSIS
• Switch Health is the contractor hired to manage the COVID-19 At Home Specimen Collection Kits
on day 1 and day 8 for all travellers arriving to Canada by land, and for air travellers arriving to Canada
via Toronto’s Pearson International Airport. Switch Health is also responsible for all day 8 test kits for
international air travellers arriving to Canada via other international airports.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What has the government done to decrease wait times, and improve bilingual services for
travellers needing to use Switch Health?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is working to ensure the provision of equitable, timely and efficient
COVID-19 testing services to all travellers, including temporary foreign workers.
• Switch Health has increased its complement of bilingual resources to provide service to
travellers in their official language of choice. 31% of Switch agents are bilingual. An additional 58
bilingual agents were on-boarded starting the last week of March to the second week of April in a step-
wise fashion.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Public Services and Procurement Canada are in
discussions with other service providers to augment laboratory testing capacity.
IF PRESSED on nurses employed with Switch Health
• The Government of Canada’s contract with Switch Health requires them to provide trained
health care professionals.
• Switch Health employees are hired and trained to observe self- swabs – they do not administer
the tests.
• When the Public Health Agency of Canada learned that 2% of Switch Health’s workforce were
not nurses, they requested that those individuals be reassigned. Switch Health has complied with this
request and is providing additional information on the claims regarding its workforce.
IF PRESSED on contract with Switch Health
• Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC) has strong processes in place to ensure that the
supplies and services procured meet the requirements set out in each Request for Proposal.
• We have just been made aware of these concerns from Blast Marketing employees and are
actively following up with Switch Health.
• The Government of Canada will take action to protect the interests of Canadians.
IF PRESSED on Temporary Foreign Workers
• Switch Health continues to work with Employment and Social Development Canada and industry
associations to distribute a step- by-step guide for employers and to address programmatic questions.
• Switch Health has implemented a specialized appointment process for employers with seasonal
workers, resulting in a streamlined appointment process.
• Dynacare provides the testing support and services for temporary foreign workers working in
Quebec.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has asked Switch Health to provide information regarding a media report
that alleges that Switch Health misrepresented its workforce as 100% nurses. Switch Health has denied
the allegation in a statement to the media and is cooperating fully with the Government.
98% of Switch Health’s workforce are nurses: 1,172 RNs and RPNs, and 17 health care professionals.
The total number of telehealth sessions conducted by trained telehealth generalists was 4,067 of
497,777 (approximately 0.8%).
TAKING ACTION TO STRENGTHEN SUPPORTIVE CARE FOR CANADIANS
BUDGET 2021:
• Budget 2021 builds upon the commitment made by the Government of Canada to take any
action it can to support seniors and vulnerable Canadians across the country.
• Budget 2021 includes:
o A $3B investment over five years ($600M per year), starting in 2022-23, to ensure that provinces
and territories provide a high standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
o $29.8M over six years, starting in 2021-22, to advance the government’s palliative care strategy.
o $41.3M over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing to improve data collection and data
infrastructure in supportive care, primary care, and pharmaceuticals.
o $90M over three years to launch the Age Well at Home initiative
o An increase to Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over.
o Funding of $27.6 million over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to
support retirement saving for personal support workers.
o $960 million over three years for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program to train skilled
workers, including personal support workers.
BACKGROUND
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
• The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with partners, such as the provinces and
territories, to develop a Framework and a targeted Action Plan on Palliative Care in order to provide
end-of-life care where Canadians want it. Budget 2021 proposes to provide $29.8M over six years,
starting in 2021-22, to Health
Canada to advance the government’s palliative care strategy and lay a better foundation for coordinated
action on long-term and supportive care needs, and improving access to quality palliative care.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $41.3M over six years, and $7.7M ongoing, starting in 2021-
22, for Statistics Canada to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary
care, and pharmaceuticals.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide $90M over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment
and Social Development Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist
community-based organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise
vulnerable seniors age in place, such as matching seniors with volunteers who can help with meal
preparations, home maintenance, daily errands, yard work, and transportation. This initiative would also
support regional and national projects that help expand services that have already demonstrated results
in helping seniors stay in their homes.
• The government is also proposing to increase Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over,
beginning in 2022.
• Budget 2021 proposes to provide funding of $27.6M over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-
Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees International Union Healthcare. The funding will
support incentives for worker participation.
• The Budget also proposes to establish a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by
ESDC, and funded by $960M over three years. The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and
deliver relevant training, and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the
health sector, this would include the need for more skilled personal support workers.
TERRITORIAL HEALTH INVESTMENT FUND
BUDGET 2021:
• No matter where anyone lives in Canada, they should be confident that they have access to
reliable, well-funded public health care.
• To support the territories in overcoming the challenges of delivering health care services in the
North, Budget 2021 proposes to provide $54 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to renew the
Territorial Health Investment Fund.
• Of this amount, $27 million would be allocated to Nunavut, $12.8 million would be allocated to
Yukon, and $14.2 million would be allocated to the Northwest Territories.
• This extension will allow Health Canada to have time to work with territorial governments to
better understand the impact of investments through the program to date, as well as their future needs.
BACKGROUND
In recognition of the unique challenges of delivering health care in the North, the Government has
provided a series of time-limited funding arrangements since 2005, most recently in 2017 under the
Territorial Health Investment Fund, to support medical travel costs and health system improvements.
Budget 2017 funding ended on March 31, 2021, with the territories pushing for funding to be continued.
Delays in implementing the 2017 funding for the Territorial Health Investment Fund, and as a result of
the COVID-19 pandemic, meant it was premature to make a long-term commitment to the future of the
program without having results from past investments.
Instead, a two-year extension will provide time for Health Canada to work with the territories to better
understand the impact of past investments and the territories’ future needs.
This funding will extend THIF at existing funding levels for each territory for an additional two years, to
end of fiscal year 2022-23. Funding will flow through grant funding agreements between Health Canada
and each territory.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
SYNOPSIS
• On March 1, 2021, Health Canada issued new interim orders extending the regulatory
flexibilities for expedited access to COVID-19 medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the rapid testing devices needed
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
• The Department has prioritized the review of all types of COVID-19 tests, including rapid and
new innovative testing options and technologies.
• Health Canada continues to work as quickly as possible to approve rapid, point-of-care
diagnostic, self-testing and monitoring tests without compromising on standards for safety,
effectiveness and quality.
• As of June 14, 2021, Health Canada has authorized 74 testing devices, through its expedited
regulatory review efforts. This includes rapid tests, that can be used at home or in a point of care
setting.
• On April 23, Health Canada authorized the first self-test kit, the Lucira CHECKIT COVID-19 Test
Kit. Since then Health Canada continues to proactively contact self-test manufacturers that have been
authorized in other jurisdictions; inviting them to submit an application in Canada.
• On May 12, Health Canada authorized an amendment to the Quidel Sofia, a rapid antigen test,
to allow for serial testing in asymptomatic populations.
• As new tests become available and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada works with provincial public health laboratories to acquire and distribute them to increase
existing on-the-ground testing capacity.
• Based on the information available to date on variants, the authorized tests continue to be
effective.
• Health Canada is monitoring the potential impacts of the new variants on the effectiveness of
test devices and will take action as necessary.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on home testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada has identified applications for self-testing technologies as being of highest
priority for review at this time.
• On April 23, 2021, Health Canada authorized the Lucira CHECKIT COVID-19 Test Kit. This is the
first complete self-test kit to be authorized in Canada.
• The single-use test kit uses self-administered nasal swabs and results are available within 30
minutes.
• A second application for a self-testing device is currently under priority review - this device is the
“Panbio COVID-19 Antigen Self- test”.
IF PRESSED… on why tests are authorized in other countries but not in Canada
• Each jurisdiction has different rules and approval processes.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing
devices available for sale in Canada have been accurate and reliable. As a result, we have avoided some
of the problems other countries have experienced, including recalling lower-quality tests.
• Health Canada accepts submissions made to another jurisdiction and assesses that data
independently.
• Once tests are approved by our international partners, we contact manufacturers to encourage
them to apply for authorization in Canada.
IF PRESSED… on Health Canada’s position on saliva testing for COVID-19:
• Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and reliable COVID-19 tests devices for use
with various samples
• At this time, Health Canada has authorized the use of gargle and spit samples for use with the
authorized Cepheid Xpertxpress SARS-CoV-2 testing device.
• Health Canada is prioritizing the review of applications for test kits that use saliva samples so
Canadians have access to new testing options.
IF PRESSED… on the authorization of Spartan test kits:
• Health Canada authorized the Spartan Biosciences COVID-19 test kit under an Interim Order on
January 22, 2021.
• When Health Canada became aware of reports of inaccurate results from users of the Spartan
Biosciences COVID-19 tests, the Department requested detailed information from Spartan about the
nature of the inaccuracies, possible causes, and where the tests have been distributed.
• On March 30, 2021, Spartan initiated a voluntary recall and contacted their customers to notify
them of the issue.
• Spartan continues to investigate the root-cause of the performance issue, keeping Health
Canada informed. Upon completion of this investigation, Health Canada will review the analysis before
distribution re-commences.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing the spread of
the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for clinical care and public health
management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the safety,
effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an application through the IO
pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based testing to reliably
diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. A number of lab-based and point-of-care
nucleic acid-based tests have been authorized for use in Canada. Health Canada has received additional
point-of-care nucleic acid-based tests which are being prioritized for review at this time.
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
Antigen tests are often rapid tests that can be offered at the point of care in disposable formats, though
one lab-based antigen test has been approved as well. Antigen testing is one of several emerging
technologies that can be used to determine if a person is infected with the COVID-19 virus.
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not aware of a
serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are not appropriate for early
diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection to develop antibodies.
TESTING CAPACITY
SYNOPSIS
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories to distribute the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and
Quidel Sofia rapid tests, as well as putting in place surge support for laboratory testing.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians have access to effective
COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure tests to meet both current and future
demand as testing continues to increase across the country.
• As part of this work, we purchased five rapid tests – the Cepheid GeneXpert, Abbott ID NOW,
Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor and Quidel Sofia– and have worked with our provincial and territorial
counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• Cepheid GeneXpert tests began shipments in the spring of 2020, and the first shipment of
Abbott tests were sent in late October 2020. Shipments to provinces and territories will continue each
week as supply arrives in Canada.
• To date, 42M tests have been delivered to Canada, including over 6.5 million Abbott ID NOW
tests, 22.9 million Abbott Panbio tests, 11.6 million BD Veritor tests and 850 thousand Quidel Sofia.
These tests are being provided to provinces and territories at no cost to them.
• Provinces and territories decide how to deploy these technologies, informed by the Pan-
Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance that was released in October.
• Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity has now
exceeded the 200,000 tests per day target.
• We have also put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
• My department continues to work with colleagues in Public Services and Procurement Canada,
Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to identify
and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• As emerging testing and screening products or platforms become available and approved for use
in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON BORDER TESTING
• The Government of Canada has implemented robust measures at Canada’s borders to prevent
and mitigate the importation of new COVID-19 cases associated with international travel.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with various provinces, territories and partners to
implement innovative and scientifically grounded measures at Canada’s international border.
• Border testing pilot projects are a means to help generate scientific evidence to inform
development and/or enhance various policies and programs that prevent introduction and spread of
disease in Canadian communities.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXPERT PANEL BORDER’S REPORT
• On May 27, 2021, the Minister of Health welcomed the COVID-19 Testing and Screening Expert
Advisory Panel’s report, Priority Strategies to Optimize Testing and Quarantine at Canada’s Borders,
which provides evidence-based advice and recommendations on border testing and quarantine
measures to prevent and control transmission of COVID-19.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is reviewing the evidence presented by the Panel as well as
its recommendations to help inform the evolution of future border and travel measures considering
vaccination status.
• In addition, the government is engaging provinces and territories on their perspectives on the
Panel’s recommendations.
• The Government of Canada will be prudent in its approach moving forward as it gradually
adjusts border measures, with the health and safety of Canadians top of mind.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada work closely with provincial and territorial
officials and laboratories in support of a coordinated approach and conducting laboratory testing for the
virus that causes COVID-19. As of June 2, nearly 35 million tests for COVID-19 were performed in
Canada.
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Beginning September 3, a table outlining progress by provinces and territories in increasing their testing
capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory compared
to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement, has been published online.
As of May 31, the projected maximum testing capacity reported by provinces and territories was
238,280 tests/day, exceeding the original testing capacity target of 200,000 tests/day as articulated by
provinces and territories under the Safe Restart Agreement.
Province/ Testing Capacity Projected Max. Capacity as % of
Territory Commitment under Testing Capacity* Commitment
the SRA (tests/day) (tests/day)
BC 20,000 20,132 101%
AB 22,000 22,000 100%
SK 4,000 4,500 112%
MB 3,000 3,500 117%
ON 78,000 124,700 160%
QC 35,000 46,338 132%
NB 2,500-3,000 3,000 100-120%
NS 2,500 10,000 400%
PE 835 850 102%
NL 2,500-3,000 2,700 90-108%
NU N/A 300 N/A
NWT 225 110 49%
YT 160 150 94%
TOTAL 170,720 – 171,720 238,280 >100%
The federal government has activated additional laboratory capacity to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. Six federal labs are currently operational and can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 12,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario, as well as Correctional Services
Canada. Efforts to increase surge capacity are ongoing.
As we move into the next phase of lifting some public health measures and re-opening some parts of the
economy, cases of COVID-19 will still occur until the population has enough immunity or a vaccine is
available to prevent the disease.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community. In this next phase, testing will be
critical for groups that are more vulnerable to complications from COVID-19. This testing will be an early
warning for our healthcare system.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
ACCESS TO TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s medical system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to treatments for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standards for safety, effectiveness and quality.
• In September 2020, I signed an Interim Order that created a mechanism for the expedited
review of treatments, while ensuring that we maintain a high level of scientific scrutiny.
• As of June 2021, 16 submissions have been received under the Interim Order – including 9
treatments.
• Health Canada has authorized three drugs to treat COVID-19: bamlanivimab and remdesivir
were authorized in 2020 and on June 9, Health Canada authorized casirivimab and imdevimab as a
combination therapy.
• As of June 10, 2021, Health Canada continues to review 6 treatments under the Interim Order.
These include 4 monoclonal antibody therapies (Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination,
GSK’s Sotrovimab, CytoDyn’s Leronlimab and Celltrion’s Regdanvimab) and 2 others that work as
antiviral and/or anti-inflammatory drugs (favipiravir and baracitinib). One submission, for colchicine, has
been withdrawn by the manufacturer.
• The Government of Canada continues to engage proactively with domestic and international
companies to negotiate advance purchase agreements for the procurement of treatments to ensure
timely access.
IF PRESSED ON BAMLANIVIMAB
• Health Canada is aware that US FDA has revoked the Emergency Use Authorization for
bamlanivimab, at the request of Eli Lilly
• This revocation is related to lack of efficacy against emerging variants of concern circulating in
the US, in particular the Californian variants (B.1.427/B.1.429)
• There are no safety concerns with bamlanivimab. This decision was made in the context of the
US having two combination monoclonal antibody treatments available, which work better against some
of the emerging variants
• In Canada, bamlanivimab has been distributed to all Provinces except Manitoba, New Brunswick
and the Territories
• Bamlanivimab is the only treatment currently available in Canada for mild-to-moderate COVID
infection
• The Alpha (B.1.1.7) variant is the predominant variant in 94% of the cases in Canada at this time,
against which bamlanivimab is expected to retain efficacy
• However, other variants resistant to bamlanivimab are emerging, and Health Canada continues
to monitor these variants and their potential impacts on COVID-19 treatments
• Health Canada has updated the product labelling for bamlanivimab and communicated to
healthcare professionals to provide information on variants and their impact on bamlanivimab efficacy,
and has also discussed this issue with the provinces and territories
IF PRESSED ON CASIRIVIMAB AND IMDEVIMAB
• On June 9, 2021, Health Canada authorized a new treatment, casirivimab and imdevimab for the
treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults and adolescents (12 years of age and older weighing
at least 40 kg) who are at high risk for progressing to hospitalization and/or death.
• The combination drug treatment was developed by U.S. company Regeneron Pharmaceuticals
Inc. and is distributed in Canada by Hoffmann-La Roche Ltd.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
• Health Canada has authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment of
patients (12 years of age or older, who weigh at least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen to help them breathe. We approved this drug with conditions
for the manufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality.
• Despite the World Health Organization’s (WHO) updated guidelines advising against the use of
remdesivir, Health Canada continues to support this drug as a treatment option, which is in line with
other international regulators.
• Specifically, remdesivir modestly decreases patient time in hospital and continues to provide
benefit for patients and health care systems when used according to the authorized indication.
• Health Canada will continue to evaluate the information about remdesivir, and will take the
appropriate steps to ensure the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT AVAILABILITY
• Health Canada is closely monitoring global treatment development and is in active discussions
with manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory and scientific advice for Canadian clinical
trials and regulatory approvals.
• As of June 10, 2021, Health Canada has received 16 submissions under the interim order. This
includes 9 treatments and 7 vaccines (Moderna, Pfizer, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Verity
Pharmaceuticals/Serum Institute of India, Novavax and Medicago). One of these submissions (for
colchicine) was withdrawn on June 7, 2021.
• On November 20, Health Canada, under the Interim Order, authorized a monoclonal antibody
from Eli Lilly.
• There are terms and conditions associated with the authorization. This means that there are
requirements for the company after authorization to provide additional data pertaining to the quality,
effectiveness and safety of the drug.
• While recognizing the urgent need for treatments, all products will undergo a rigorous scientific
review to ensure they meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER
• The Interim Order allows Health Canada to expedite the review and authorization of drugs and
vaccines for Canadians in four ways:
o authorizing a brand new drug based on available evidence with more agile administrative and
application requirements;
o authorizing a new drug based on certain elements being approved by a trusted foreign
regulatory authority;
o allowing expanded use of an already-approved drug to include COVID-19-related indications
that were not in the original authorization; and,
o permitting the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to arrange for the importation of
promising COVID-19 drugs for placement (pre-positioning) in Canadian facilities prior to their
authorization in Canada if the Government of Canada has entered into a contract for its procurement.
• Health Canada will ensure that these drugs are supported by sufficient evidence of safety,
efficacy and quality.
• In addition, under the Interim Order, Health Canada can impose terms and conditions on the
authorization, such as risk mitigation measures and periodic assessments of safety information.
• Health Canada will monitor the safety and effectiveness of these drugs and will take immediate
action, including the suspension or cancellation of authorizations or establishment licenses, if required,
to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the World Health Organization, amongst others, to
share information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based approaches for
treatments. The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay
informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON THERAPEUTIC INVESTMENTS
• The Government of Canada is collaborating with academia and the private sector to advance
research and development of therapeutics including pre-clinical research, bio-manufacturing and
enhancing capacity for and access to clinical trials.
• The Government of Canada is closely monitoring and reviewing emerging evidence on possible
COVID-19 treatments, such as corticosteroids, antiviral drugs and antibody treatments.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with provinces and
territories to ensure rapid and equitable access to therapeutics.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food and Drugs Act and
the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and provide the Government with additional
powers.
The amendments will:
• help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
• seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for Canadians;
and
• allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is needed to
respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered in other
jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may not fully meet some of
the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act — such as packaging requirements.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new website for the
health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for
questions. Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19
website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to COVID-19.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab for the treatment of adults
and pediatric patients 12 years of age or older with mild to moderate COVID-19, who weigh at least 40
kg and who are at high risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 illness and/or hospitalization.
Bamlanivimab is the first treatment to be authorized in Canada using the Interim Order pathway for
COVID-19- drugs and vaccines. Under the Interim Order, there are terms and conditions associated with
the authorization. This means that there are requirements for the manufacturer after authorization to
provide additional data pertaining to the quality, effectiveness and safety of the drug.
The Institut national d’excellence en santé et en services sociaux (INESSS) has published a report on
healthcare system implementation that concluded that there is insufficient data to support the use of
bamlanivimab in the treatment of COVID-19. Similarly, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) released a report with their recommendations on January 14, highlighting limited
data and issues of bringing COVID-19-positive patients into healthcare settings to receive infusions,
which could impact delivery of care to non-COVID patients.
While Health Canada assesses the benefit/risk balance of new treatments based on their safety, efficacy,
and quality, INESSS and CADTH conduct independent cost-benefit analyses of new treatments that
consider other information in addition to safety and effectiveness. Given their regional mandate for
drug use and reimbursement, INESSS’s and CADTH’s recommendations may be different from Health
Canada.
Hoffman-La Roche’s casirivimab and imdevimab combination
Casirivimab and imdevimab are monoclonal antibodies that are administered together by intravenous
infusion as a single dose, and this product has shown a clear benefit for patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of hospitalization and/or death.
Other antibody products under review
Health Canada has also received four other submissions for antibody treatments with proposed
indications similar to Bamlanivimab and Hoffman-La Roche’s casirivimab and imdevimab combination
(Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination, CytoDyn’s Leronlimab, GlaxoSmithKline’s
sotrovimab and Celltrion’s Regdanvimab). Monoclonal antibodies are being tested both as treatment for
mild/moderate COVID-19, and also as prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
Remdesivir
Health Canada has authorized with conditions the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) manufactured
by Gilead Sciences Canada, Inc. for the treatment of patients with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require oxygenation. As a condition of authorization, the manufacturer will submit
to Health Canada:
• post-market safety monitoring reports, as well as reports on all serious adverse drug reactions,
annual pregnancy safety reports and any foreign regulatory actions related to the safety of remdesivir;
• any further data on the safety and efficacy of the drug, including final data from ongoing clinical
trials and additional safety data on patients with liver and kidney disease; and
• further quality data confirming that the manufacturing processes and controls will consistently
produce product of suitable quality for the intended use.
Remdesivir has also been granted emergency or conditional authorization in the U.S., Europe, Japan,
Singapore, Switzerland and Australia, and the US FDA has granted it full authorization. In Canada, the
authorization included a full scientific review. There is no expiry date on the authorization.
One existing clinical trial authorized by Health Canada to evaluate the safety and effectiveness of
remdesivir for use in Canada is still ongoing. This clinical trial will continue to gather more data on the
drug.
On November 20, the World Health Organization (WHO) released a guidance document, which
conditionally recommends against the use of remdesivir in patients with COVID-19, regardless of disease
severity. This follows the release of the WHO’s Solidarity trial results, which indicate that remdesivir
appeared to have little or no benefit for hospitalized patients.
Health Canada’s authorization with conditions of remdesivir was based on the National Institute for
Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID)’s Adaptive COVID-19 Treatment Trial (ACTT-1) trial results and is
limited to patients with severe COVID-19 who have pneumonia requiring supplemental oxygen. The
large, randomized controlled trial ACTT-1 demonstrated clear clinical benefit for this subset of COVID-19
patients.
Health Canada continues to support the use of remdesivir according to its authorized indication and in
the context of clinical trials. Health Canada has not authorized the routine use of remdesivir in patients
outside these two scenarios.
Two new variants of SARS-CoV-2 have emerged in the UK and South Africa but the activity of remdesivir
against these new variants is not expected to be affected. Health Canada has contacted Gilead Sciences
for information on how they plan to assess the impact of these mutations on the efficacy and safety of
remdesivir. Regulatory action is not expected to be required at this time, which is consistent with other
international regulators.
Favipiravir
Favipiravir is a broad-spectrum antiviral drug that has not been authorized in Canada.
There are currently two authorized clinical trials with favipiravir with study sites in Canada, which have
been sponsored by Appili Therapeutics Inc:
• The CONTROL trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 outbreaks in long-term care
homes. This study is led by Dr. Alison McGeer, an infectious disease specialist in the Sinai Health System.
• The PEPCO trial is studying its use in preventing COVID-19 in vulnerable people who have had
recent direct exposure to someone with a confirmed COVID-19 infection.
On December 18, 2020, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories filed a submission to Health Canada for favipiravir
(brand name Reeqonus) for the treatment of COVID-19 under the interim order pathway.
Colchicine
The purpose of this application under the Interim Order was to obtain a market authorization for the
indication “reduction of complications in adults with coronavirus infections such as COVID- 19.”
Although the submission to authorize colchicine as a treatment of COVID-19 has been withdrawn by the
manufacturer, colchicine is currently authorized in Canada as 0.6 mg tablets for the prophylaxis and
treatment of gout flares and Familial Mediterranean Fever (FMF) in adults at doses up to 2.4 mg daily.
Based on the review of submitted evidence, Health Canada was not able to establish a positive benefit-
harm balance for the colchicine 0.5 mg tablets in reduction of complications in adults with coronavirus
infections such as COVID-19. The sponsor was given an opportunity to provide additional supporting
clinical trial evidence. However, on June 7, 2021, the sponsor opted to withdraw the submission from
review. Voluntarily withdrawal of a submission does not disqualify a sponsor from refiling the
application at a later date based on new evidence.
Baracitinib
Baracitinib is a Janus kinase (Jak) inhibitor that is already approved in Canada for the treatment of
rheumatoid arthritis.
It is being investigated as a treatment that may reduce the complications related to the cytokine storm
as well as potentially inhibiting cell proteins that have a role in viral replication.
On May 13, Eli Lilly filed a drug submission with Health Canada under the Interim Order pathway.
Dexamethasone
Clinical trial results announced in June 2020 showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to
reduce inflammation, cut death rates by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients
admitted to hospital. As a result, the WHO has updated its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19.
Although the dexamethasone study’s results are preliminary, the researchers behind the project suggest
the drug should immediately become standard care in severely ill patients.
The oral tablet format of dexamethasone was added to Health Canada’s list of Tier 3 shortages on May
1, 2020 based on its current indications for use. Tier 3 shortages are those that have the greatest
potential impact on Canada’s drug supply and health care system. Drugs on this list are in high demand
or in shortage. Apotex and Pharmascience are the only two companies in Canada that market the
dexamethasone oral tablet. There are currently no active shortages reported by either company. Health
Canada is continuing to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis.
The IV format of dexamethasone has not been determined to be a Tier 3 shortage; a consensus
determination was made to monitor the supply situation on a monthly basis. Health Canada is also
monitoring the supply situation for dexamethasone alternatives, corticosteroids such as
methylprednisolone, prednisolone and hydrocortisone.
REGULATION OF ULTRAVIOLET LIGHT EMITTING DEVICES AND OZONE-GENERATING DEVICES
SYNOPSIS
• On June 7, 2021, Health Canada issued an Interim Order that subjects certain ultraviolet
radiation-emitting (UV) devices and ozone-generating devices to the requirements of the Pest Control
Products Act.
• The Interim Order captures UV and ozone-generating devices that are manufactured,
represented, distributed or used to control, destroy or inactivate viruses, bacteria or other micro-
organisms that are human pathogens, or to reduce their levels, other than in swimming pools, spas or
wastewater treatment systems.
• Certain devices, such as UV hand-held wands, are subject to a pre-market assessment and
require registration prior to entering the Canadian market.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• Why did Health Canada issue this Interim Order?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• UV and ozone-generating devices are widely and increasingly available for sale in Canada during
the pandemic. Many of these products make unproven claims and can pose serious health and safety
concerns.
• On June 7, 2021, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to bring certain UV and ozone-
generating devices under the Pest Control Products Act.
• Through the Interim Order, certain UV and ozone-generating devices are subject to safety and
efficacy assessments and must be registered prior to entering the Canadian market.
IF PRESSED ON WHICH UV DEVICES ARE EXEMPT FROM THE INTERIM ORDER:
• Certain regulated UV devices are exempt from registration provided they meet specific safety
requirements, such as shielding from direct UV exposure.
• Higher risk medical devices are also exempt since they are already covered under a different
regulation.
IF PRESSED ON THE ISSUE OF WHAT WILL HAPPEN TO THE UV AND OZONE DEVICES CURRENTLY ON THE
MARKET:
• Health Canada will take appropriate enforcement action to stop the manufacture, import,
distribution or use of products that are confirmed to be non-compliant with the Interim Order.
• Enforcement actions could include warning letters, detention and seizure of products,
compliance orders, and notices of violation with warning or monetary penalty.
BACKGROUND
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, there has been a significant increase in the sale and use of
UV and ozone-generating devices intended to control or kill bacteria and viruses (including SARS-CoV-2 –
the virus that causes COVID-19). These devices are widely marketed for use in various settings,
predominantly for use in domestic dwellings to kill bacteria and viruses on surfaces and objects such as
cell phones, keys, remote controls, and the air in small to large sized rooms. Some of these devices are
used in public settings such as schools and hospitals.
• To date, Health Canada has not received sufficient evidence to demonstrate that they can be
used safely, nor are effective as claimed.
• These devices can pose serious health and safety concerns. For instance, depending on the
wavelength, intensity, and duration of radiation exposure, direct exposure to ultraviolet light can result
in serious injuries including severe burns to the skin and eyes. Similarly, inhaling ozone can lead to
decreased lung function, irritation of respiratory pathways, and inflammation of pulmonary tissues as
well as irreversible lung damage leading to higher susceptibility to respiratory infections.
• UV or ozone-generating devices should not be used as a substitute for currently recommended
infection prevention measures such as frequent hand washing, physical distancing, mask-wearing, and
cleaning and disinfecting.
• In November 2020, Health Canada published an advisory warning Canadians about the risks of
using unregistered UV lights and wands that make unproven claims to kill the virus that causes COVID-
19. It covers a subset of the wide array of UV devices available in the marketplace. UV devices have also
generated media attention given that many make unproven COVID-19 related claims.
• On April 30, 2021, Health Canada published a Notice of Intent to inform stakeholders and
Canadians of its intent to regulate UV and ozone-generating devices.
• On May 12, 2021, Health Canada published an accompanying Questions and Answers document
to provide additional information regarding the product scope and requirements to help stakeholders in
complying with the Interim Order, as well as information for the public about these devices.
• On June 7, 2021, the Minister of Health made the Interim Order.
Interim Order
• The Minister of Health’s primary mandate under the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) is to
prevent unacceptable risks to individuals and the environment from the use of pest control products. To
meet this objective, the PCPA requires the Minister of Health to conduct pre-market assessments of pest
control products to determine if the risks to human health and the environment are acceptable, and the
products are efficacious before they are registered or authorized.
• The Minister may make an Interim Order under subsection 67.1(1) of the PCPA if the Minister
believes that immediate action is required to deal with a significant risk, direct or indirect, to health,
safety or the environment.
• By issuing an Interim Order that brings certain UV and ozone-generating devices under the
PCPA, these devices are subject to safety and efficacy assessments and must be registered prior to
entering the Canadian market. Certain UV devices are exempt from registration if they meet certain
conditions (in which case they are authorized without the need for registration). Bringing the Interim
Order into force prohibits the manufacture, distribution, importation, and use of unregistered or
unauthorized devices under the PCPA.
• Health Canada takes a risk-based approach to addressing compliance of UV and ozone-
generating devices that are subject to these new requirements, and appropriate enforcement action will
be taken against products confirmed to be non-compliant. Enforcement actions may include: warning
letters; detention and seizure of products; compliance orders under the PCPA; and notices of violation
with warning or monetary penalty under the Agriculture and Agri-Food Administrative Monetary
Penalties Act.
• The Interim Order avoids regulatory duplication by exempting from the PCPA any device
classified as a Class II, III or IV medical device under the Medical Devices Regulations.
Additional Considerations:
• In 2018, Health Canada published a regulatory pre-consultation discussion paper (“PRO2018-02,
Pre-Consultation - Proposed Regulatory Amendments to the Pest Control Products Regulations (Pest
Control Devices)”, available at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-
safety/pesticides- pest-management/public/consultations/regulatory-proposals/2018/pest-control-
devices.html). This paper proposed amendments to regulate pest control devices, including UV and
ozone devices.
VACCINATION CERTIFICATION
SYNOPSIS
• Work is underway to develop a longer-term approach to vaccine-enabled international travel.
KEY MESSAGES
• Governments and international bodies are exploring the possible use of vaccination certificates
as one tool to support the re- opening of societies and economies. Canada will continue to work with its
partners around the world on this matter.
• As some jurisdictions begin to think about granting privileges to vaccinated people, any similar
consideration in the Canadian context would have to be based on reliable scientific evidence and a
stable epidemiological context.
• Scientific evidence is clear that the COVID-19 vaccines approved for use in Canada are highly
effective at preventing illness and evidence continues to emerge on the extent to which vaccines
interrupt transmissibility.
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that all individuals
should continue to practice recommended public health measures to help prevent the spread of the
virus and to help control the pandemic, regardless of vaccination status.
• As the vaccine roll-out continues, we are focusing on the public health measures that we know
are effective, including wearing a mask, washing hands and maintaining physical distancing.
IF PRESSED ABOUT GOVERNMENT OF CANADA POSITION ON VACCINATION CERTIFICATES
• We are aware that other countries and international actors are beginning to consider how
vaccination certificates could be deployed in the coming months and years to help reopen societies.
• At the May 27 First Ministers’ Meeting, broad consensus emerged on collaborative efforts to
develop a proof of vaccine credential to enable international travel based on sound principles, including
respect for provincial and territorial jurisdiction and privacy of health information.
• Canada will continue to work with its partners around the world on this matter.
BACKGROUND
The concept of an “immunity passport”, a proposed document or e-certificate proving that a person has
been vaccinated, or has a certain level of immunity to COVID-19, has been suggested in the media as a
potential basis to grant permissions or exemptions from COVID-19 rules. The Government of Canada is
developing a pan-Canadian proof of vaccination framework, though no details have been publicly
announced yet.
Provinces and territories administer vaccines and are responsible for keeping records of vaccinations.
Public health is within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, including potential decisions on whether to
relax public health measures based on vaccination status. The Government of Canada is the lead on
international travel and interprovincial travel. Any proof of vaccination credential will require Federal-
Provincial-Territorial collaboration.
International scan
Around the world, governments, non-governmental organizations, and private companies are exploring
the concept of vaccination certification as a vehicle for conferring or re-instating certain freedoms
within their countries and organizations, and, in the case of countries, as a means to facilitate travel
across and beyond their national borders.
Some of the countries exploring this option include the EU27, Israel, Iceland, Denmark, and Chile. As
well, a number of airlines are planning ways to help travellers comply with anticipated state
requirements, while others, such as Qantas and Korean Air, are planning to implement their own
vaccination requirements.
Organizations around the world, including the World Health Organization and the International Civil
Aviation Organization, are working to develop international standards and technical specifications, and
Canada is attending ongoing discussions.
Domestic scan
Some of the provinces and territories are considering whether vaccination certification would be of
benefit in their jurisdictions, but only Quebec and Manitoba have announced plans to implement this
tool.
In December 2020, Ontario Health Minister Christine Elliott indicated that "voluntary" proof of
vaccinations may enable vaccinated individuals to: travel…perhaps for work purposes, for going to
theatres or cinemas or any other venues.
In December 2020, BC’s Chief Public Health Officer, Dr. Bonnie Henry, indicated that BC will have a
vaccination database for tracking purposes.
In December 2020, Premier Andrew Furey said Newfoundland and Labrador is not considering
demanding proof of vaccination for access privileges.
VACCINE SURVEILLANCE
SYNOPSIS
• A robust vaccine surveillance system is essential for ensuring public confidence during Canada-
wide immunization efforts and on the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines. The Government of Canada is
working with partners to monitor the safety of the vaccine supply, conduct vaccine effectiveness studies
and track vaccine coverage and the factors that influence vaccine uptake.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to give confidence to Canadians in the COVID-19 vaccines?
• How is the Government ensuring the safety and effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines, and
monitoring vaccination coverage in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s vaccine safety surveillance system is a collaboration between provinces and territories,
the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers.
• Reports of vaccine side-effects are carefully monitored and further investigations are carried out
to ensure that any safety issues are promptly detected and appropriate action is taken.
• The Government of Canada has invested in research networks to study vaccine effectiveness
and safety so that we understand how well Canadians are protected against COVID-19. The Government
is also tracking vaccine coverage and the factors that influence knowledge, attitudes and beliefs about
the COVID-19 vaccination.
• We are providing $30.25 million through the Immunization Partnership Fund to continue
promoting vaccine acceptance and uptake among Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
• Openness, transparency, and public access to robust information are a key part of Canada’s
vaccination plan. The Government of Canada publishes reports on vaccine safety and coverage weekly.
BACKGROUND
Vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines are behaving in the entire
population and their real-world impact. High-quality and timely data are critical to promote confidence
in COVID-19 vaccines and to inform decisions about implementation of the vaccination campaign across
Canada.
Vaccine Safety Surveillance
Canada’s rigorous regulatory system ensures that vaccines are safe, effective and of high quality before
they are authorized. However, no health product is completely risk-free.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories, Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. This
system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness and
sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada funds the Immunization Monitoring
Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a pediatric, hospital-based network that reports adverse events to
PHAC, and the Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, which provides weekly reports to PHAC and
P/T health authorities.
Monitoring Effectiveness
While manufacturer-led clinical trials give us data on how well vaccines work under controlled research
conditions, vaccine effectiveness tells us how well the vaccine works in the real world. In addition, while
the available evidence shows that COVID-19 vaccine recipients will develop immunity to the SARS-CoV2
virus, there is limited evidence on effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines on longer-term immunity against
the virus.
Evidence on the effectiveness of COVID-19 vaccines in Canada will help to instill confidence among
Canadians on the benefits of vaccination. It will also support further tailoring of Canadian guidance on
the use of the various vaccines that will be available to Canadians.
PHAC is well-positioned to provide federal leadership, given its experience working with existing vaccine
research networks, P/T public health authorities, and immunization programs. PHAC will continue to
review Canadian and international evidence, and data from vaccine manufacturers to support public
health decision makers and program implementation. Additionally, it will maintain confidence in the
COVID-19 vaccine program by sharing results with the media and general public.
Immune (antibody) responses following vaccination can be assessed through a variety of different
methods. PHAC, in collaboration with the COVID-19 Immunization Task Force (CITF), is funding several
studies in Canada to understand and monitor the durability of protection following vaccination across
different population groups. For example, the CITF, in collaboration with PHAC, is funding a study with
Canadian Blood Services that provide monthly snapshots of population-level immunity in vaccinated and
unvaccinated individuals.
Vaccine Coverage Surveillance
Vaccine coverage is the proportion of the population that has been vaccinated. PHAC works with
federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) jurisdictions to collect COVID-19 vaccination data and estimate
vaccination coverage. Vaccination coverage data is essential to inform Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic
response and help the Government of Canada: assess vaccination uptake, and determine the
effectiveness of the immunization program in delivering COVID-19 vaccines to Canadians.
Vaccination data is obtained by provincial/territorial (P/T) public health authorities from immunization
registries in each jurisdiction (Note: Nunavut’s electronic registry is under development). Since January,
PHAC has been posting pan-Canadian vaccine coverage estimates on a weekly basis on Canada.ca. This
includes information on vaccine type, vaccine dose (1 versus 2), age group, and sex.
PHAC is also working with Statistics Canada on vaccine coverage surveys to complement data from P/T
registries. The surveys will provide in-depth information on sociodemographic characteristics (e.g., age,
gender, ethnicity, Indigenous status, country of birth, education, and income), vaccination status,
reasons for not having been vaccinated, knowledge, attitudes and beliefs about COVID-19 vaccines and
vaccines in general. The surveys will provide additional information to guide the current COVID-19
vaccination campaign, in particular promotion efforts. Results from the first cycle, conducted in March
and April in territorial capitals, were released on June 4. The second cycle was conducted in the ten
provinces in April and May and its results will be released in July.
In February 2021, the Government announced an investment of more than $64 million to help partners
across Canada increase COVID-19 vaccination uptake, including a commitment of $30.25 million from
2020 to 2023, to the Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF) for community-led projects. This investment
will continue to support efforts to increase vaccine acceptance and uptake among Canadians, in
particular underserved groups, and reduce vaccine-preventable disease. It builds on initial investments
of $25 million from 2016 to 2021 through Budget 2016. Also through the IPF, PHAC is providing up to
$32.5 million to help P/Ts enhance their electronic vaccination registries and improve the way they
capture and report on the uptake of the COVID- 19 vaccine.
ESSURE BIRTH CONTROL
SYNOPSIS
• Essure is an implantable permanent birth control device. Complications from the device include
pain, changes in menstrual bleeding, and allergic (immune or hypersensitivity) reactions.
• The manufacturer (Bayer) voluntarily removed the device from the Canadian market in 2017.
• Media has suggested that the company and department were not transparent enough in sharing
adverse event reports.
• A story by CBC’s The Fifth Estate on March 4, 2021, alleges that the side effects of Essure were
not shared, and that more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from Bayer in
order to seek compensation for health complications they claim resulted from the birth control device.
The piece quoted an obstetrician- gynecologist who stated “many of the doctors really don't know the
definition of what an adverse event would be associated with such a procedure”.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to protect the health and safety of Canadian women who
experienced complications from the Essure permanent birth control device?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• A medical device is authorized after Health Canada completes a scientific assessment, ensuring
that it meets requirements for safety and effectiveness, and then continues to be monitored after
approval.
• When new safety concerns with the Essure device came to light, Health Canada assessed them
and issued a safety communication to inform patients and health care practitioners of the potential risks
associated with its use.
• The Department required the manufacturer to strengthen the product labelling with clear
warnings about the potential for adverse events, and to develop a patient information sheet and
checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the device.
• Even though the product is no longer available for sale in Canada, Health Canada continues to
monitor the safety of Essure devices in women that received these implants, and will take action, as
necessary, to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
• Women who have concerns about an implanted device should consult their health care
practitioner.
IF PRESSED…on mandatory reporting of medical device incidents
• As of December 2019, Health Canada requires hospitals to report medical device incidents and
serious adverse drug reactions.
• The reports submitted by hospitals are a valuable source of information for the monitoring of
health products.
• Health Canada is providing support and guidance to hospitals via outreach events, and online
educational modules.
IF PRESSED… what has been done to strengthen re regulation of medical devices in Canada
• Under the Medical Devices Action Plan, Health Canada has made significant strides to further
strengthen the regulation of medical devices in Canada.
• This plan lays out a three-part strategy to deliver better health outcomes for Canadians who rely
on medical devices for their health and well-being.
• The plan helps ensure the devices Canadians rely on for their health and well-being are subject
to continued safety and effectiveness requirements.
• A progress report was published in May 2021, and outlines additional action Health Canada will
take under the regulatory innovation agenda.
IF PRESSED… on US court proceedings
• Health Canada is unable to comment on U.S. court proceedings, and is unaware of the country
of origin for complaints made to other international regulators, or of the Canadian incidents included in
this litigation.
BACKGROUND
Essure is a birth control device implanted in the fallopian tubes of women who want permanent birth
control.
The product was licensed as a Class III medical device in Canada in 2002. All Class III and IV medical
device license applications must be supported by evidence of safety and clinical effectiveness. Health
Canada approves license applications based on the available data and on the risks and benefits of the
device.
Symptoms experienced by some Canadian women include chronic abdominal and pelvic pain, excessive
bleeding and autoimmune responses in women who have metal allergies. Thousands of injury
complaints surfaced in 2020 only after women in the U.S. filed lawsuits against Bayer. Health Canada
maintains an online registry where patients and doctors can report complications. The CBC piece
identified 98 adverse event reports associated with Essure in the Health Canada database.
The device was voluntarily discontinued by the manufacturer (Bayer) in October 2017. Bayer stated that
the decision to discontinue was based on low consumer demand of Essure worldwide and not related to
safety or effectiveness issues. Bayer sold approximately 10,000 units of Essure in Canada. The number of
patients in Canada relying on Essure for contraception is estimated to be 9,000.
Health Canada undertook two post-market safety reviews of Essure in February 2015 and April 2016. As
a result of these reviews, Health Canada identified actions to help improve awareness of the possible
risks and complications associated with its use. In 2016 and 2017, Health Canada communicated the
risks through safety alerts, public safety reviews and Health Product InfoWatch, a publication intended
for health care professionals. Bayer was required to incorporate stronger, clear warnings in the product
information materials. This included a new “boxed warning” emphasizing that Essure is a permanent
birth control system involving several steps which must be adhered to for effectiveness, and that the
device has possible complications that can be serious. The Department also required the company to
develop a patient information sheet and checklist for physicians and patients to consult before using the
device.
Despite the discontinuation of Essure in Canada, Bayer has committed to fulfill their post-market
commitments to Health Canada by submitting Canadian reports as per the Medical Devices Regulations,
as well as the results of the ongoing surveillance study required by the US FDA. The estimated
completion date for that final study report is June 2025. Health Canada reviews these results, along with
any relevant new scientific or clinical information that may emerge, to assess if further measures might
be needed.
Medical Devices Action Plan (MDAP)
Examples of advances made since the launch of the MDAP:
A Scientific Advisory Committee on Health Products for Women was established to hear from patient
advocates, physicians and researchers on issues relating to women’s health and the regulation of the
medical devices and drugs that they use.
New federal regulations came into force in December 2019 that require all hospitals across the country
to report medical device incidents and serious adverse drug reactions to Health Canada. This helps
improve the reporting of valuable information about the “real world” experiences of patients and health
care professionals who are using these therapeutic products. In 2020, almost 3,500 medical device
incidents were submitted to Health Canada by hospitals.
Health Canada launched a database of medical device incident reports that is accessible to all Canadians.
Final regulatory amendments published in December 2020 establish new post-market authorities and
requirements for medical devices that are already in effect for drugs. The amendments:
• authorize the Minister of Health to order device manufacturers to conduct post-market safety
assessments;
• authorize the Minister of Health to order additional tests and studies to provide new
information on a device;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to report regulatory actions in certain foreign
jurisdictions related to their devices within a prescribed timeframe;
• require Class II-IV device manufacturers to periodically review device risk and benefit
information and notify Health Canada when there has been a change in the safety profile; and,
• require device manufacturers to provide an analysis of a safety and effectiveness issue in
response to a safety signal, when requested to do so by the Minister.
The Food and Drugs Act was amended in 2019 to increase Health Canada’s post-market oversight by
providing new authorities for inspectors, such as ordering a person to provide any document,
information or sample to the inspector.
A recent report of activities performed under the Medical Devices Action plan was published May 28,
2021, and outlines additional action Health Canada will take under the regulatory innovation agenda.
Lawsuits
The Fifth Estate story alleges more than 700 Canadian women have to fight for accountability from
Bayer, the manufacturer of Essure, in order to seek compensation for health complications they claim
resulted from the birth control device. Bayer agreed to pay $1.6 billion to settle thousands of lawsuits in
the U.S. The story states Bayer has not settled any lawsuits in Canada and does not intend to.
Youth Vaping
SYNOPSIS
• Youth vaping rates in Canada doubled over a two year period (2017-2019). Furthermore, youth
were also vaping more frequently. There has been significant media coverage and concerns expressed
by parents, educators, health professionals and non-government organizations.
• In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey
(CTNS) results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019.
While the rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be
closely monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and the Canadian Student Tobacco,
Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What is the Government doing to address the increased use and appeal of vaping products to
youth?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is concerned by the high rates of youth vaping, and is taking comprehensive
action to address it.
• New regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they
can be seen or heard by youth. This means that young Canadians should no longer see advertising for
vaping products in public spaces, in convenience stores or online.
• On December 19, 2020, Health Canada published proposed new regulations on nicotine
concentration. The proposed regulations would lower the maximum nicotine concentration for vaping
products sold in Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. It would be prohibited
to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than this new limit.
• Health Canada is also developing additional regulatory measures to reduce youth access and the
appeal of vaping products. These include proposed regulations that would set restrictions on flavours in
vaping products, using the best available evidence.
• We also increased investments in our national public education campaign to inform youth and
their parents about the risks and harms of vaping, and created funding opportunities to engage partners
and stakeholders in a collaborative response.
• My department also intensified enforcement of the strong set of controls that Parliament has
established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act and will continue these efforts to ensure that
industry is compliant with our regulations.
IF PRESSED ON PROPOSED NEW EXCISE TAX ON VAPING PRODUCTS…
• Through Budget 2021, Finance Canada proposed to implement a tax on vaping products in 2022
to help reduce youth vaping.
• The new federal tax on vaping products builds on recent federal regulations restricting
promotion and advertising, draft regulations to set a maximum nicotine concentration level, and
proposed regulations being developed to restrict flavours in vaping products.
• The proposed new excise duty would impose a single flat rate duty on every 10 millilitres (ml) of
vaping liquid or fraction thereof, within an immediate container (i.e., the container holding the liquid
itself). Finance Canada has requested input from industry and stakeholders on the proposal by June 30,
2021.
• Health Canada will continue to work in close collaboration with department on the
implementation of the proposal.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping. To date, Health
Canada has invested more than $13 million to develop and implement the campaign.
• The campaign included digital advertising on social media and television, advertising in malls,
cinemas and on transit and print and online resources. It also included an interactive learning tour in
schools and community venues. In November 2020, the tour re- launched in an online format with live
facilitators, in response to COVID-19.
• Vaping awareness kits were also provided to all middle and high schools across Canada.
Information resources were also sent to health care professionals to share in their offices.
• An evaluation of the initial advertising campaign found that 26% of teens who saw the ads,
report that they decided not to vape as result of the ads.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and vaping product promotions. For example, it is prohibited to furnish a vaping
product to anyone under 18 in Canada, and lifestyle advertising of vaping products is strictly prohibited
under the Act.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove:
o lifestyle advertising or advertisements from television and in- store displays; and,
o online content from social media influencers that encouraged youth vaping.
• In 2019, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000 retailers of vaping products and seized more
than 80,000 units of non- compliant vaping products.
• Due to the COVID-19 pandemic on-site inspections were temporarily suspended, however,
vaping products are being sampled remotely and virtual inspections are being conducted online,
focussing on enforcing the promotion prohibitions under the TVPA on social media sites. Health Canada
is currently planning the resumption of on-site inspections.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of
the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The purpose of the review is to examine the provisions of the Act, and whether it is supporting
its intended objectives.
• Health Canada is preparing to launch the legislative review of the Act, and it will be completed
and a report tabled in both houses of Parliament by May 23 2022, as required by the legislation.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to address youth
vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and enforcement of existing rules
and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. Health Canada has invested more than $13 million in the
campaign since December 2018. .
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On December 19, 2020, Health Canada published the proposed Concentration of Nicotine in Vaping
Products Regulations that would lower the maximum nicotine concentration allowed for vaping
products in Canada to 20 mg/ml, down from the current limit of 66 mg/ml. These proposed new
regulations would prohibit the sale of vaping products in Canada if the nicotine concentration is higher
than the new limit. The consultation period for the proposed regulations closed March 4, 2021 and the
department is preparing the final regulations.
On April 19, 2021, Finance Canada announced its intention to implement a tax on vaping products in
2022 through the introduction of a new excise duty framework. The proposed framework would impose
a single flat rate duty on every 10 millilitres (ml) of vaping liquid or fraction thereof, within an immediate
container (i.e., the container holding the liquid itself).
Finance Canada has requested input from industry and stakeholders on the proposal by June 30, 2021.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, Health Canada is developing proposed regulations
setting restrictions on flavours in vaping products. A regulatory proposal has been included in Health
Canada’s Forward Regulatory Plan 2020-2022. The proposed flavour restrictions have been the subject
of a targeted letter writing campaign (more than 70,000 letters to date) to Members of Parliament by
former smokers who oppose any further restrictions to vaping products in Canada. As with any
regulatory proposal, Canadians would have the opportunity to provide comments during the public
consultation period.
There is a large consumer market for vaping products in Canada. Smoking is the leading preventable
cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-related disease is caused by the toxic and
carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping products expose users to far fewer toxic chemicals and
substances than conventional cigarettes, and are less harmful alternatives to tobacco products if they
quit smoking and switch completely to vaping.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical dependence and
youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. Moreover, the long-term health
effects of vaping are unknown.
The most recent Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS) results from 2018-2019,
released in December 2019, indicate e-cigarette prevalence rates doubled among students since the last
survey with 20% of students reporting having used an e-cigarette in the past 30 days, an increase from
10% in 2016-2017. These students are also reporting using vaping products more frequently. Health
Canada has not seen a corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to be at
all-time lows. Results showed the prevalence of current daily smoking decreased among students in
Grades 7 to 12 to 0.9% in 2018-2019, down from 1.3% in 2016-2017.
In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS)
results that indicated youth vaping rates have not increased from the previous survey in 2019. While the
rates remain high, more data is needed to determine a potential trend. Health Canada will be closely
monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS and CSTADS.
Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires that the Minister perform a
legislative review of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force. This
section was an amendment to the Bill, originally brought forward by Senator Seidman (CPC) during the
Standing Senate Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI) examination of the clause-
by-clause of Bill S-5 on April 13, 2017. The review was proposed as an opportunity for Parliament to
keep an eye on the new areas of regulatory coverage relating to vaping products, especially their impact
on youth.
