Created: 2020-05-15T18:20:45.409777
Name: Committee_of_the_Whole
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/8c94dcff-1dcb-4cf7-a7fc-1ad57d6e34a1/resource/65610f5e-267a-4e4f-b34d-6b9735be5d00/download/allenglish.pdf
Package ID: 8c94dcff-1dcb-4cf7-a7fc-1ad57d6e34a1
Keywords: ['Briefing notes']
Notes: Briefing binder used by the Minister of Health for her Committee of the Whole appearance in the Senate on March 25, 2020
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Opening Remarks for
the Honourable Patty Hajdu
Minister of Health
Committee of the Whole
Government of Canada response to COVID-19
March 25, 2020
Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 5 minutes
Speech length: 665 words (5 minutes)
Check against delivery
Introduction
Mr. Speaker,
COVID-19 has changed how we live, how we work, how
we interact with friends and family. It has changed the
tenor of life in Canada.
In the past week, we have seen increases in case counts,
among healthcare professionals and in vulnerable
populations, including those in long-term care facilities.
Tragically, we have also seen an increase in COVID-19-
related deaths.
We have all had to adapt to the reality of this pandemic.
In these unprecedented times, Canadians are looking for
information. They want the facts. They want to know what
is happening, and what is going to happen next.
Public Health Measures
Strong public health leadership is essential during a
pandemic. And I am grateful for the advice and guidance
that the Public Health Agency of Canada has continuously
provided since the first reports of COVID-19 cases began
to be received earlier this year.
The Agency has provided Canadians with clear
information about how they can protect their health and
what they can do to protect the health of others.
In just a few short weeks, the terms “self-isolation” and
“social distancing” have become part of our everyday
lexicon.
And I am so grateful and proud to see Canadians following
the advice from our public health experts—from covering
coughs, to self-isolating after travel, to finding new ways to
connect with each other while still practicing social
distancing. These actions—both big and small—are
important and necessary.
Provinces and territories have also stepped up measures
to contain the spread. They have declared states of
emergency and closed schools and other public spaces.
These actions will help slow the spread of this virus in
Canada.
Investing in Research
Our Government has invested in research, with more than
$52 million invested through the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research to support 96 projects across the country
working on countermeasures to COVID-19.
This is part of our $275 million commitment to enhance
capacity to explore antivirals, develop vaccines and
support clinical trials.
With this funding, researchers at universities and hospitals
across the country will work urgently to develop and
assess diagnostic tools and possible vaccines, as well as
to create strategies to fight misinformation, stigma and
fear.
This work will allow us to broaden our understanding of
the disease and provide evidence to inform public health
interventions as well as national and international
decision-making and planning.
These actions have been essential to our response to
COVID-19. And, while we have done as much as possible
to date, there is more to be done as the crisis evolves.
Other Government actions
Since the first cases of COVID-19 were reported, one of
our top priorities has been ensuring that front-line
healthcare workers have the personal protective
equipment they need to stay safe.
We are working proactively with the provinces and
territories on collaborative bulk purchases, leveraging
Canada’s buying power to secure medical equipment and
supplies that are so critical to the healthcare system’s
ability to manage COVID-19. And we are working with
Canadian businesses to manufacture critical supplies here
in Canada, as the Prime Minister announced last week.
The Public Health Agency of Canada; Health Canada;
Innovation, Science, and Economic Development; and
Public Services and Procurement Canada are working
around the clock to secure items such as masks, face
shields, and isolation gowns both from domestic and
international firms.
Conclusion
The COVID-19 pandemic is an unprecedented public
health threat. None of us has experienced an event of this
scale before.
Canadians are counting on us to protect their health and
to help them navigate this uncertain time.
If we are to win this fight, we need every advantage we
can find.
As I have said on numerous occasions: “We need to act
now and we need to act together.”
I urge you to take this opportunity to do so.
Thank you.
New regulation making power to help prevent or
alleviate drug and medical devices shortages
 As part of our whole-of-government response to
COVID-19, we are proposing amendments to the
Food and Drugs Act that would provide the authority
to establish regulations necessary to help prevent or
alleviate shortages of drugs and medical devices in
Canada.
 These amendments would allow the Government to
put in place more robust tools to support efforts to
alleviate shortages that occur and prevent shortages
from happening when possible.
 For example, these amendments would allow the
Government to put in place a regulatory framework
that would enable the importation of alternative
sources of drugs and medical devices when
shortages occur as a result of COVID-19.
 The Government of Canada is committed to taking
the necessary action to continue to protect the health
and safety of Canadians during this pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-19
SHORTAGES …
 Health Canada is actively monitoring the supply of
drugs and medical devices on the Canadian market.
We are taking action with our partners to mitigate the
impact of any shortages related to COVID-19 on
Canadians.
 For example, we have been informed of a shortage in
hydroxychloroquine, a drug that is being used in the
treatment of COVID-19. We are working with industry
and health care partners to identify alternative
sources for this drug.
 Health Canada has also implemented an interim
approach to facilitate expedited access to hand
sanitizers, disinfectants and personal protective
equipment. This approach is proving effective and a
number of products have already qualified for
immediate import and sale.
 My department is working to identify potential
suppliers of other products related to COVID-19 and
will continue to expedite licenses as required and
facilitate importation at the border.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access
to the drugs and medical devices they need during
the serious health threat posed by COVID-19.
LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENT TO SEEK ADDITIONAL
SAFETY INFORMATION
 Health Canada is proposing an amendment to the
Food and Drugs Act that will reinforce the
Government’s authority to seek additional safety
information to help assess the risks and benefits of
new products brought to the Canadian market through
faster submission/assessment pathways via
emergency interim orders.
 This amendment will reinforce the Government’s
authority to make regulations that allow Health
Canada to seek additional safety information on new
products being brought to the Canadian market,
including ones using faster submission/assessment
pathways through emergency interim orders.
 The additional information will be used to assess the
risks and benefits of the new products, and confirm
that they are safe for Canadians.
 This amendment, along with the other legislative
changes being introduced for the Food and Drugs
Act, will support and enhance our ability to address
drug and medical device shortages during the
COVID-19 pandemic by ensuring quick access.
 This amendment will allow the Government to
balance the need for urgent access to new drugs and
medical devices such as diagnostic kits while
ensuring that we continue to protect the health and
safety of Canadians.
LEGISLATIVE AMENDMENT TO EXPAND THE
AUTHORITY OF THE COMMISSIONER OF PATENTS
 Health Canada and Innovation, Science and
Economic Development are proposing legislative
amendments to the Patent Act that will permit Health
Canada to apply to the Commissioner of Patents for a
compulsory license to authorize the Government, or
another specified person, to make, use or sell a
patented invention to the extent necessary to respond
to a public health emergency.
 One of the measures being introduced to ensure
adequate supplies in Canada is amendments to the
Patent Act that will enable the Commissioner of
Patents to authorize the Government, or another
specified person, to make, use or sell a patented
product during a public health emergency.
 This change will empower existing manufacturing
capacity to address market failures and enable the
Government to deliver vital products such as patented
drugs or ventilators needed to address this crisis.
 The Government respects patent rights and their
importance in business. As such, these new
provisions will only be used in exceptional
circumstances, and will only address instances where
the patent holder is not in a position to produce the
invention for use in Canada, or if demand exceeds
supply during a public health emergency.
 The Government knows that industry will do
everything it can to meet the needs of Canadians.
Authorizations will only be granted to the extent
necessary to respond to the emergency and several
safeguards are included in the amendments that
protect the interests of patent holders, including
compensation.
Digital Tools/Apps Assisting with Covid-19
 Our government recognizes the significant health,
economic and social impact of COVID-19 on
Canadians, with many experiencing stress and
anxiety.
 The government is working in close collaboration with
provinces and territories to ensure Canadians have
up-to-date information and evidence-based guidance
on the COVID-19 pandemic.
 For example, on March 21, we launched a self-
assessment tool on Canada.ca which allows
Canadians to assess their symptoms so that they
know whether to seek medical help or not.
 In 48 hours, this tool had over 2 million hits, helping
millions of Canadians to get the evidence-based
information that they need.
 In the coming days the Government will also be
launching other digital tools to keep Canadians
informed and safe, including virtual mental health
supports.
 The federal government will continue to work with all
of our partners to ensure that Canadians have access
to up-to-date information, tools and resources they
need.
IF PRESSED …
 The self-assessment tool provides Canadians with
essential information to help them determine whether
they may have COVID-19 symptoms, and whether they
should seek testing or additional medical assistance.
 We will continue to work closely with provinces and
territories, vendor and stakeholders on further tools that
help Canadians manage their own health and stay safe
during this pandemic.
TREATMENT
 At present there is no specific drug or medication
treatment for people who have COVID-19.
Researchers are looking at the effectiveness of
existing antiviral treatments.
 World Health Organization has provided advice to
health professionals that includes recommendations
for early supportive therapy, management of
symptoms and prevention of complications.
 The novel coronavirus causes a range of illness from
mild to severe for some individuals.
IF PRESSED IF there any natural health products,
including traditional Chinese medicines, Ayurvedic
medicines and homeopathic products to protect
against or treat this virus?
 No, natural health products are authorized to protect
against, or treat COVID-19. This includes traditional
Chinese medicines, Ayurvedic medicines and
homeopathic products.
WEARING MASKS
Should the general population in Canada wear masks
to protect themselves from this virus?
 If you are a healthy individual, the use of a mask is
not necessary.
 However, if you are experiencing symptoms of an
illness that spreads through the air, wearing a mask
can help prevent the spread of the infection to others.
 The mask acts as a barrier and helps stop the tiny
droplets from spreading around you when you cough
or sneeze.
 Your health provider may recommend you wear a
mask while you are seeking or waiting for care. In this
instance masks are an appropriate part of infection
prevention and control measures that put in place so
that people with an infectious respiratory illness do
not transmit the infection to others.
 If you are caring for a sick person or you are in direct
contact with an ill person, wearing a mask can help
protect you from catching the virus, but it will not fully
eliminate the risk of illness.
 When wearing a mask, make sure to:
o properly cover your mouth and nose
o avoid touching the mask once it’s on your face
o properly discard the mask after each use
o wash your hands after removing the mask
 It is not recommended that healthy people or people
who have not travelled to a COVID-19 affected area
wear masks. Wearing a mask when you are not ill and
are not at high risk for developing symptoms may give
a false sense of security. Masks can easily become
contaminated and need to be changed frequently and
fitted properly for them to provide adequate
protection.
Access to Disinfectants and Protective Equipment
What is Health Canada doing to increase and maintain
supplies of hand sanitizer, hard surface disinfectants,
and personal protective equipment?
 For hand sanitizers and hard surface disinfectants,
products may be imported and sold as soon as
companies have submitted a complete notification
form that meets the established criteria.
 For personal protective equipment (class I medical
devices), products may be imported or sold
immediately after Health Canada issues a medical
device establishment licence. Health Canada is
currently issuing these licences within 24 hours of
receipt of a completed application.
 Companies are working as quickly as possible to
make products available on shelves.
 Information about this expedited process was shared
with all drugs, natural health products, and medical
device establishment licence holders and product
licence holders in Canada and with relevant industry
associations.
 We will update Canadians with any new information
as it arises.
Vaccine Research and Development
Are other countries investing heavily to gain access?
Why is Canada not doing more?
Federal Role
 The Government of Canada is investing $275
million for research on medical countermeasures,
including antivirals, vaccine development, and
support for clinical trials, to bolster Canada’s
response to COVID-19 and protect the health and
well-being of Canadians.
 The Government has mobilized its scientific,
laboratory, and research expertise as well as its
networks with research institutions and the private
sector to work directly on COVID-19 medical
countermeasure solutions. Key activities have
included:
 canvassing provinces and territories to identify
medical countermeasure priorities - especially
in regard to personal protective equipment -
and making Public Services and Procurement
Canada bulk procurement available to secure
timely access to available supplies;
 monitoring global medical countermeasure
R&D, and sharing insights and information on
companies with promising solutions that
Canadian firms can partner with or buy from to
meet our needs; and
 identifying a short-list of investment-ready
companies in Canada working on promising
medical countermeasures and working with
them to develop funding proposals to
accelerate commercialization of these products
for the domestic market.
 The Government of Canada is investing
$192 million in new projects that will be
prioritized under the new Strategic
Innovation Fund COVID-19 stream to
deliver direct support to Canadian
companies for large-scale projects, such
as:
 AbCellera, a Vancouver-based biotech
company that has built the world’s
leading technology for antibody
discovery, is at the forefront of
developing antibody-based drugs to
treat and prevent COVID-19.
 Medicago, a Quebec City-based
company with 20 years of experience in
plant-based vaccines and therapeutics,
that has identified a viable plant-based
vaccine candidate currently at the pre-
clinical testing phase.
 This investment includes $25.8 million for a second
round of funding under the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research’s rapid coronavirus research
response, for a total of $52.6 million which is
supporting 96 research teams across Canada that
are focusing on better understanding COVID-19
and accelerating the development, testing, and
implementation of medical and social
countermeasures.
Timeline for Vaccine Development
How long will it take to develop a vaccine?
 Coronaviruses are a group of viruses that can cause
a wide range of illness, ranging from the common cold
to Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) and
Middle East Respiratory Syndrome (MERS-CoV). The
challenge of developing a vaccine that protects
against coronaviruses is that infection by human
coronaviruses does not provide long-lasting immunity,
meaning someone can be re-infected in the future
following recovery from an initial infection.
 Although a vaccine that provides long-term immunity
remains a challenge, an outbreak vaccine aimed to
provide short-term protection (similar to a pandemic
influenza vaccine) to respond to a novel coronavirus
outbreak could potentially be developed.
 In the case of a vaccine for a specific coronavirus, it
could take over a year for researchers to develop a
vaccine.
 For example, there are currently no licensed vaccines
or specific treatments for Middle East Respiratory
Syndrome coronavirus (MERS-CoV)—a particular
coronavirus that was first identified in 2012. We are
aware of work being conducted elsewhere to better
understand how MERS-CoV infections might be
prevented and to develop a MERS-CoV vaccine. This
includes vaccine development efforts being
coordinated by WHO and the Coalition for Epidemic
Preparedness (CEPI).
Hospital/Health Care Capacity
 There is significant concern about how much capacity
our health care systems will have to handle covid-19
needs across the country.
 We are working to get a good picture of current
capacity in order for us to know where and how our
help can be used.
 Provinces and territories are already doing
tremendous work to put into action the pandemic
plans and procedures they prepared for use in times
like this, based on international experiences and
guidance.
 They are also working to free up additional capacity to
prepare to meet projected needs. This includes
cancelling elective surgeries, physically reconfiguring
spaces to fit more beds, and transferring patients who
no longer need to be in hospital to other care settings
(for example, patients who were waiting for a long
term care bed).
 Many provinces are also putting in place new
procedures to allow the use of virtual care services
and online screening assessments. This is taking
pressure off of emergency departments and
supporting social distancing, where possible.
 They are also running training exercises and
simulations for the expected surge in covid-19 cases.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough
capacity…
 As we have seen from other countries, we know
demand on our system could be, and likely will be,
severe. That is why social distancing is so important –
it will help spread out demand on our systems.
 At the same time, we are making every effort to
increase capacity so we can be as ready as possible
for the increased needs we know are coming.
Background
 A committee of federal/provincial/territorial Deputy
Ministers of Health is meeting regularly to assess
health care capacity and support governments in their
efforts to expand available capacity.
Personal Protective Equipment
 As governments around the world work to combat the
spread of COVID-19, we are seeing a global shortage
of personal protective equipment.
 To address this shortage, our Government is taking
action on three fronts.
 Firstly, we have been working hand-in-hand with all
provinces and territories on proactive bulk purchase
orders to leverage our collective buying power for key
equipment, such as N95 masks, ventilators and
supplies to ensure that Canadians who need to be
tested are tested.
 Secondly, we are expediting the regulatory process to
ensure that we are able to get critically needed
products into the Canadian market.
o Last week, I signed an Interim Order that
authorized new testing kits and that will enable us
to fast-track the approval of products already
approved for use in other countries.
 Finally, we are ramping up Canada’s domestic
industrial capacity to fill the gap, to ensure we have
an ongoing supply of critically needed personal
protective equipment.
IF PRESSED on availability of supplies…
 The Public Health Agency of Canada; Health
Canada; Innovation Science and Economic
Development; and Public Services and Procurement
Canada are working around the clock to identify
suppliers for personal protective equipment and
secure delivery.
 We are doing everything we can to get these supplies
to our frontline healthcare workers as soon as
possible.
IF PRESSED on accelerating the regulatory process
for new PPE…
 Our Government is expediting the review and
approval of medical devices in Canada to ensure that
frontline healthcare workers receive the supplies they
need as soon as possible.
 Last week, I signed an Interim Order authorizing two
new diagnostic test kits.
 Interim orders are one of the fastest mechanisms that
the Government of Canada can use to help make
health products more available, while also ensuring
that safety is prioritized.
 Through this Interim Order, Health Canada will also
be able to consider approvals granted by foreign
regulatory authorities in deciding whether or not to
approve an application for the importation or sale of
COVID-19-related medical devices.
 This will help us ensure that Canada is able to benefit
from the latest advancements in research and
development related to COVID-19 – both at home and
abroad.
IF PRESSED on the ramping up of domestic industrial
capacity…
 The Prime Minister announced on March 20 that we
will leverage Canada’s domestic industrial capacity to
fill the gap between what our frontline healthcare
workers need and what is currently available in the
marketplace.
 The Government will provide funding to support the
retooling of manufacturing lines and the rapid scaling
up of existing production.
Health Human Resources – COVID-19
 Our Government recognizes that health care
professionals are the backbone of Canada’s response
to COVID-19.
 They are the people who are caring for the sick and
running the respirators. We depend on them.
 Provinces and territories are demonstrating
tremendous innovation and flexibility in maximizing
their health providers to protect the health and safety
of Canadians in response to COVID-19.
 For example, provinces and territories are
implementing measures to increase the supply of
health care professionals and expand delivery models
to address surge requirements, including:
o Expediting licensing to enable retired or inactive
nurses and doctors, or those licensed in another
province or territory, to be deployed)
o Creating new physician billing codes and removal
of billing limits to allow for an uptick in virtual
care, including virtual COVID-19 screening
o Developing virtual care guidelines to promote the
continuation of routine care while social
distancing to protect both patients and doctors
o Ensuring health care professionals can operate
using full or expanded scopes of practice (for
example, allowing pharmacists to renew
prescriptions, licensed practical nurses to
perform swabs, and paramedics to screen for
COVID-19)
 Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of
Canada are facilitating the identification of issues and
gaps, and the sharing of innovative health care
system practices across Canada with regular
discussions with Federal, Provincial, Territorial
Deputy Ministers of Health.
Health Products Claiming to Treat COVID-19
What is Health Canada doing about products claiming
to prevent, treat or cure COVID-19?
 Health Canada has not approved any health product
to prevent, treat or cure COVID-19.
 The Department has received complaints of
misinformation regarding products to treat COVID-19
and is taking action to address these cases.
 Health Canada encourages anyone who has
information regarding the potential non-compliant sale
or advertising of any health product to report it using
the Department’s online complaint forms.
 When Health Canada identifies or is notified of
potential non-compliance with the Food and Drugs
Act or its associated Regulations, it takes steps to
confirm whether non-compliance has occurred and
takes action based on the risk to the health of
Canadians.
 A number of compliance and enforcement options are
available to correct non-compliance or mitigate a risk
to Canadians, including site visits, public
communications, recalls, and the seizure of products
and advertising materials.
Approval of COVID-19 Test Kits
When will Health Canada be able to approve the first
test kits for COVID-19 as medical devices?
 Health Canada has been actively working with
manufacturers to enable market access for
commercial diagnostic devices in order to increase
Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
 On March 13, 2020, Health Canada received two
applications for a diagnostic device: one from Roche
Diagnostics and one from ThermoFisher Scientific.
These applications have received expedited review
and are now approved for access by healthcare
professionals through our Special Access Program
(SAP).
 Health Canada is also working with a number of other
companies that are in the process of preparing and
submitting information for review and will expedite
those applications as well.
Exemptions under the CDSA
 Health Canada received inquiries from a few
jurisdictions regarding measures that would facilitate
access to certain medical treatments during the
pandemic. The Department has taken quick action to
respond to their concerns and to prevent potential
issues related to accessing medical treatment during
the pandemic.
 In response to the COVID-19 outbreak, Health
Canada has temporarily exempted certain new
activities that apply to pharmacists who are registered
and entitled to practice pharmacy under the laws of
their province or territory and are entitled to conduct
activities with controlled substances.
 The availability of these new activities depends on the
province or territory and licensing authority adopting
these measures. Health Canada recommends
contacting the provincial and territorial licensing
authorities for more information.
 Given the seriousness of the COVID-19 outbreak,
Health Canada is working quickly to help jurisdictions
maintain access to medications for Canadians.
Ventilators
What is the current capacity and how are we ensuring
we are ramping up to deal with expected case
numbers?
Federal Role
 The Government of Canada is working closely with its
provincial/territorial counterparts to ensure an
adequate supply of ventilators, and is proactively
procuring ventilators.
 We continue to work with Provinces and Territories to
identify and monitor their evolving needs.
 We are working across Government and with
suppliers to procure additional equipment.
 There is also a mutual Provincial/Territorial assistance
agreement in place to facilitate inter-
provincial/territorial support requests (for medical
equipment, personnel or other resources).
Collaboration with PTs and support to Indigenous
Communities/North
What specific measures are being taken to ensure
vulnerable communities are protected?
What lessons learned from H1N1 and SARS have
already been implemented?
o Vulnerable populations are a key concern during
this pandemic.
o Given this, Federal, Provincial and Territorial
partners are discussing measures and guidance
to prevent spread to those most vulnerable to
infection and poor outcomes.
o Lessons learned from previous outbreaks in
Canada play a key role in informing these
discussions.
o The Government of Canada is working with First
Nations, Inuit and Metis communities to support
them in responding to the COVID-19 and provide
access to health services that are comparable to
that of other Canadians.
o Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) is a key
partner in the discussions regarding public health
measures for vulnerable populations and is
working closely with Indigenous partners, the
Public Health Agency of Canada and provincial
and territorial counterparts to protect the health
and safety of Indigenous communities.
o For example, ISC's regional emergency
management coordinators, communicable
disease coordinators, and regional medical
officers are working with First Nations
communities and the BC First Nations Health
Authority in support of public health emergency
preparedness and response activities to COVID-
19.
Testing / Testing Kits
What is current capacity and how are we ensuring we
are ramping up to deal with expected numbers?
What is the current capacity and how are we ensuring
we are ramping up to deal with expected case
numbers?
Federal Role
 The Government of Canada is implementing a
strategy to ramp up laboratory testing as quickly as
possible and to ensure that our public health
laboratories have the diagnostic supplies needed to
test for COVID-19.
 We have seen a tremendous amount of
collaboration and coordination amongst many
sectors related to testing, including academia,
government, and industry. Canada’s scientific
community is working together to tackle this
pandemic.
Helping Test Patients
How will these new test kits help test more patients?
 This Interim Order makes it easier and faster for
certain medical devices, such as laboratory diagnostic
test kits, to be imported and sold in Canada. This
would help improve access to medical devices that
could permit faster and more convenient testing of
patients, which would avoid needing to send samples
to the NML lab in Winnipeg, facilitating quicker test
results.
 Point-of-care diagnostic tests are in development and
may become available through this Interim Order,
which would permit quicker and more convenient
testing of patients. Quicker test results would enable
healthcare providers and patients to take appropriate
actions more quickly in order to help reduce the
spread of the disease.
Border and travel / quarantine and self isolation
To what extent is the Government willing to curtail
civil liberties to ensure we suppress the spread of
COVID-19?
 The Government of Canada is carefully considering
all available evidence for the implementation of
public health measures that are evidence-based,
feasible and appropriate to address risks.
 On March 13, 2020, to address the global spread of
COVID-19 coronavirus disease, the Government of
Canada began asking that all travellers entering
Canada self-isolate for a 14-day period. We are
prepared to build on these voluntary measures,
including through mandatory self isolation.
 Such an approach would allow the Government of
Canada to mandate that all travellers entering
Canada by air, land or sea, to self-isolate for 14-
days. If people do not comply, they could be subject
to significant penalties.
 The Government, as a whole, will not hesitate to
consider stringent measures to control the spread
of infection but does so always with strong
consideration of the impact on civil liberties.
CANADIAN ARMED FORCES SUPPORT
 Through Operation GLOBE, the Canadian Armed Forces is
providing organizational and logistical support to Whole of
Government partners when and where needed.
 This includes providing CAF medical teams to support
repatriation flights, as well as appropriate facilities at CFB
Trenton for the health observation and isolation of evacuees
under the direction of the Public Health Agency of Canada.
If pressed on additional Canadian Armed Forces support
 The Canadian Armed Forces continues to ready troops and
capabilities for potential responses across Canada, including in
Northern and Remote communities.
 Canada’s military remains dispersed to preserve force health,
and will be ready to conduct an array of tasks in support of other
government departments – whether for COVID-19, spring
flooding, summer forest fires, or other unforeseen emergencies.
If pressed on Canadian Armed Forces activities
 We always act to mitigate the level of risk to our military
personnel no matter where they work or are deployed.
 The Canadian Armed Forces has taken the additional step of
temporarily suspending training and education activities to
protect its students and the communities they live in.
If pressed on training at the Royal Military College
 As part of the maximum dispersion of students, Royal Military
College officer cadets will complete their school year online.
 Our military training institutions will adapt their activities to
minimize the risks to everyone, especially to our civilian work
force and our contractors.
KEY FACTS
 210 returnees were released from the CFB Trenton quarantine on 24
March.
 21 people remain quarantined. This includes 13 people who tested
positive for COVID and eight others at risk of exposure (24 Mar 2020)
BACKGROUND
Canadian Armed Forces Assistance to the Repatriation of Canadians
 The Canadian Armed Forces are supporting a whole of government effort to
repatriate Canadian citizens from areas impacted by the coronavirus under
Operation GLOBE.
Medical Teams
 Canadian Armed Forces medical teams provided support to Global Affairs Canada,
and other Government of Canada personnel in providing medical care to returnees
while in transit to Canada onboard four returning flights:
o 2 flights returning from China (Canada 1 and Canada 2)
o 1 flight returning from China via Vancouver (United States 4)
o 1 flight returning from Japan (Canada 3)
o 1 flight returning from the United States (Canada 4)
 Upon arrival, Canadian Armed Forces medical teams transferred medical
accountability and responsibility for care to the Public Health Agency of Canada.
 Canadian Armed Forces health professionals also assisted Global Affairs Canada
with the Canadians hospitalized in Japan.
Housing Returnees at CFB Trenton
 Returnees from three out of four charted flights, as well as Canadian returnees
onboard a US flight, have been housed at CFB Trenton for the period determined by
the Public Health Agency of Canada. 210 of 231 people quarantined at CFB
Trenton were released on the 24th of March. 21 people who either tested positive for
COVID or were at risk of exposure to the illness will be released at a date yet to be
determined by PHAC.
Logistical Support at the NAV Canada Centre
 The Canadian Armed Forces supported the transit of returnees from Japan to the
NAV Canada Centre, in Cornwall, where they were quarantined.
 To enable Public Health Agency of Canada and other agencies to conduct their
quarantine-related activities, the Canadian Armed Forces assisted with providing
support to repatriated Canadians, including logistical support, general duties support
and the provision of a command and control node for Whole of Government
partners.
COVID-19 Update
Committee of the Whole
March 24, 2020
Priority Repatriations
Global Affairs Canada is facilitating the repatriation of stranded Canadian travellers from
countries where borders and/or airspaces have been closed (or are expected to close), and
where there are no longer commercial options to return to Canada.
These repatriation efforts include the coordination of flights, internal travel, and regular
communication with Canadians.
The Department is prioritizing countries where there is a high density of stranded Canadians.
Ongoing operations include (based on 0700 air repatriation Ops data):
Flight Status Departure (Airline) Date Capacity
Completed Morocco 1 (Air Canada) March 21 450
Completed Morocco 2 (Air Canada) March 23 450
Completed Panama 1 (Air Transat) March 23 350
Confirmed Peru 1 (Air Canada) March 24 450
Confirmed Morocco 3 (Air Canada) March 25 450
Confirmed Panama 2 (Air Transat) March 26 350
Confirmed Spain (AC Rouge) March 25 297
Confirmed Ecuador 1 (AC Rouge) March 25 280
Confirmed Ukraine (Ukrainian Airlines) March 25 TBD
Planning Peru 2 (Air Canada) March 26 450
Planning Ecuador 2 (AC Rouge) March 27 280
Planning Peru 3 (Air Canada) March 27 450
Planning El Salvador (Air Transat) March 27 189
Planning Guatemala (Air Transat) March 27 189
Planning Honduras 1 (Air Transat) March 26 189
Planning Morocco 4 (Air Canada) March 27 450
Notional Honduras 2 (Air Transat) TBD 189
Notional India TBD TBD
Notional Tunisia (Tunis Air) March 25 250
Notional Algeria (Air Algiers) TBD TBD
Notional Philippines TBD TBD
Notional Egypt TBD TBD
Notional Haiti TBD TBD
Notional Pakistan TBD TBD
Sub-totals
Completed 3 900
Confirmed 6 21,77
Planning 7 21,97
Notional 8 439 (TBD)
Total 24 flights 5,713
 Canada is the only country to have been granted permission to have a flight take off from
Morocco since the government officially suspended all commercial passenger flights at
midnight on March 22. Two flights have arrived in Canada (March 21 and 23), one is
confirmed (25) and one is in planning.
 Despite increased restriction of movement in Morocco, our mission was able to facilitate
transportation by Canadians throughout Morocco to the Casablanca airport by issuing travel
facilitation letters and by identifying and communicating authorized travel options.
 For Panama, one Air Transat flight is completed (March 23) and one confirmed (26).
 For Peru, one Air Canada flight is confirmed (March 24), and two are in planning (March 26
and March 27). The flight route is Lima to Toronto for all three flights with capacity for 450
passengers on each. The mission is working with local charters to assist Canadians with
travel to Lima from other parts of Peru.
 For Ecuador, one Air Canada Rouge flights is confirmed (March 25) and one in planning
(March 27) with 280 passenger capacity each. The mission has received 1,863 inquiries
from Canadians in Ecuador, with 1551 expressing a desire to return. Of 3487 registered
Canadians, approximately 33% are over 65.
 For Spain, Air Transat (AT) flights are still operating. One Air Canada Rouge flight is
confirmed from Barcelona (March 25) with 297 passenger capacity. Tickets are now on sale.
 For Ukraine, one Ukrainian International Airlines flight is confirmed for March 25, and flight
information has been sent to Canadians.
 For Honduras, Guatemala and El Salvador, negotiations are ongoing to allow special Air
Transat flights landing rights for later this week. The complete lockdown on movement
protocols within Guatemala and El Salvador might hamper Canadians’ ability to get to the
airport. Missions are engaging host governments for special escorts and laisser passers.
Emerging Consular Areas of Focus
Global Affairs Canada is monitoring border and air space closures in countries where we have
high volumes of Canadians, as indicated by number of registered Canadians (ROCA data),
metrics from the Emergency Call Centre, and reporting from missions.
 India has suspended commercial flights, but we have received assurances that planned Air
Canada flights may continue to arrive so those passengers with existing tickets may depart.
Over 800 Canadians currently indicating they plan to depart. The mission is working to
facilitate internal travel given prohibition of domestic flights and interstate modes of
transportation, though this has been complicated by the Delhi lock down.
 Algeria’s land borders were closed from March 17 until further notice. All passenger flights
have been suspended. There are an estimated 600 Canadians stranded in Algeria.
 Tunisia’s land border is closed, and all passenger flights suspended as of March 20.
 Mexico has not announced border or air space closure measures, but should this occur, it
will impact a large number of Canadian travellers. For the moment commercial flight options
remain and Global Affairs Canada continues to encourage Canadians to return home.
 With all commercial flights expected to cease in the next 72 hours in the Philippines and Sri
Lanka, it is expected that large numbers of Canadian citizens trying to return will be
stranded (potentially over 1,000 per country).
 Countries in the table below 41% of registered Canadians abroad (423,208). Canadians in
the United States would represent an additional 10% of all Canadians abroad, however, a
land return remains an option in the case of the U.S.
Number of Stranded Canadians by Countries with
High Levels of ROCAs
Country Stranded Canadians Total Persons Registered Airspace
(data from mission) status
Philippines 2000 7,812 Closed
India 866 16,072 Closed
Algeria 600 2,452 Closed
Tunisia 500 2,014 Closed
Lebanon 80 9,732 Closed
Saudi Arabia 80 6,976 Closed
United Arab Emirates 74 8,719 Closed
China 0 12,983 Open
United Kingdom 0 12,947 Open
Australia 0 11,915 Open
Portugal 0 9,881 Open
France 0 9,236 Open
Spain 0 8,835 Open
Thailand 0 7,324 not
reported
Mexico 31,568 not
reported
Paraguay 14,153 not
reported
Total 4,200 164,807
 Air Canada Flights from Barbados to Toronto have been reinstated, with the last flight now
planned for March 28. The mission notes that AC flights from Barbados to Toronto are then
likely to occur on a weekly basis. Grenada had announced the closure of its airport effective
today, will allow some Air Canada flights (March 24, 26, 28 and 31).
 There are several thousand Canadians are still in the Dominican Republic. Since March
18, 17,218 Canadians and admissible travelers have returned to Canada. Two Canadian
airlines (Sunwing and Air Canada) are no longer offering ferry flights, while the other two
(Westjet and Air Transat) will operate a limited number of flights until at least March 25.
 There are reports of planned air space closures in Kenya, Argentina, and the United Arab
Emirates.
 There are 544 Canadians in Argentina and 30-40 in Chile that still need to find flight options
to return to Canada following the denial of Air Canada entry into Argentinean airspace on
Sunday night.
Consular Services
Global Affairs Canada continues to provide a range of services to Canadian abroad, both at
headquarters and through its mission network.
All missions remain open and have adapted their service delivery models to local conditions
and constraints on accessibility, including quarantines, curfews and lock-downs.
Staff at headquarters and missions have been redeployed to focus on consular operations and
increase capacity across the network.
The Department is working with its mission network to identify Canadians with confirmed
infection, so that we may follow up with local authorities, offer assistance to these Canadians
and monitor their well-being.
Global Affairs Canada is actively monitoring a number of cruise ships with Canadian
passengers and crew. The Department is working directly with the cruise lines and our mission
network to facilitate the return of Canadians to Canada from their point of disembarkation.
In recent days, we have had successful repatriations from Brazil, Argentina, South Africa,
Chile, and Argentina. Other boats are docking or will dock in the coming days, in Australia,
Hawaii, and Singapore.
Background Only
• Canada continues to monitor approximately 90 cruise ships with Canadian citizens
onboard.
Docking today 24 March 2020:
• Costa Deliziosa: 6 Canadian passengers. Landing at Port Louis, Mauritius. No
COVID Confirmed.
• MSC Splendida: 24 Canadian passengers. Has docked at Marseille, and will
disembark today. All passengers will be taken to the airport and put onto charters
according to their original plans. No passengers with COVID.
• Grandeur of the Seas: Docking in Miami. No remaining Canadian passengers, all
disembarked at last port of Baltimore. No COVID Confirmed.
• MSC Magnifica: 7 Canadian passengers, docked in Fremantle Australia. No COVID
confirmed. Mission reports 1771 passengers and crew and Australian foreign
ministry understands that 290 may be sick but have not yet been tested.
Disembarked
Ocean Endeavour (Ushuaia, Argentina)
 17 Canadian passengers, 15 crew
 COVID: no confirmed cases
 Passengers may be able to fly out on March 23 or 24.
MS Amsterdam (Freemantle, Australia)
 148 Canadian passengers, 3 Canadian crew
 COVID: no confirmed cases
 All guests disembarked in Freemantle, Australia. Disembarkation and onward travel via
commercial means will be complete by March 23.
Norwegian Jewel (Honolulu)
 347 Canadians passengers
 COVID: no confirmed cases
 Passengers to disembark today, charter flights to YVR scheduled for March 23 and 24
Viking River Avalon Upstream (Phnom Penh)
 2 Canadians passengers
 COVID: no confirmed cases
 Canadians in transit from Phnom Penh to Vancouver, expected to arrive on March 23.
Ships that may require assistance:
MS Zaandam (en route to Fort Lauderdale)
• 247 Canadian passengers, 1 Canadian Crew
• COVID: no confirmed cases, but 13 passengers and 29 crew indicated influenza like
symptoms (no COVID tests on board). Guests asked to quarantine in rooms.
• En route to Fort Lauderdale to dock on March 30. Mission in PANAM is on standby should
ship require support for passage through the canal. Consular message to passengers being
drafted for distribution through email and ship communications.
Coral Princess (en route to Rio)
• 97 Canadian passengers on board, 2 Canadian crew
• COVID: No current cases of COVID. COVID was previously present on the ship, in
treatment in Argentina.
• Will dock in Rio on March 24, clearance procedures to take up to 8 hours. Princess working
with passengers on onward flights.
MS Maasdam (en route to San Diego)
• 280 Canadians passengers, 3 Canadian crew
• COVID: no confirmed cases
• Will be docking in San Diego on March 26, disembarkation March 27. Discussing with Air
Canada to delay flight from San Diego to Toronto to accommodate passengers
Emergency Loan Program for Canadians Abroad
Global Affairs Canada is administering the COVID-19 Emergency Loan Program for
Canadians Abroad – a new, temporary financial assistance program to help Canadians outside
Canada return home.
Canadians directly impacted by COVID-19 are able to apply for an emergency loan of up to
$5,000 to help return to Canada and cover short-term essential needs while they work toward
their return.
To date, 93 loans totalling $170,000 have been approved through the loan program; 385 loan
applications are under review. These numbers do not include the all of the loans being
processed at mission, some of which are experiencing a high volume of inquiries (e.g. Rabat,
Lima, Tunis, Manilla, New Delhi, Mexico).
Canadian citizens are eligible to apply for the loan if they have been impacted by COVID-19,
planned to return to Canada, and have no other source of funds. Citizens travelling with an
immediate family member who is a permanent resident of Canada (PR) may include eligible
expenses for that PR family member in their application.
Eligible Canadian citizens who are currently abroad and need financial assistance through the
Emergency Loan Program for Canadians Abroad can contact either the closest Government of
Canada Office or Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and Response Centre located
in Ottawa.
Eligible Canadian citizens who want to apply under this Program can contact either the closest
Government of Canada Office or Global Affairs Canada’s 24/7 Emergency Watch and
Response Centre located in Ottawa. Once the Canadian has answered pre-screening questions
by a consular official, he/she will receive an invitation to apply for a loan.
The application itself can be completed in 10-15 minutes from any computer or mobile device.
Upon receipt of an application, a consular official contacts the individual to verify identity and
obtain any additional details required. Once a request is approved the recipient will receive the
funds in their Canadian bank account in two business days, on average.
Resources have been redirected within Global Affairs Canada to address the volume of
requests for these emergency loans and consular officials are doing their best to quickly
respond to each request.
Consular officials, both abroad and in Canada, are working to ensure that assistance is being
given to those who need our help the most. Canadians who do not urgently need financial
assistance to get home should continue to try to make their own arrangements to return to
Canada as soon as possible.
International Assistance
On March 11, the Prime Minister announced $50 million in funding to help vulnerable countries
prepare for and respond to COVID-19.
Of this, $8 million is being provided to experienced humanitarian partners in response to their
emergency appeals for responding to the pandemic, including the World Health Organization,
the Pan-American Health Organization, the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees,
and the International Federation of the Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
Further allocations from this envelope will be made shortly to address the increasing needs of
vulnerable countries and key partners in addressing the pandemic, including to respond to
specific requests that have been made to Canada.
We are working with international partners like the World Health Organization and the
International Red Cross and Red Crescent movement, amongst others, to identify the priority
requirements of vulnerable countries and to determine the most effective response options. We
are prepared to do more.
Bilateral Outreach
Minister Champagne is undertaking outreach to the following countries:
- Barbados
- Brazil
- China
- Cuba
- Ecuador
- European Union
- France
- Germany
- Greece
- India
- Italy
- Japan
- Mexico
- Morocco
- New Zealand
- Panama
- Saint Lucia
- Saudi Arabia
- Singapore
- Senegal
- Spain
- United Arab Emirates
- Uruguay
Supplemental Information – Global Affairs Canada
Talking points on Global Supply Chains:
 The Minister is working closely with counterparts from
Chile, Singapore and New Zealand on a joint
ministerial statement to affirm our government’s
commitment to maintaining open and connected
supply chains amid the current COVID-19
situation. In the statement, Canada will also affirm
the importance of refraining from imposing trade
restrictive measures on essential goods, especially
medical supplies. We are working with New Zealand,
and encourage the Ottawa Group to endorse the
ministerial statement and to broaden support from
there.
 Building on our bilateral agreement to keep the
Canada-US border open for essential supply chains,
we are exploring a broader joint Canada-U.S. initiative
to maintain an integrated approach, with a focus on
food, medical supplies, pharmaceuticals, critical
infrastructure, and key sectors (e.g. auto).
 We are working with G7 and G20 governments to
promote cooperation in keeping supply chains open,
including shaping a draft G20 Leaders Statement to
include a clear message aimed at encouraging
members to refrain from taking measures inconsistent
with International trade rules.
 The government is providing assistance to Canadian
industry for the transport of critical products to feed
essential supply chains in Canada (e.g. raw
ingredients for processed food, drug manufacturing,
etc).
 We are working with like-minded countries, including
Switzerland, UK, Australia, and EU member states, to
ensure World Intellectual Property Organization
administrative policies for registering and maintaining
rights in respect of patents, trademarks and industrial
designs continue to serve users of those systems in
meeting filing and other requirements.
Talking points on International Assistance:
 On March 11, the Prime Minister announced $50
million in funding to help vulnerable countries prepare
for, and respond to, COVID-19.
 Of this, $8 million is being provided to experienced
humanitarian partners in response to their emergency
appeals for responding to the pandemic, including the
World Health Organization, the Pan-American Health
Organization, the United Nations High Commissioner
for Refugees and the International Federation of the
Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies.
 Further allocations from this envelope will be made
shortly to address the increasing needs of vulnerable
countries and key partners in addressing the
pandemic, including to respond to specific requests
which have been made to Canada.
 We are working with international partners like the
World Health Organization and the International Red
Cross and Red Crescent movement, among others, to
identify the priority requirements of vulnerable
countries and to determine the most effective
response options.
 We are prepared to do more.
Talking points on Border Measures:
Asylum/Irregular Migration:
 To reduce the public health risks to Canadians and
reduce pressure on Canada’s health care system, an
order has been made under the Quarantine Act that
prohibits a foreign national from entering Canada from
the United States for the purpose of making a claim
for refugee protection, be it regularly or irregularly.
 This means that claimants entering Canada, from the
U.S., through any mode of travel (air, marine or land),
including between official ports of entry, will be
directed back to the U.S, a designated safe-third
country - which serves to mitigate the risk of
refoulement. The U.S. has provided Canada
assurances that individuals will be permitted to return
to Canada to pursue their claim once the temporary
prohibition is lifted.
 The prohibition on making an asylum claim, however,
would not apply to: (a) U.S. national or stateless
habitual resident of the U.S. making a claim against
the United States; (b) unaccompanied minors with no
parents in the United States; and (c) parents (or legal
guardians) of a U.S. minor citizen that is claiming
asylum against the United States.
 Any other asylum claim would be deferred to after the
pandemic and claimants would subsequently be
allowed to have their claims processed in Canada. In
other words, we are not denying claims, we are
deferring receiving these claims and require people to
wait in the U.S. until the pandemic is over.
 Canada intends to uphold its international
commitments and is operating within its existing legal
framework. This is an unprecedented situation and
we must take extraordinary measures to protect the
health and safety of Canadians.
Refugee Resettlement:
 Canada’s main partners in administering refugee
resettlement operations, the United Nations Refugee
Agency (UNHCR) and the International Organization
for Migration, have also temporarily suspended
resettlement travel for refugees.
 Given this situation and recognizing the very limited
ability of sponsors and resettlement organizations to
receive refugees, resettlement travel to Canada has
been temporarily suspended.

