Created: 2024-05-31T19:51:46.049009
Name: Outdoor_air_pollution_and_health:_Minimizing_the_effects
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/air-quality/outdoor-pollution-health/minimizing-effects.html
Package ID: 8ef45ab1-a5c9-46e1-b0bc-ac2e7b2bc3c4
Keywords: ['Outdoor air pollution', 'air-pollution and health', 'minimizing the effects', 'follow tips', 'reduce your risk', 'health-effects and air-pollution']
Notes: Follow these tips to reduce your risk of health effects from air pollution.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Outdoor air pollution and health: Minimizing the effects - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Healthy living Health and the environment Air quality and health Outdoor air pollution and health: Minimizing the effects Overview Health effects Minimizing the effects Related resources On this page How to lower your risk of health effects of outdoor air pollution What we're doing to reduce air pollution How to lower your risk of health effects of outdoor air pollution Follow these tips to reduce your risk of health effects from air pollution. Reduce outdoor air pollution coming into your home. Avoid or reduce exercising near areas of heavy traffic, especially during rush hour. Exercise in parks and green spaces away from major roads, when possible. Choose low-traffic routes for walking, running or cycling, especially during rush hour. Know the best times to be active outdoors. Check the Air Quality Health Index (AQHI) index in your community, especially during "smog season" from April to September. If it isn't available in your area, check your provincial environment ministry website for local air quality information. When air pollution levels are high: avoid or reduce strenuous outdoor activities limit time spent outdoors, especially if you are at risk Talk to your health care provider about other ways to protect your health when air pollution levels are high. This is especially important for people with pre-existing heart or lung conditions. What we're doing to reduce outdoor air pollution Our research on the health effects of smog played a role in developing national air quality standards for particulate matter and ground-level ozone. These standards are an important step in reducing the effects of smog on our health. We will continue to study the effects of short and long-term exposure to smog-producing pollutants. These studies will lead to more standards and guidelines to help protect you from the health effects of smog. Learn more about what we're doing to reduce traffic-related air pollution (TRAP). Page details Date modified: 2023-06-05 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy