Created: 2024-04-02T14:51:56.468322
Name: Health_Product_InfoWatch:_September_2023
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/health-product-infowatch/september-2023.html
Package ID: 93252a61-bb7e-480e-af63-80e060ee5ec8
Keywords: ['Health product', 'infowatch', 'September 2023', 'pharmaceuticals', 'biologics', 'medical devices', 'natural health products']
Notes: The following is a list of health product advisories, type I drug recalls and summaries of completed safety reviews published in August 2023 by Health Canada.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Health Product InfoWatch: September 2023 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Drugs and health products MedEffect Canada Health Product InfoWatch Health Product InfoWatch: September 2023 Download the alternative format (325 KB, 4 pages) Health Products and Food BranchMarketed Health Products DirectorateHealth Product InfoWatch Editorial Team Published: 2023-09-27 Pub.: 230000 Cat.: H167-1E-PDF ISSN: 2368-8025 Contents Health products mentioned in this issue Monthly recap of health product safety information Online pharmacies: Marketing of drugs and medical devices Scope Reporting Adverse Reactions Helpful links Suggestions? Health products mentioned in this issue Pharmaceuticals and biologics Amitriptyline Apo-Acyclovir Domperidone Keytruda (pembrolizumab) Sabril (vigabatrin) Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Natural and non-prescription health products Cromolyn Eye Drops Other Unauthorized Health Products Monthly recap of health product safety information The following is a list of health product advisories, type I drug recalls and summaries of completed safety reviews published in August 2023 by Health Canada. Amitriptyline Certain lots of amitriptyline tablets were recalled as the affected lots exceeded the interim acceptable intake limit for N-nitroso-nortriptyline (NNORT) or exceeded the acceptable cumulative intake limit for N-nitrosodimethylamine (NDMA) and NNORT. Type 1 drug recall: Amitriptyline Type 1 drug recall: Apo-Amitriptyline Type 1 drug recall: Elavil Type 1 drug recall: Pms-Amitriptyline Apo-Acyclovir Certain lots of Apo-Acyclovir tablets were recalled as the affected lots exceeded the concentration intake limit for NDMA. Type 1 drug recall: Apo-Acyclovir Cromolyn Eye Drops The Pendopharm Division of Pharmascience Inc. recalled all lots of the 10 mL format of Cromolyn Eye Drops due to the risk of microbial growth. Advisory: Cromolyn Eye Drops Domperidone This safety review evaluated the risk of psychiatric withdrawal events following sudden discontinuation or tapering of domperidone used to stimulate lactation. Health Canada's review found a link, which was mostly observed in patients taking daily doses greater than the maximum recommended dose of 30 mg per day. Health Canada will work with the manufacturers to update the Canadian product monographs for domperidone-containing products to note that cases of psychiatric withdrawal events have been reported. Health Canada has also communicated this information to healthcare professionals. Summary Safety Review: Domperidone Health Product InfoWatch: Domperidone Keytruda (pembrolizumab) and Tecentriq (atezolizumab) This safety review evaluated the risk of aplastic anemia associated with Keytruda (pembrolizumab) or Tecentriq (atezolizumab). Health Canada's review found a link. The review also found that the risk applied to all members of the immune checkpoint inhibitor drug class. Health Canada is working with the manufacturers to update the Canadian product monographs for Keytruda and Tecentriq, as well as for the other products in the immune checkpoint inhibitor drug class that are not currently labelled for this risk. Summary Safety Review: Keytruda (pembrolizumab) and Tecentriq (atezolizumab) Sabril (vigabatrin) Two lots of Sabril (vigabatrin) 500 mg powder for oral solution, in sachet format, were found to contain trace amounts of another prescription drug, tiapride. Health Canada has determined that the health risk of the trace contamination to patients is low. It is important that patients do not stop taking their Sabril as prescribed without consulting their physician, as the benefits of this drug are expected to outweigh its potential risks despite trace amounts of tiapride, unless patients have a severe allergy to tiapride. Advisory: Sabril (vigabatrin) Unauthorized Health Products Health Canada advised Canadians about various unauthorized health products being sold at retail locations across Canada or online that may pose serious health risks. Advisory: Unauthorized health products seized from stores in the Greater Toronto Area Advisory: Unauthorized health products seized from Yang Sheng Health Food and G&R Ginseng Trading stores in Richmond, B.C. Advisory: Unauthorized sexual enhancement products Advisory: Unauthorized skin lightening and skin treatment products Online pharmacies: Marketing of drugs and medical devices In Canada, pharmacies and/or pharmacy owners are regulated by the pharmacy regulatory authority in the jurisdiction (province or territory) where the business is established. A legitimate pharmacy and/or pharmacy owner, including online pharmacies and owners of online pharmacies, will thus be licensed by the pharmacy regulatory authority in that province or territory.Footnote 1 Health Canada is the national regulatory authority for drug and medical device advertising and as such, is responsible for ensuring compliance with federal advertising legislation and regulations. Health Canada would like to remind healthcare professionals and online pharmacy owners that online pharmacies in Canada are subject to the Canadian federal legislation related to advertising of health products. Health Canada's Stop Illegal Marketing of Drugs and Devices (SIM-DD) program is a platform that provides support to healthcare professionals in understanding, identifying, and reporting illegal marketing of drugs and medical devices. The SIM-DD program also helps healthcare professionals and online pharmacy owners avoid engaging in illegal advertising when promoting health products and/or services to consumers. Healthcare professionals are encouraged to report any suspected illegal online pharmacy advertising to Health Canada. Health Canada encourages healthcare professionals to discuss the risks of purchasing drugs from illegal online sellers with their patients. The following links are provided to help identify and differentiate illegal websites selling drugs from licensed online pharmacies in Canada: Choosing a safe online pharmacy Buying drugs over the internet National Association of Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities Alliance for Safe Online Pharmacies National Association of Boards of Pharmacy Scope This monthly publication is intended primarily for healthcare professionals and includes information on pharmaceuticals, biologics, medical devices and natural health products. It provides a summary of key health product safety information published in the previous month by Health Canada, as well as a selection of new health product safety information meant to raise awareness. New information contained in this issue is not comprehensive but rather represents a selection of clinically relevant items warranting enhanced dissemination. Reporting Adverse Reactions Canada Vigilance Program Telephone: 1-866-234-2345 Fax or mail: Form available on MedEffect Canada For more information on how to report an adverse reaction, visit the Adverse Reaction and Medical Device Problem Reporting page. Helpful links MedEffectTM Canada Recalls and Safety Alerts Database New Safety and Effectiveness Reviews Canada Vigilance Adverse Reaction Online Database Drug Product Database Medical Devices Active Licence Listing Licensed Natural Health Products Database The Drug and Health Product Portal Drug Shortages Canada Medical device shortages: List of shortages and discontinuations Stop Illegal Marketing of Drugs and Devices List of drugs for exceptional importation and sale Coronavirus disease (COVID-19) Drug and vaccine authorizations for COVID-19: List of authorized drugs, vaccines and expanded indications COVID-19 vaccines and treatments portal Reported side effects following COVID-19 vaccination in Canada Suggestions? Your comments are important to us. Let us know what you think by reaching us at:infowatch-infovigilance@hc-sc.gc.ca Health Product InfoWatch Editorial Team Marketed Health Products Directorate Health Canada Address Locator 1906C Ottawa ON K1A 0K9 Telephone: 613-954-6522 Teletypewriter: 1-800-465-7735 (Service Canada) References Footnote 1 National Association of Pharmacy Regulatory Authorities. Online Pharmacies. Accessed July 3, 2023. Return to footnote 1 referrer Page details Date modified: 2023-09-28 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy