Created: 2024-02-26T17:30:55.428977
Name: Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2019-2020:_Consumer_Chemicals_and_Containers_Regulations,_2001
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/consumer-chemicals-containers-regulations-2019-2020.html
Package ID: 9397d562-ce98-48c9-9026-22cdef91212b
Keywords: ['cyclical enforcement project', 'Consumer-Chemicals Containers Regulations']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of consumer chemicals with the requirements of the Consumer Chemicals and Containers Regulations, 2001 (CCCR, 2001).
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Consumer Chemicals and Containers Regulations, 2001 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Cyclical Enforcement Project 2019-2020: Consumer Chemicals and Containers Regulations, 2001 Fiscal year 2019-2020 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and its regulations. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of consumer chemicals with the requirements of the Consumer Chemicals and Containers Regulations, 2001 (CCCR, 2001). For this project, compliance of select consumer chemicals with the CCCR, 2001 was determined through a review of classification documents requested from establishments by Health Canada inspectors. Some of these products were sampled and sent to the Product Safety Laboratory to have relevant regulatory criteria verified through laboratory testing. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of consumer chemical Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2019-2020 fiscal year, flammability, corrosivity, viscosity and pH testing, as well as visual evaluation of 60 different product labels was carried out. The compliance verification inspections resulted in 12 recalls, 1 stop sale, 23 stop distributions, 2 corrections and 10 commitments to address non-compliance. Of the 23 stop distributions, 18 were intermediate measures due to the company not providing documentation within the required timelines. In 8 of these cases, the final actions taken with the products are also identified in the entry in the table. There were 14 instances where no corrective action was required and 9 instances where the products were determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the CCCR, 2001. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action AK Real Colors High Compatibility Thinner Sunward Hobbies Did not meet the flammable classification labelling requirements Commitment by Sunward Hobbies AVT Paints Ironlak Lak Gloss Acrylic Spray Paint Curry's Artists' Materials Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by AVT Paints Bestine Bestine Solvent and Thinner Speedball Art Products Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Voluntary Recall by Speedball Art Products LLC Bob Smith Industries Incorporation Various Cyanoacrylate Glues GRA Distribution No compliance issues detected None Bob Smith Industries Incorporation Various Cyanoacrylate Glues Hi Performance No compliance issues detected None Bob Smith Industries Incorporation Various Cyanoacrylate Glues P.M. Hansen Did not meet quick skin-bonding adhesives packaging and labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by P.M. Hansen Bob Smith Industries Incorporation Various Cyanoacrylate Glues Valley Trading Did not meet quick skin-bonding adhesives packaging and labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Valley Trading (contacted all customers) Citadel Citadel Chaos Black Spray Games Workshop No compliance issues detected None Citadel Citadel Munitorum Varnish Spray Games Workshop No compliance issues detected None Citadel Citadel Super Glue Thin Games Workshop Did not meet quick skin-bonding adhesives packaging and labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Games Workshop Cutek Cutek CD33 Naked Deck Source Inc. No compliance issues detected None Cutek Cutek Extreme Wood Oil Deck Source Inc. Did not meet toxic classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Deck Source Inc. Cutek Cutek Proclean Deck Source Inc. Did not meet corrosive classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Deck Source Inc. DeSerres DeSerres - Huile de Lin (DALH) DeSerres No compliance issues detected None DeSerres DeSerres - Solvant (DALS) DeSerres No compliance issues detected None DeSerres DeSerres Spray Paint - Solvent Based DeSerres No compliance issues detected None Flex-I-File Classic C/A Glue Profile Accessories Inadequate classification documentation Stop Sale by Profile Accessories Flex-I-File Plast-I-Weld Plastic Welder Profile Accessories Did not meet toxic and corrosive classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Flex-I-File G96 G96 Military Grade Bore Solvent G96 Products Inc. Inadequate classification documentation Stop Distribution by G96 Products Inc. G96 G96 Nitro Solvent Aerosol G96 Products Inc. No compliance issues detected None Gamblin Artists’ Colors Gamblin Gamvar Gloss Curry's Artists' Materials Did not meet toxic classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Gamblin Artists’ Colours Granger's Gear Cleaner Interex Industries Ltd. Inadequate classification documents followed by determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations Temporary Stop Distribution by Interex Industries Ltd. Granger's Odour Eliminator Interex Industries Ltd. Inadequate classification documents followed by determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations Temporary Stop Distribution by Interex Industries Ltd. Granger's Rubber Boot Care Interex Industries Ltd. Inadequate classification documents followed by determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations Temporary Stop Distribution by Interex Industries Ltd. Hachem Acrylique haute- viscosité, Turquoise Hachem Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None Hachem Nettoyant à pinceaux Hachem Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None Hachem Peinture acrylique - fluide, Alizarine cramoisie Hachem Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None Hoppe's Hoppe's BoreSnake CLP - Aerosol Hoppe's Prohibited Voluntary Recall by Hoppe’s Hoppe's No 9 Solvent 1 Pint, Gun Bore Cleaner Hoppe's Inadequate classification documents followed by did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Temporary Stop Distribution by Hoppe’s followed by Commitment by Hoppe’s Hornady One Shot, Sonic Clean Solution, Gun Parts Formula, item # 043360 Hornady Manufacturing Co. Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Hornady Manufacturing Co. Hornady One Shot, with dyna GlidePlus Gun Cleaner and Lube, in aerosol container, item #9990, 99901 Hornady Manufacturing Co. Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Hornady Manufacturing Co. Humbrol Enamel (Gloss Purple) P.M. Hansen Ltd. Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Stop Distribution by P.M. Hansen Ltd. followed by Commitment by P.M. Hansen Ltd. Humbrol Enamel Thinners P.M. Hansen Ltd. Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Stop Distribution by P.M. Hansen Ltd. followed by Commitment by P.M. Hansen Ltd. Humbrol Poly Cement P.M. Hansen Ltd. Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Stop Distribution by P.M. Hansen Ltd. followed by Commitment by P.M. Hansen Ltd. Humbrol Enamel Sunward Hobbies Did not meet the flammable classification labelling requirements Commitment by P.M. Hansen Ltd. Jacquard Gutta Resist Clear Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Did not meet the flammable classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Jacquard Gutta Resist Gold Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Did not meet the flammable classification labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Jacquard Gutta Resist Solvent Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Did not meet the toxic and flammable classification packaging and labelling requirements Voluntary Recall by Rupert, Gibbon & Spider, Inc. Kama Pigments Huile de lin raffinée et blanchie Kama Pigments (9131-8766 Québec Inc.) Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Commitment by Kama Pigments Kama Pigments Medium Alkyde Kama Pigments (9131-8766 Québec Inc.) Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Kama Pigments Kama Pigments Vernis final a tableau - brillant Kama Pigments (9131-8766 Québec Inc.) Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Stop Distribution by Kama Pigments Lee Valley Conservator's Wax Lee Valley Tools Inadequate classification documents followed by did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Temporary Stop Distribution by Lee Valley Tools followed by Correction by Lee Valley Tools Lyman's Lyman's Turbo Sonic Case Cleaner Lyman Products Inadequate classification documents followed by did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Temporary Stop Distribution by Lyman Products followed by Commitment by Lyman Products Lyman's Lyman's Turbo Sonic Steel Gun Cleaner Lyman Products Inadequate classification documents followed by did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Temporary Stop Distribution by Lyman Products followed by Commitment by Lyman Products Martin/F. Weber Martin/F. Weber turpenoid natural Curry's Artists' Materials Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None MG Chemicals Silicone Modified Conformal Coating MG Chemicals Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Stop Distribution by MG Chemicals MG Chemicals Super Duster MG Chemicals No compliance issues detected None MG Chemicals Super Glue MG Chemicals No compliance issues detected None Mona Lisa Mona Lisa Linseed Oil Speedball Art Products Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Speedball Art Products Novus Novus Polish #1 Plastic Clean & Shine Profile Accessories Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None Novus Novus Polish #2 Fine Scratch Remover Profile Accessories Determined not to meet the definition of a chemical product under the Regulations None Pébéo Essence de térébenthine rectifiée Pébéo No compliance issues detected None Pébéo Huile de lin raffinée Pébéo Did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Commitment by Pébéo Pébéo Vernis à tableau mat Pébéo No compliance issues detected None Pink Soap Pink Soap Brush Cleaner Speedball Art Products Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Speedball Art Products Satellite City Inc. Hot Stuff Lee Valley Tools No compliance issues detected None Tried & True Tried & True Original Wood Finish Lee Valley Tools Inadequate classification documents followed by did not meet the technical specifications for the presentation and/or location of information requirements Temporary Stop Distribution by Lee Valley Tools followed by Correction by Lee Valley Tools Via Chem Brush n’ bond #BNB-72 Via-Chem Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Via-Chem Via Chem High Performance Future Glue Via-Chem Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Via-Chem Via Chem Via-Bond Fix All Cement Glue Via-Chem Inadequate classification documents Stop Distribution by Via-Chem Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). Related links Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2021-01-20 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy