Created: 2024-09-20T18:10:23.148158
Name: An_Act_respecting_Pharmacare_Parliamentary_Committee_Binder
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/99ffd5c4-d3d3-463a-b364-e9da5bf7d4d9/resource/7483685d-02c6-42ed-a1ed-2127016510e0/download/an-act-respecting-pharmacare-eng.pdf
Package ID: 99ffd5c4-d3d3-463a-b364-e9da5bf7d4d9
Keywords: ['parliamentary appearance', 'Health', 'Pharmacare']
Notes: Minister Holland's  binder for his appearance at An Act respecting Pharmacare on May 27th, 2024.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
An Act respecting Pharmacare
Parliamentary Committee Binder
May 27th, 2024
An Act respecting Pharmacare
Parliamentary Committee Binder
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Part A: Overview
1. Questions and Answers
2. Technical Briefing Deck
3. Pharmacare News Release
Part B: QP Notes
4. Populations with Unmet Needs
5. Indigenous Groups
6. PT Jurisdiction
7. Fiscal Implications
8. National Formulary and Bulk Purchasing Strategy
9. Stakeholders
10. Uninsured and Underinsured
11. Drugs for Rare Diseases
12. Appropriate Use
13. Canadian Drug Agency Post-Announcement
Part C: Background
14. Backgrounder on Contraceptives
15. Backgrounder on Diabetes
16. Text of the Bill
Questions & Answers
Pharmacare Bill Legislation
Q1. How much is this going to cost?
The bill sets out that discussions would need to first occur between provinces and territories (PTs)
with respect to the funding of universal, single-payer coverage for a range of contraception and
diabetes medications. Further information on the cost will be subject to forthcoming discussions
and subsequent agreements with willing PTs.
Separate from this Bill, the Government of Canada would also create a fund for diabetes devices
and supplies. This fund would be rolled out to support access to diabetes devices such as
continuous glucose monitors, insulin pumps, syringes and test strips.
Also as set out in the Bill, the Minister will establish a committee of experts to make
recommendations respecting options for the operation and financing of national, universal, single-
payer pharmacare, which would include information on costs starting with contraception and
diabetes medications.
If pressed on the cost of universal pharmacare,
The Bill outlines a mechanism, through collaboration and agreements with willing PTs, that will put
in place a universal single-payer model for the coverage of specific contraception and diabetes
medications. The intent of this funding would be to enhance, rather than replace, existing PT
spending on public drug benefit programs.
There are a range of costing estimates depending on model of coverage and formulary so it would
be impossible to give a definitive answer to this question. This Bill provides for a committee of
experts to make recommendations related to the financing and operation of single-payer
pharmacare.
If pressed on the $1.5 billion cost stated in news articles and Budget 2024
The announcement of $1.5B over five years in Budget 2024 confirms the federal government’s
commitment to provide funding to launch national pharmacare in Canada.
As outlined in Bill C-64, there is a commitment to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces,
territories, and Indigenous peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products.
The Bill also states the Government’s intention to work with provinces and territories to increase
existing public pharmacare coverage to provide universal, single-payer coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications.
The Minister has had some preliminary discussions with his provincial and territorial counterparts.
The federal government will discuss with provinces and territories how we can work together to
achieve these commitments, while recognizing the unique drug coverage context within each
jurisdiction. As these discussions unfold, more information will become available.
Q2. Why were contraception and diabetes drugs chosen specifically?
These targeted measures will improve equity, affordability, and health outcomes and have the
potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Access to contraception reduces the risk of unintended pregnancies and improves people’s ability
to determine their own contribution to society and the economy. In Canada, there are more than 9
million people of reproductive age who make up nearly one quarter of the Canadian population
(22.5% in 2022). Cost has consistently been identified as the single most important barrier to
access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women and gender diverse
Canadians.
Diabetes is a very complex disease affecting more than 3.7 million Canadians and can be treated
with safe and effective medications. Additionally, uncontrolled diabetes and its complications can
lead to high and unnecessary costs incurred from lost productivity and elevated health-care system
use. Access to diabetes medications can improve the health of Canadians living with diabetes and
reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or amputations.
More information is available in the backgrounders.
Q3. When will other drugs be added and what is the process to do that?
This Bill outlines a framework that would help guide collaboration with provinces, territories,
Indigenous Peoples, stakeholders and partners to develop national universal pharmacare over
time, based on the foundational principles outlined in the Bill.
The Bill also sets out processes and next steps for other foundational elements of a national
pharmacare program, including work on a national formulary, a national bulk purchasing plan, an
appropriate use strategy and an expert committee. The consideration of adding other drugs would
evolve against the backdrop of these other elements, in addition to ongoing collaboration with
provinces, territories, stakeholder and partners.
In addition to work that will be carried out through the Bill, the Government of Canada is already
moving forward, in collaboration with PTs, on other pharmacare initiatives that are delivering
results. This includes work on the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, the Improving
Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs Initiative with Prince Edward Island, and work to establish
the Canadian Drug Agency.
Q4. Is this coverage of contraception and diabetes medications truly “single payer” model?
Canada currently relies on more than 100 government-run drug insurance programs designed to
serve people in vulnerable groups, and more than 100,000 private drug insurance plans that largely
provide employment-based coverage. A “single-payer” system means that a government pays for
services on behalf of all its citizens. In the Canadian context, where PTs deliver health care, the
term “single-payer” means PT governments, which is often supported by federal funding.
The Bill outlines a mechanism, through collaboration and agreements with willing PTs, that will put
in place a universal single-payer model for the coverage of specific contraception and diabetes
medications. The intent of this funding would be to enhance, rather than replace, existing PT
spending on public drug benefit programs.
Q5. What could be the impact on private drug insurance? Should people opt-out of their private
insurance plan if their province accepts funding for contraception and diabetes?
The Bill does not reference private drug insurance or legislate any of its activities. Workplace health
benefit plans often cover a range of costs beyond drug coverage, including services from other
health providers (such as physiotherapy) and include benefits like life insurance and disability
benefits. Employers use these plans for recruitment and retention of employees, as part of an
employee’s compensation. Until agreements are in place with PTs, employers and employees
would be unlikely to want to make any changes to their drug plans.
Canadians that do have private drug insurance would also have coverage for a broader scope of
drug classes beyond the specific contraception and diabetes medications outlined in the Bill.
Furthermore, access to the specific contraception and diabetes medications will be dependent on
the establishment of bilateral agreements with PTs before implementation of this initiative
commences.
Q6. Would there need to be changes to the CHA to roll-out full pharmacare?
There are no plans to make amendments to the Canada Health Act (CHA) and this Bill does not
require the CHA be amended.
In recognition of PT jurisdiction on the delivery of health care services and the essential role they
play in implementing pharmacare, it is important that the Canadian government take a
collaborative approach with partners as we move forward.
This Bill provides a flexible approach to allow for discussions to occur with PTs and subsequently
working with them to implement national universal pharmacare over time.
Furthermore, the Bill contains other pharmacare commitments such as a national formulary and a
national bulk purchasing plan which would be outside the scope of the CHA.
Q7. Why doesn’t this Bill follow the recommendations outlined in the Advisory Council/ Hoskins
report?
This preamble text of the Bill recognizes the work and recommendations of the Advisory Council
and the Bill follows several recommendations of the report, including:
Taking a step by step approach to the implementation of pharmacare in partnership with PTs and
Indigenous populations;
Having essential medicines as a starting point in the development of a national formulary;
Establishing a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) that would help develop a national formulary, a
purchasing strategy, and provide guidance on appropriate use; and,
Recognizing the need to improve access to drugs for rare diseases.
Q8. Why is there currently funding to PEI for its program and no other province or territory?
The PEI demonstration initiative is giving real world lessons in how pharmacare principles can be
implemented in Canada's distinct pharmaceutical landscape.
PEI signaled its interest in participating in a demonstration initiative and an agreement was
announced on August 11, 2021. Through this agreement, PEI received $35 million in federal funding
to add new drugs to its list of covered drugs and lower out of pocket costs for drugs covered under
existing public plans for Island residents.
To date, the PEI project has increased access to over 100 drugs, reduced copays and other cost
barriers for residents, and reduced paperwork to access certain medications. Within the first 6
months alone, PEI residents have saved over $2 million on over 230,000 prescriptions. These
actions under the PEI demonstration initiative have helped demonstrate practically how
affordability and accessibility principles can be achieved in the real world.
The Government of Canada will use these lessons to inform future discussions with PTs.
Q9. Have discussions taken place with other provinces and territories? Are they supportive?
This Bill sets the framework for future collaboration in implementing national universal pharmacare
with willing jurisdictions and also key partners including Indigenous Peoples, patients, and
stakeholders.
The Government of Canada would work with willing PTs to implement coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications through bilateral agreements.
The Government of Canada is already engaging PTs on other pharmacare initiatives that are
delivering results, including the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, the Improving
Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs initiative and working to establish the CDA.
Q10. What will the national formulary look like and how will it be covered under national universal
pharmacare?
A national formulary is a list of approved prescription drugs and products which all Canadians
should have access to under national universal pharmacare.
To inform the development of a national formulary, this Bill sets out that the Minister would request
the CDA prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products. This list would be a
starting point for partners to consider which pharmaceutical products should be included under
national universal pharmacare. It would also help set out parameters for future bilateral
agreements with PTs.
Upon completion of this list, the Minister must initiate discussions with PTs, Indigenous peoples
and other partners and stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward the first phase of
national universal pharmacare.
The CDA is an expert in this area and is best placed to develop this starting point in collaboration
with PTs, Indigenous Peoples, and other partners and stakeholders. The CDA would be expected to
develop this list no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Bill gets approved.
Q11. How long will it take to get to full pharmacare if this is a foundational step?
The 2019 Advisory Panel proposed a step-by-step approach and implementation over seven years
as it recognized the complexity of the current situation with regard to prescription drug affordability
and access in Canada, taking into consideration the various ways Canadians may receive drug
coverage.
This Bill would guide collaboration with PTs, Indigenous Peoples, stakeholders, and partners to
develop national universal pharmacare over time, based on the foundational principles outlined in
the Bill.
This will also be dependent on the forthcoming discussions with PTs regarding specific
contraception and diabetes medications and subsequent agreements that will be put in place with
willing PTs.
Q12. What is the bulk purchasing strategy?
This Bill tasks the Minister to request the CDA to develop advice on a national bulk purchasing
strategy no later than the first anniversary of the day on which the Act receives royal assent.
In simple terms, a bulk purchasing strategy means a coordinated price negotiation approach to
maximize negotiating power and lead to lower drug prices for Canadians. Because the purchase is
made in bulk form, a better deal can be negotiated.
The bulk purchasing strategy will not include the physical purchase and stockpile of drugs by the
Government of Canada on behalf of responsible governments.
Q13. Does this Bill create the mandate for the Canadian Drug Agency?
No. The Bill does not create anything regarding the Agency’s organizational mandate, governance,
or funding. The creation of the CDA was announced on December 18, 2023.
The Bill describes the Minister’s power to request advice from the CDA. It states that the Minister of
Health must request that the CDA prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related
products to inform the development of a national formulary and develop a national bulk purchasing
strategy.
If pressed on the role and functions of the CDA:
The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
(CADTH) and in partnership with PTs. The CDA will incorporate and expand on CADTH’s expertise in
the pharmaceutical sector, including its strong leadership and technical proficiency.
The CDA will work to improve the appropriate prescribing and use of medications; increase access
to drug and treatment data; and reduce drug system duplication and lack of coordination.
Q14. What will be the impact of the pharmacare bill on Indigenous Peoples in Canada?
The Bill commits to engaging and collaborating with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis governments and
representative organizations on the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
The Bill has no impact on any current federal programs for Indigenous Peoples, such as drug
coverage for registered First Nations and recognized Inuit through the Non-Insured Health Benefits
(NIHB) Program.
Q15. What if a province opts out with the expectation of full compensation?
As outlined in the Bill, in order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage
for contraception and diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made
between the Government of Canada and a willing province or territory.
The Bill also recognizes the jurisdiction of PTs in the provision of health care, including the coverage
of prescription drugs and related products.
Q16. In BC, contraceptives are already free. What will this new federal program mean for them?
As outlined in the Bill, in order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage
for contraception and diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made
between the Government of Canada and a province or territory.
We will take the necessary time to work with provinces and territories, like BC, to discuss the
details of bilateral agreements recognizing the unique public drug coverage contexts across all of
the PTs.
Q17. How will this Bill apply in Quebec for contraceptive and diabetes coverage?
Quebec has a mixed payer model which ensures that their residents always have some form of
public or private drug coverage.
This Bill outlines the framework for discussions to come with willing jurisdictions as partners in
implementing national universal pharmacare, including Quebec. It also sets out foundational
principles for affordability, accessibility, appropriate use and universality that can be applied to any
drug coverage model in Canada.
Q18. If this Bill is only framework legislation, what is the Government doing now to make drugs
more accessible and affordable for Canadians?
The Government continues its work to streamline the approval of new drugs while ensuring their
safety, efficacy, and quality; advance on national pharmacare; implement a national strategy for
drugs for rare diseases; and proceed with an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences
strategy.
These developments will improve the accessibility of new medicines for people in Canada and
support the sustainability of the health care system, while at the same time supporting innovation
and investment in the pharmaceutical sector.
On March 22, 2023, the Minister of Health announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years to increase access to, and affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases to help improve
the health and lives of patients living with a rare disease in Canada. This investment in improving
the accessibility and affordability of drugs for rare diseases is an important piece of pharmacare.
The Government of Canada has also been working in collaboration with PTs to help Canadians
access more common prescription medications. In August 2021, the Government announced the
Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs agreement to provide Prince Edward Island
(PEI) with $35 million over four years starting in 2021-22 to support the province’s efforts to provide
its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
In June 2023, PEI’s $5 copay program reduced copays for almost 60% of medications regularly used
by Island residents for eligible medications used for cardiovascular disease, diabetes and mental
health covered under the public drug programs. The High-Cost Drug Program was also modified to
remove barriers making the program available to all income levels. In addition, in July 2023, PEI
adjusted the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the annual cap on the amount of money a
household spends on eligible medications.
As of November 2023, PEI residents have saved over $2 million out-of-pocket costs on more than
230,000 prescriptions.
The Government of Canada also supports the work of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance
(pCPA) which negotiates drug prices for public drug plans. These negotiations have produced
savings of $3.4 billion annually.
Q19. What are the options for models that the government is considering (or that you have studied)
for pharmacare?
The Bill does not identify a model of pharmacare
The Bill commits that the Government of Canada would continue to collaborate with partners and
stakeholders in implementing national universal pharmacare.
Specific models, including the operation and financing of universal, single payer pharmacare, will
be studied by the expert committee described in the Bill.
Canada’s Plan for Universal Pharmacare
Steps towards national universal pharmacare
2019:
Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
Budget 2019 Commitment for foundational elements: Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), National
Formulary and National Strategy for Rare Diseases
2020:
Speech from the Throne commitment to PT engagement towards national, universal pharmacare,
proceeding with National Strategy for Rare Diseases, advancing work to establish the CDA
2021:
Investment of $35M with Prince Edward Island for the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription
Drugs Initiative
2022:
June 2022, a multidisciplinary national panel convened by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and
Technology in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada, recommended a framework for
developing a national formulary and a sample list of drugs.
Budget 2022 commitments to introduce Pharmacare Bill and task CDA to develop a national
formulary
2023:
March 2023, the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases (DRD) was launched with an
investment of up to $1.5B over 3 years to increase access to, and affordability of, DRDs.
December 2023 creation of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) with an investment of $89.5 million
over 5 years, starting in 2024-25.
An Act respecting pharmacare
This Bill represents the first phase in the federal government’s commitment to establish national
universal pharmacare.
Sets the federal government’s framework to guide its efforts with partners to improve prescription
drug accessibility, affordability, universal coverage and appropriate use, for all Canadians.
Formalizes a requirement to work collaboratively with provinces and territories and Indigenous
peoples to build national universal pharmacare through a step-by-step approach.
Describes the Government’s intent to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a range of
contraception and diabetes medications through collaborative arrangements with willing provinces
and territories.
Supports the development of a national formulary of essential prescription drugs and related
products and the development of a national bulk purchasing strategy, to be led by the Canadian
Drug Agency.
Principles
The bill outlines that the Minister is to consider the following principles and the Canada Health Act,
when collaborating with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders towards national universal pharmacare:
a. improve the accessibility of pharmaceutical products, including through their coverage, in a
manner that is more consistent across Canada;
b. improve the affordability of pharmaceutical products, including by reducing financial barriers for
Canadians;
c. support the appropriate use of pharmaceutical products — namely, in a manner that prioritizes
patient safety, optimizes health outcomes and reinforces health system sustainability — in order to
improve the physical and mental health and well-being of Canadians; and
d. provide universal coverage of pharmaceutical products across Canada.
The principles included in the bill are intended to guide efforts to improve coverage for Canadians
and align with ongoing work related to drugs for rare diseases and the Canadian Drug Agency.
Bilateral Agreements and Funding
This Bill legislates a path to bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories by providing a
federal commitment to long-term pharmacare funding beginning with existing funding for drugs for
rare diseases as announced in Budget 2019.
If the Minister enters in a bilateral agreement with a willing province or territory, the Minister may
provide funding to that province or territory, to increase any existing pharmacare coverage, allowing
the province or territory to provide universal, single-payer, first dollar coverage, for specific
prescription drugs and related products intended for contraception or the treatment of diabetes.
Specific Contraception and Diabetes Medications
The Government will work with willing provinces and territories to implement coverage for specific
contraception and diabetes medications through bilateral agreements, per the Bill. Funding will
enhance, rather than replace, existing provincial and territorial spending on public drug benefit
programs.
The specific contraception and diabetes medications are listed in the backgrounders.
Specific Contraception and Diabetes Medications (cont’d)
Starting with these drugs is part of the step-by-step approach set out in the Bill.
Provides an opportunity to test the application of the principles of improving access, affordability,
appropriate use and universal coverage at a national scale within the context of the complexity of
Canada’s healthcare system.
Provides for a nationally consistent approach that some provinces have already begun to
implement to support uptake of effective contraception methods.
Benefits people living with and managing diabetes and helps ensure that these individuals are able
to afford the drugs that they need.
The Minister will also work with PTs to establish a fund for diabetes devices and supplies to support
patients in managing their diabetes and administering their medication.
The Canadian Drug Agency (CDA)
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug
Agency (CDA). The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs).
The bill outlines the functions of the CDA, a key foundational element of national pharmacare, as
outlined below:
Clinical and cost-effectiveness analysis
Advice to inform formulary listing by federal, provincial and territorial drug plans
Pharmaceutical data and analytics
Appropriate prescribing and use
Pharmaceutical system coordination
National Formulary and Bulk Purchasing Strategy
After discussions with the provinces and territories, the Bill requires that the Minister request that
the CDA:
1. prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products to inform the development of a
national formulary that will establish the scope of prescription drugs and related products to which
Canadians should have access under national universal pharmacare.
Upon completion of this list, the Minister must initiate discussions with provinces, territories,
Indigenous peoples and other partners and stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward
the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
2. develop, in collaboration with partners and stakeholders, a national bulk purchasing strategy.
The Minister must request the CDA complete the list and strategy no later than the first anniversary
of the day on which this Act receives royal assent.
Appropriate Use Strategy
Work to advance a pan-Canadian strategy for appropriate use began in March 2023, with the launch
of an Advisory Committee to inform the strategy and a corresponding program.
An Appropriate Use Strategy section commits the Minister to:
ensuring that a pan-Canadian strategy for appropriate use is published no later than one year after
royal assent of the Act and,
requesting that the CDA prepare reports every three years on the progress made in advancing the
strategy.
Committee of Experts
The Minister must, within 30 days of the day on which this Act receives royal assent, establish a
committee of experts, and provide for its membership, to make recommendations respecting
options for the operation and financing of national, universal, single-payer pharmacare.
The committee must, no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Act receives royal
assent, provide a written report to the Minister setting out its recommendations.
Summary of Next Steps
Should this Bill be passed:
The Minister will establish a committee of experts, within thirty days of the day after this Act
receives royal assent. Appointment of committee members would be shared publicly.
Ministerial outreach will commence on next steps, including discussions with provinces and
territories regarding bilateral agreements.
The Minister will request that within one year on which this Act receives royal assent, the Canadian
Drug Agency:
prepare a list of essential prescription drugs and related products to inform the development of a
national formulary, and
develop a national bulk purchasing strategy.
Initiatives that are underway related to affordable prescription medicines in Prince Edward Island,
efforts under the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, and work by the Canadian Drug
Agency, will all continue and will be evaluated for their lessons learned for national universal
pharmacare in Canada.
News Release
For Immediate Release
Government of Canada Introduces Legislation for First Phase of National Universal Pharmacare
Legislation includes universal access to contraception and diabetes medications.
February 29, 2024 | Ottawa, Ontario | Health Canada
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, introduced Bill C-64, An Act respecting
pharmacare (Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for first phase of
national universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to
work with provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of
contraception and diabetes medications.
The Minister also announced the government’s plan to establish a fund to support Canadians’
access to supplies that diabetics require to manage and monitor their condition and administer
their medication, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
This legislation is an important step forward to improve health equity, affordability, and outcomes
and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Coverage for contraceptives will mean that 9 million Canadians of reproductive age will have better
access to contraception and reproductive autonomy, reducing the risk of unintended pregnancies
and improving their ability to plan for the future. Cost has consistently been identified as the single
most important barrier to access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women
and gender diverse Canadians. Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a
comprehensive suite of contraceptive drugs and devices.
Diabetes is a complex disease that has no cure but can be treated with safe and effective
medications. One in four Canadians with diabetes have reported not following their treatment plan
due to cost.
Improving access to diabetes medications will help improve the health of 3.7 million Canadians
living with diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as
blindness or amputations.
Over the past year, the Government of Canada has delivered on key actions to provide better and
more accessible health care in Canada. Financial barriers should not be an impediment to
accessing safe and effective prescription drugs and related products. We are determined to work
towards a plan where Canadians can obtain their medication as prescribed, regardless of where
they live or their ability to pay.
The Bill demonstrates the Government of Canada’s commitment to consulting widely about the
way forward and working with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders to improve the accessibility, affordability and appropriate use of pharmaceutical
products, by reducing financial barriers and contributing to physical and mental health and well-
being.
Bill C-64 also provides that the new Canadian Drug Agency work towards the development of a
national formulary, develop a national bulk purchasing strategy, and support the publication of a
pan- Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of prescription medications.
Together, these elements would form the key next steps towards national universal pharmacare in
Canada. The Minister would further establish a committee of experts to make recommendations on
the operation and financing of national, universal, single-payer pharmacare in Canada.
Bill C-64 proposes a significant change to our heath care landscape, which, together with the
learnings from ongoing initiatives such as the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases and the
Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs initiative with Prince Edward Island, are part of
the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure Canadians can access the medicines they need and
pave the way forward towards the implementation of national universal pharmacare in Canada.
Quotes
“Each and every Canadian should have access to the prescription drugs they need. That’s why
we’re working with our partners towards the first phase of national universal pharmacare. This
important next step will provide universal access to contraception and diabetes medication that
will be transformational in improving health outcomes in Canada.”
The Honourable Mark Holland Minister of Health
Quick Facts
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug
Agency with an investment of over $89.5 million over 5 years, starting in 2024-25. The Agency will
provide the dedicated leadership and coordination needed to make Canada’s drug system more
sustainable and prepared for the future and help Canadians achieve better health outcomes.
On March 22 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years to help increase access to, and the affordability of, effective drugs for rare diseases. Bill C-64
commits to a model for long-term funding, beginning with funding for the National Strategy for
Drugs for Rare Diseases and to be primarily provided through bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories.
PEI residents have saved over $2 million in out-of-pocket costs on more than 230,000 prescriptions
under PEI’s $5 copay program, which was launched in June 2023 and reduced copays for almost
60% of medications regularly used by Island residents. These latest improvements are an important
milestone of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescriptions Drugs (IAAPD) initiative that provides
federal funding to PEI to improve access to prescription drugs and make prescriptions drugs more
affordable for Island residents.
Associated Links
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Contraception
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Diabetes Medications, and Diabetes Device Fund for Devices
and Supplies
Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
Prescription drug insurance coverage
PHARMACARE
The possible impact of the Pharmacare Act on populations with unmet needs: women, low income
households, persons with disabilities, persons with chronic diseases /
KEY FACTS
While the vast majority of Canadians have access to some form of drug coverage, many households
still struggle to afford needed medications.
Patient charges (e.g., premiums, copays, deductibles, and plan maximums) under existing public
and private drug plans present cost barriers for many individuals and households.
Low-income households, women, gender diverse individuals, 2SLGBTQI+ populations, racialized
communities, persons with chronic diseases, and persons with disabilities experience additional
barriers in accessing the drugs they need. These populations tend to experience higher cost-related
non-adherence, which means they are foregoing or reducing doses due to cost.
Factors such as lower wages, poorer access to private coverage through an employer and possibly
greater need for high cost medications have resulted in these populations experiencing high out-of-
pocket costs for the drugs they need.
According to the Canadian Survey on Disabilities, 13% of all persons with disabilities aged 15 years
and over had unmet needs for prescription drug due to cost.
A 2022 report by Statistics Canada found the percentages of people reporting not having
prescription insurance to cover drug costs was higher among immigrants (29%) relative to non-
immigrants (17%) and among racialized persons (29%) relative to non racialized and non-
Indigenous persons (17%).
KEY MESSAGES
No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on the
table. Unfortunately, many are still forced to make this impossible decision.
That is why the Government of Canada continues to work with provinces, territories and
stakeholders to ensure that Canadians have better access to the drugs they need.
Women, gender diverse persons, 2SLGBTQI+ populations, racialized communities, persons with
chronic diseases and persons with disabilities, particularly those in low-income households, often
face barriers to receiving the drugs they need for themselves or their loved ones due to out-of-
pocket costs.
The Pharmacare Act proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal
pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces
and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and
diabetes medications, to help Canadians access the drugs they need, especially those who face
the greatest barriers.
This legislation is an important step forward to improve health equity, affordability, and outcomes
and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Coverage for contraceptives will mean that 9 million Canadians of reproductive age will have better
access to contraception and reproductive autonomy, reducing the risk of unintended pregnancies
and improving their ability to plan for the future. Cost has consistently been identified as the single
most important barrier to access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women
and gender diverse Canadians. Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a suite of
contraceptive drugs and devices.
Diabetes is a complex disease that has no cure but can be treated with safe and effective
medications. One in four Canadians with diabetes have reported not following their treatment plan
due to cost. Improving access to diabetes medications will help improve the health of 3.7 million
Canadians living with diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications
such as blindness or amputations.
BACKGROUND
Women and gender diverse people, seniors, persons with disabilities, persons with chronic
diseases, 2SLGBTQI+ populations, racialized communities, and those living in rural or remote
communities are disproportionality impacted by Canada’s current patchwork approach to drug
coverage, especially if they are from a low-income household.
Historically, these populations have demonstrated higher rates of cost-related non-adherence. This
means they are taking less medication than prescribed because of cost, such as delaying or failing
to fill prescriptions, or skipping or lowering medication doses.
Factors associated with cost-related non-adherence include high out-of-pocket drug spending, low
income or financial flexibility, lack of drug insurance, younger age, and poorer health.
A 2022 report by Statistics Canada looking at the impact of the pandemic on pharmaceutical
access and use found the percentages of people reporting not having prescription insurance to
cover drug costs was higher among immigrants (29%) relative to non-immigrants (17%) and among
racialized persons (29%) relative to non racialized and non-Indigenous persons (17%).
According to the Canadian Survey on Disabilities, 13% of all persons with disabilities aged 15 years
and over had unmet needs for prescription drug due to cost. Unmet need for an aid, device, and/or
prescription drug to cost was higher among those of working age (28.6%) than over the age of 65, as
well as among those with more severe disabilities (37.4%).
Overall, individuals with precarious work (i.e., part-time employment) tend to not have access to
private drug coverage through their employer. As a result, they may have to pay for prescription
drugs 100% out-of-pocket if they are not eligible for a public drug plan (most public plans support
catastrophic costs and select populations like seniors and children). Furthermore, patient charges
(e.g., premiums, copays, deductibles, and plan maximums) under existing public and private plans
can result in high out-of-pocket costs that may make the drugs they need inaccessible.
Contraception
Some populations are disproportionally affected by the lack of coverage. Women, people with low
incomes and young people, all of whom are all more likely to work in part-time or contract
positions, often lack access to private coverage. One study found that women and girls from lower-
income households are more likely to use less-effective contraceptive methods or no contraceptive
method.
Diabetes
Diabetes disproportionately affects certain populations within Canada. Evidence shows that First
Nations and Métis people, and people of African, East Asian and South Asian ethnic backgrounds
have higher rates of Type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
PHARMACARE
Impact of the Pharmacare Act on Indigenous Peoples, governments and organizations
KEY FACTS
The Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program provides coverage for a range of medically
necessary benefits, including comprehensive drug coverage, to over 900,000 registered First
Nations and recognized Inuit.
The Pharmacare Act does not affect the NIHB program or the amount of funding provided to
Indigenous governments and organizations.
NIHB recipients will continue to have access to the robust drug coverage.
Bill C-64 commits the Government of Canada to engage and collaborate with Indigenous Peoples
on the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to working together with Indigenous partners and
communities across the country to advance priorities that promote and protect health, including
drug coverage.
The Pharmacare Act will not affect the Non-Insured Health Benefits program delivered by
Indigenous Services Canada. Recipients will continue to have access to the robust drug coverage.
All the contraception and diabetes medications listed for discussion with provinces and territories
are included on the NIHB formulary and are provided at no cost to NIHB recipients.
The Government of Canada recognizes the unique relationships that provinces and territories have
with Indigenous Peoples and representative organizations within each jurisdiction. Therefore, we
will work with provinces and territories to ensure that an approach for meaningful engagement with
Indigenous Peoples and representative organizations is appropriately reflected in bilateral
agreements.
BACKGROUND
First Nations and Inuit that receive drug coverage through the Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB)
will experience no changes from the bill. Non-status, urban and off-reserve First Nations and Métis
are covered through PT and/or private plans, like all Canadians. Individuals could benefit from the
universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications, as
outlined in Bill C-64.
Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program
The Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program provides coverage for a range of medically
necessary benefits to over 900,000 registered First Nations and recognized Inuit. All registered First
Nations and recognized Inuit are eligible for NIHB benefits, regardless of location or income level,
unless otherwise covered under a separate agreement with federal or provincial governments, or
through a separate self-government agreement.
As the NIHB program is provided only to First Nations and Inuit registered under the Indian Act and
their children under 18 months, the program captures around half with an Indigenous identity.
The NIHB program covers a comprehensive range of prescription drugs and over-the-counter
medications listed on the NIHB Drug Benefit List (DBL). Prescription and over-the-counter
medications are evidence-based and covered in accordance with program policies.
In 2021 to 2022, the NIHB program paid for pharmacy claims made by a total of 528,541 First
Nations and Inuit clients. The total spent for these claims was $576.3 million or 34.0% of total NIHB
expenditures. Of all the NIHB program benefits, the pharmacy benefit is the benefit most utilized by
clients and accounts for the second largest share of expenditures.
PHARMACARE
The federal role in implementing national pharmacare, in light of provincial and territorial (PT)
jurisdiction over health care delivery.
KEY FACTS
The management of prescription drugs is a shared responsibility in Canada.
The federal government is responsible for assessing the safety, efficacy and quality of drugs before
authorizing them for sale in Canada.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for the delivery of health care for their
residents, including determining which drugs are covered under government-run public plans,
under what conditions this coverage is offered, and which populations are eligible for this coverage.
Bill C-64 outlines the Government of Canada’s plan to ensure universal, single-payer coverage for a
range of contraception and diabetes medications. This includes the Government of Canada’s
intention to establish a fund for diabetes devices to help support Canadians manage and monitor
their diabetes and administer their medication.
The Government of Canada will work with willing provinces and territories to implement this
coverage through bilateral agreements.
KEY MESSAGES
Bill C-64 recognizes and emphasises the role of the provinces and territories in health care delivery
in Canada and sets out a collaborative, principles based, step-by-step path towards national
universal pharmacare.
The Bill outlines the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and territories (PTs) to
provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
In order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage for contraception and
diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made between the Government of
Canada and a willing province or territory.
The Bill demonstrates the Government of Canada’s commitment to consulting widely about the
way forward and working with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders.
BACKGROUND
PT Drug Plans
In total, there are more than 100 government-run drug coverage plans in Canada. These plans are
based on a variety of distinct coverage models (e.g., comprehensive coverage for low-income
seniors, income-based safety net coverage, voluntary premium-based coverage). There is generally
good alignment with regard to the list of drugs eligible for coverage across public drug plans
country-wide. But how much Canadians are required to pay out-of-pocket under these plans varies
significantly within and between jurisdictions.
PTs provide coverage with minimal/no patient charges for certain vulnerable groups, such as lower-
income seniors and people on social assistance. All provinces (but none of the territories) also have
a form of safety net coverage to protect residents from high (“catastrophic”) drug costs relative to
income. These “catastrophic” plans have deductibles (3-20% of household income) or premiums.
While protective against truly catastrophic costs, they offer little support for routine drug expenses.
Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs in Prince Edward Island
Since 2021, the federal government has been working with the Government of Prince Edward Island
(PEI) on a demonstration initiative to improve affordable access to medications for Island residents
with an investment of $35 million. Through this partnership, PEI has improved affordability by
reducing copays to $5 for some common medications, expanded eligibility to their High Cost Drug
Program by removing barriers for those in the lowest income brackets and making the program
available to all income levels, and adjusting the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the cap on the
amount of money a household spends on eligible medications. The province has also expanded
access to 85 new medications and removed administrative barriers to 23 medications.
PEI reached out to the federal government to signal its interest in collaborating to improve
accessibility and affordability of their public drugs plans. At the time, PEI’s formulary listed the
lowest number of drugs in the country, resulting in less access to drugs for Islanders compared to
the rest of Canada. Island residents also faced some of Canada’s highest co-pays and deductibles
for drugs covered on their public plans. The province was also already in the process of reviewing its
public drug plans to determine how best to simplify its complex set of plans to make them more
affordable and comparable to other provinces.
Federal Drug Coverage
The federal government provides drug coverage with minimal/no patient charges to approximately
1.2 million Canadians who are part of selected federal populations (i.e., registered First Nations
and recognized Inuit populations, federal inmates, members of the Canadian forces, veterans,
resettled refugees and refugee claimants).
The largest federal drug plan is part of the Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program run by
Indigenous Services Canada, which provides over 900,000 registered First Nations and recognized
Inuit with coverage for a range of medical services not covered by other plans and programs. The
NIHB drug plan provides beneficiaries with coverage for a comprehensive list of drugs (including
essential medicines) with no deductibles or copayments.
PHARMACARE
Fiscal implications of an Act respecting pharmacare
KEY FACTS
Bill C-64 outlines the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and territories (PTs) to
provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
This includes the Government of Canada’s intention to establish a fund for diabetes devices to help
support Canadians manage and monitor their diabetes and administer their medication.
Federal funding to provinces and territories for the provision of universal, single payer coverage for a
range of contraception and diabetes medications will be provided through bilateral agreements.
The Bill also commits the Government of Canada to maintaining long-term funding for the
provinces, territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of
pharmaceutical products, beginning with those for rare diseases.
Budget 2024 includes a commitment of $1.5 billion over 5 years to support the launch of national
pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes medications.
KEY MESSAGES
When Canadians do not fill their prescriptions for financial reasons, their health may worsen, which
can lead to increased use of the health care system and increased health care costs.
The Pharmacare Act proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal
pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces
and territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and
diabetes medications, to help Canadians access the drugs they need.
In order to receive federal funding to provide universal, single-payer coverage for contraception and
diabetes medications, a bilateral agreement would need to be made between the Government of
Canada and a willing province or territory. The intent of this funding would be to enhance, rather
than replace, existing PT spending on public drug benefit programs as set out in Bill C-64.
All costing will be contingent on the outcome of discussions with provinces and territories,
beginning with the provision of universal, single payer for a range of contraception and diabetes
medications as identified in the lists provided in the backgrounders to the news release.
The Bill also commits to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces, territories and Indigenous
peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical products, beginning with
those for rare diseases.
To help carry out this work, in Budget 2024 the Government of Canada announced $1.5 billion over
5 years to support the launch of national pharmacare and coverage for contraception and diabetes
medications.
This Bill represents a major milestone for the Government of Canada, confirming its commitment to
work with provinces, territories, Indigenous Peoples and other partners towards a universal national
pharmacare program.
BACKGROUND
Estimates for the cost of implementing national universal pharmacare vary. Factors influencing the
incremental public cost include the scope of drugs covered, the magnitude of cost-sharing with
patients (i.e. premiums, deductibles, copays) and the degree of cost-shifting from private to public
payers.
The 2019 Hoskins report estimated the cost to implement universal single-payer public
pharmacare would be $3.5 billion in 2022 (for an initial list of approximately 125 drugs), rising to
$15.3 billion at full implementation in 2027 (for a comprehensive national formulary of
approximately 900 drugs).
Contraception
Studies have demonstrated that publicly funded no-cost universal contraception can result in
public cost savings. Evidence from the University of British Columbia (BC) estimated that no-cost
contraception has the potential to save the BC health care system approximately $27 million per
year.
Diabetes
Uncontrolled diabetes can have very serious short and long-term health impacts and represents a
burden to individuals, families, and Canadian society. High and unnecessary costs are incurred
from lost productivity and elevated health-care system use due to diabetes and its complications,
including heart attack, stroke, kidney failure, blindness and amputation. The full cost of diabetes to
the healthcare system in 2018 is estimated to be around $27 billion and could exceed $39 billion by
2028.
Federal Investments in Pharmacare
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced the creation of the Canadian Drug
Agency (CDA). The CDA will be built from the existing Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories (PTs). The Government of
Canada is investing $89.5 million over five years to establish the CDA.
The CDA will incorporate and expand on CADTH's expertise in the pharmaceutical sector, including
its strong leadership and technical proficiency. The CDA will build on CADTH's existing mandate
and functions (health technology assessment, post-market safety and effectiveness) and expand
them to include new work streams including:
Improving the appropriate prescribing and use of medications, for better patient health and to
support system sustainability;
Increasing pan-Canadian data collection and expanding access to drug and treatment data,
including real-world evidence data, to better support patients, inform health decisions and enable
robust system data analytics; and
Reducing drug system duplication and lack of coordination that causes expensive inefficiencies
and pressures.
The Government will work with CADTH and PTs to develop the CDA. Once the CDA is operational, it
will take on a greater role in the drug system to ensure Canadians can have better health outcomes
and access the medications they need now and into the future.
In March 2023, the Minister of Health announced the launch of the first phase of the national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years, to
improve access to treatments for people living with a rare disease. As part of this first phase, the
Government of Canada will provide up to:
$1.4 billion over three years to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements.
$33 million over three years to Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program
to support eligible First Nations and Inuit clients with rare diseases.
$20 million over three years to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health and the
Canadian Institute for Health Information to improve the collection and use of evidence to support
decision-making.
$32 million over five years to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance a rare disease
research agenda
$16 million over three years to support the establishment of national governance structures, such
as a Health Canada secretariat and a stakeholder Implementation Advisory Group.
PHARMACARE
National formulary and national bulk purchasing strategy
KEY FACTS
Bill C-64 outlines next steps toward the development of a national formulary and a national bulk
purchasing strategy, both of which will serve as important foundational elements of national
pharmacare.
A ‘formulary’ is a list of drugs and related products that are eligible for coverage under a drug plan.
A national formulary would outline the scope of prescription drugs and related products Canadians
should have access to under national universal pharmacare and would inform work toward a bulk
purchasing strategy.
Through the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA), provinces and territories have already
realized benefits from coordinated negotiations to achieve greater value for publicly funded drug
programs and patients.
The Minister must request that the CDA prepare a preliminary list of prescription drugs and related
products to inform the development of a national formulary and collaborate with partners and
stakeholders to develop a national bulk purchasing strategy aligned with the principles set out in
the Pharmacare Act.
KEY MESSAGES
A national formulary and a national bulk purchasing strategy for prescription drugs and related
products will serve as important foundational elements of national pharmacare.
To that end, the Bill C-64 sets out that the Minister of Health must request that the Canadian Drug
Agency (CDA) prepare a preliminary list of prescription drugs and related products to inform the
development of a national formulary. The Minister must also request that the CDA develop a
national bulk purchasing strategy.
National Formulary
Bill C-64 describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and territories to
provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
A preliminary list of these two groups of medications has been prepared and will form an important
part of a national formulary once it is developed by the Canadian Drug Agency.
National Bulk Purchasing Strategy
The benefits of bulk purchasing have already been shown in Canada by the pan-Canadian
Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) since 2010. As of April 1, 2023 savings from pCPA activities to
participating public drug plans are estimated to be $3.89 Billion annually.
A national bulk purchasing strategy developed by the Canadian Drug Agency, in collaboration with
partners and stakeholders, would build from the existing work of the pCPA. Once subsequently
agreed with partners and implemented, this strategy could further help lower the prices and
increase the availability of prescription drugs and related products that will be covered under
pharmacare agreements.
BACKGROUND
In 2019, the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric
Hoskins, recommended the implementation of universal national pharmacare. The Council
proposed coverage be phased-in starting with a list of essential medicines to be expanded over
time to become a comprehensive drug list (national formulary).
Guided by the Council’s work, Budget 2019 announced funding for a number of foundational steps
toward national pharmacare, including the development of a national formulary. Subsequently,
Budget 2022 committed to continue progress toward national pharmacare by tabling a Pharmacare
Act and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national formulary of essential
medicines and a bulk purchasing plan.
Preliminary work toward a national formulary has been completed. In June 2022, a multidisciplinary
advisory panel convened by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in Health (CADTH) at
the request of Health Canada recommended principles and a process for developing a national
formulary.
As a test case for its proposed process, the panel also developed a sample list of commonly
prescribed drugs and related products for three therapeutic areas with a high volume of drug use in
Canada: cardiovascular disease, diabetes and mental illness.
The Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare suggested that with national
pharmacare, estimated system-wide savings would be modest at first ($0.3 billion in 2022) rising to
almost $5 billion annually once pharmacare is fully implemented with a comprehensive formulary.
The Parliamentary Budgeting Officer, in their 2023 report on the cost of single-payer universal
pharmacare, estimate that the price of all existing drugs under a common formulary could be
negotiated down to the current lowest observable price in Canada. This contributes to their
projected economy-wide savings of up to $2.2 billion.
PHARMACARE
Anticipated response from stakeholders, including Indigenous Peoples
KEY FACTS
Stakeholders want to see progress on national pharmacare, but have differing visions of the end
state.
In general, patients, health care professionals, and labour organizations are supportive of a
“medicare” (public single-payer) approach, while the insurance and pharmaceutical industries
advocate a “fill the gaps” (mixed-payer) approach that would extend public coverage to those who
need it most while maintaining existing private plans.
The majority of stakeholders that envision a “medicare” approach have expressed support for Bill
C-64 given the provision outlining the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and
territories (PTs) to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and
diabetes medications.
Pharmacy stakeholders have expressed concern on implementing single-payer public coverage and
how that might impact their dispensing fees as well as the potential for disruptions in their ability to
provide professional services to patients/clients who are switching from private to public coverage
for these medications.
A phased approach to implementation of coverage improvements is generally supported by all
stakeholders.
There have been no new pharmacare statements from Indigenous groups since 2019. The last
known positions taken by Indigenous peoples or organisations include expressed interest in
continuing a dialogue on national pharmacare by Indigenous participants during engagement
conducted by the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare (the Advisory
Council), chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. Additionally, in 2019, the Assembly of First Nations made a
public statement that was not supportive of national pharmacare, as it infringes upon their
Medicine Chest Treaty rights. Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami and Métis National Council have not identified
pharmacare as a priority. The Government of Canada provides drug coverage for registered First
Nations and recognized Inuit through its Non-Insured Health Benefits (NIHB) Program. Changes to
that program are not being proposed under this legislation.
KEY MESSAGES
The Bill demonstrates the Government of Canada’s commitment to consulting widely about the
way forward and working with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders.
Organizations representing patients (Diabetes Canada, Heart and Stroke Foundation), health care
professionals (Canadian Medical Association) and labour organizations (Canadian Labour
Congress) have expressed general support for Bill C-64 due to the provision outlining the
Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces and territories (PTs) to provide universal,
single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and diabetes medications.
We believe all stakeholders, regardless of their preferred model of pharmacare, agree on the
importance of improving the affordability, accessibility and appropriate use of prescription drugs
for all Canadians, as reflected in the four principles outlined in the Bill.
The Government of Canada will continue to maintain open and transparent communication with all
stakeholders as the legislation moves forward.
BACKGROUND
Organizations representing patients (Diabetes Canada, Heart and Stroke Foundation), health care
professionals (Canadian Medical Association) and labour organizations (Canadian Labour
Congress) have consistently expressed their support for the recommendations of a universal,
single-payer, public model as outlined in the 2019 report by the Advisory Council. Therefore, these
groups have expressed general support for Bill C-64 given reference to universal, single-payer
coverage for a range of contraception and diabetes medications.
Most pharmaceutical and insurance industry groups, which advocate for a “fill the gaps” (mixed-
payer) approach, have not expressed support of the Bill given reference to universal, single-payer
coverage for a range of contraception and diabetes medications.
Industry groups such as Canadian Generic Pharmaceutical Association (CGPA) and Biosimilars
Canada have taken a more neutral position as they seek to learn more about the Government of
Canada’s approach to implementation, particularly related to the role of generic and biosimilar
medicines in the context of cost-savings.
During the Advisory Council’s engagement with Indigenous partners, participants expressed an
interest in continuing a dialogue on national pharmacare. In July 2019, the Assembly of First
Nations made a public statement that was not supportive of national pharmacare, as it infringes
upon their Medicine Chest Treaty rights, and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami and Métis National Council have
not identified pharmacare as a priority.
PHARMACARE
Uninsured and underinsured Canadians
KEY FACTS
Millions of Canadians are underinsured. In 2021, Statistics Canada found that more than one in
every five (21%) adults in Canada reported not having the insurance they needed to cover
prescription drug costs.
Although all provinces have catastrophic drug plans, deductibles under these plans can be up to
20% of net family income. In many cases, Canadians will never reach the deductible, leaving them
without support for their drug costs.
Statistics Canada found that in 2021 close to one in five (18%) Canadians spent $500 or more out of
pocket for their prescription medication and one in ten (9%) reported not adhering to their
prescription medication because of costs.
This can have serious consequences for individuals and their families, and result in additional costs
to the health care system.
KEY MESSAGES
No Canadian should be in a position where they must choose between the prescription drugs they
need for their health and well-being and putting food on the table.
Underinsurance can have serious consequences. Many Canadians with high out-of-pocket
medication costs report foregoing essential needs, such as food and heat, or not adhering to their
prescriptions due to costs.
When people do not take their prescription drugs the way they are supposed to, their health can
suffer. This results in serious consequences for the individual and their household, and
unnecessary costs to the health care system as patients are more likely to visit an emergency room
or be admitted to hospital.
The Pharmacare Act proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national universal
pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with provinces
and territories to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception and
diabetes medications, to help Canadians access the drugs they need, especially those who face
the greatest barriers.
This legislation is an important step forward to improve health equity, affordability, and outcomes
and has the potential of long-term savings to the health care system.
Coverage for contraceptives will mean that 9 million Canadians of reproductive age will have better
access to contraception and reproductive autonomy, reducing the risk of unintended pregnancies
and improving their ability to plan for the future. Cost has consistently been identified as the single
most important barrier to access to these medications and the cost is unevenly borne by women
and gender diverse Canadians. Bill C-64 will ensure that Canadians will have access to a suite of
contraceptive drugs and devices.
Diabetes is a complex disease that has no cure but can be treated with safe and effective
medications. One in four Canadians with diabetes have reported not following their treatment plan
due to cost. Improving access to diabetes medications will help improve the health of 3.7 million
Canadians living with diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications
such as blindness or amputations.
BACKGROUND
When Medicare was first introduced, prescription drugs outside of hospital cost less and played a
smaller role in health care. But today, prescription drugs are a central part of our health, helping to
control chronic conditions, treat temporary ones, and aid in overall health and well-being.
Outside of hospital, prescription drug coverage comes from a mix of private insurance, out-of-
pocket cash payments, and various provincial programs.
Although most Canadians have some form of drug coverage, this does not mean that those with
insurance have access to the prescription drugs they need. In 2021, Statistics Canada found that
more than one in every five (21%) adults in Canada reported not having the insurance they needed
to cover prescription drug costs.
All provinces have drug coverage to protect Canadians from catastrophic drug costs, but
deductibles under these plans can range from 0 to 20% of net family income. In many cases,
Canadians will never reach the deductible, leaving them without support for their drug costs.
Lower-income Canadians make up a disproportionate share of the underinsured. While most
provinces have put in place drug coverage for those accessing social assistance benefits, a gap
persists. Many lower-income households that do not qualify for social assistance continue to
struggle with out-of-pocket prescription drug costs. Underinsurance can be a particular concern for
young adults who ‘age-out’ of their parent’s private insurance, but do not have their own form of
private coverage.
Statistics Canada found that in 2021 close to one in five (18%) Canadians spent $500 or more out of
pocket for their prescription medication and one in ten (9%) reported not adhering to their
prescription medication because of costs. This includes delaying filling prescriptions or skipping
doses to contain costs.
Contraception
Cost has been identified by Canadian contraceptive care providers as the single most important
barrier to access to these medications. Oral contraceptives cost approximately $25 per unit, or
$300 per year. Intrauterine Devices (IUDs), which are effective for five years, cost approximately up
to $500 per unit.
Cost can discourage people both from accessing contraception, and from choosing more effective
methods of contraception with a higher upfront cost. For example, oral contraceptives have a
typical use failure rate of 9% compared to 0.20% for IUDs. Not having affordable access to effective
contraception can increase the risk of unintended pregnancies, which can impact life plans such
as going to school and advancing in one's career.
Diabetes
In 2015, 25% of Canadians with diabetes indicated following their treatments were affected by
cost, in some cases rationing medications to save money. Uncontrolled diabetes can have very
serious short and long-term health impacts and represents a burden to individuals, families, and
Canadian society. High and unnecessary costs are incurred from lost productivity and elevated
health-care system use due to diabetes and its complications, including heart attack, stroke,
kidney failure, blindness and amputation.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening. With
few or no treatment options, available treatments can be high-cost, which poses significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public
and private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are
often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need through government drug
plans, through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Many drugs for rare diseases are very
expensive and patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
KEY MESSAGES
On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three
years.
We are implementing this Strategy by working with provinces and territories towards the
development of bilateral agreements. Funding for the bilateral agreements will be available April 1,
2024 and run until March 31, 2027.
These bilateral agreements will help increase access and improve affordability of effective drugs for
rare diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada.
Further, funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Information (CIHI) and Canadian Agency for
Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) is improving the collection and use of evidence to
support decision-making.
Funding to the Canadian Institutes for Health Research (CIHR) is advancing rare disease research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON PROGRESS OF BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
Discussions with provinces and territories are underway to jointly determine a small set of new and
emerging drugs, which will be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across Canada, for the
benefit of patients.
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027.
Funding has also gone to support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases,
through Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
IF PRESSED ON HOW 2023-24 BILATERAL AGREEMENT FUNDS HAVE BEEN SPENT
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC’S PARTICIPATION IN THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
Our Government is working with all provinces and territories to help increase access to, and
affordability of, promising and effective drugs for rare diseases to improve the health of patients
across Canada, while also providing flexibility for jurisdictions to address their own unique
circumstances.
All provinces and territories have been invited to engage all steps in the implementation of the
Strategy, including jointly determining a small set of new and emerging drugs that would be cost-
shared and covered in a consistent way.
They have also been engaged to share in the other pillars of the Strategy: the benefits of
collaborative approaches to the collection and use of evidence and innovation and research.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS ON STAKEHOLDER CONSULTATION THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION
ADVISORY GROUP
An Implementation Advisory Group was launched in October 2023 to support the implementation
of the National Strategy from a patient-centered perspective and to help improve consistent access
and affordability of effective drugs for rare diseases across the country.
The Implementation Advisory Group is comprised of individuals drawn from a range of perspectives
and roles, including patients, caregivers, clinicians, and industry.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING TO HEALTH SYSTEM PARTNERS
We are working with our partners, including the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in
Health (CADTH), the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI), and the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR) to focus on collection and use of evidence to support decision making
and to advance rare disease research.
For example, CADTH’s new newborn screening expert panel will develop guidance to foster greater
consistency and timelier access to treatments.
CIHR is providing $20M over 5 years to the Maternal Infant Child and Youth Research Network
(MICYRN) to build a National Pediatric Rare Disease Clinical Trials and Treatment Network.
IF PRESSED ON WHEN PATIENTS WILL SEE BENEFITS FROM THE STRATEGY
Funding for the bilateral agreements with willing provinces and territories will start on April 1, 2024
and run for three years until March 31, 2027
Funding to health system partners has already begun, and is now helping to improve the collection
and use of evidence to support decision-making, and advancing rare disease research and
treatment networks.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE STRATEGY IS ALIGNED WITH THE PHARMACARE ACT
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards national universal
pharmacare and is a concrete expression of the principles set out in the pharmacare bill.
Through the National Strategy we are addressing the issue of access and universal coverage by
addressing the issue of the “postal code lottery” for DRD identified in national consultations. We
are also focusing on affordability and high costs of DRD that leave patients financially vulnerable,
and addressing appropriate use through supporting improvements in the use and generation of real
world evidence.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are
often genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the
world. They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a
handful of individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare
disease.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can be high-cost. Treatments for rare diseases are
often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of
patients, small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with Provinces and Territories as an active member of the
pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying
power to negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare
diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug
plans, through private drug plans, or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive,
patients generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical
trials, or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where
criteria are met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to
drugs that are unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are
for the treatment of rare diseases.
LAUNCH OF THE FIRST PHASE OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY FOR DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
The Minister of Health announced the launch of the first phase of the National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases on March 22, 2023, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years, to
improve access to treatments for people living with a rare disease.
As part of this first phase, the Government of Canada will provide up to $1.4 billion over three years
to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements. This federal investment will increase
access to safe and effective drugs for Canadians with rare diseases. Provinces and territories will
be able to add new drugs to their formularies and increase coverage of existing drugs. The new
funding will also enable provinces and territories to improve screening and diagnostics so that
patients with a rare disease have a better chance of getting access to effective treatments at the
right time, which can mean significantly better health and overall quality of life for patients and their
families.
In addition, the Government of Canada is providing up to $33 million over three years to Indigenous
Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program to support eligible First Nations and Inuit
clients with rare diseases.
The Government of Canada is also making key investments of up to $68 million to support
collaborative governance, data infrastructure, and research for drugs for rare diseases. $20 million
over three years is being provided to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health and
the Canadian Institute for Health Information to improve the collection and use of evidence to
support decision-making. The Canadian Institutes of Health Research are receiving $32 million over
five years to advance a rare disease research agenda with a focus on developing better diagnostic
tools and establishing a robust Canadian rare disease clinical trials network. $16 million over three
years, starting in 2023, is being invested to support the establishment of national governance
structures, such as a Health Canada secretariat and a stakeholder Implementation Advisory Group.
The Government of Canada will continue working with provinces and territories, health system
partners, and stakeholders, including patients, families, and clinicians, to develop future actions
based on lessons learned as part of these actions included in the first phase of the Strategy.
NATIONAL PHARMACARE LEGISLATION
The 2019 Final Report of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
recommended for the Canadian government to develop a formal National Strategy for Drugs for
Rare Diseases.
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on a number of foundational
elements of national pharmacare, including the creation of the National Strategy, as well as the
development of a national formulary, and the creation of the Canadian Drug Agency.
The National Strategy is intended to be part of continuing progress towards a national universal
pharmacare program. It continues to be a crucial part of the government’s commitment to long-
term funding to improve the accessibility and affordability of drugs.
Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare, commits to maintaining long-term funding for provinces,
territories and Indigenous Peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with the funding announced for the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases.
PAN-CANADIAN APPROPRIATE USE STRATEGY
ISSUE
In Canada, over 750 million prescriptions worth $38.9B are written annually. However, there is no
coordinated national approach to provide guidance and support to prescribers and patients on
their safe and effective use. A growing body of evidence suggests that prescribing is often
suboptimal, threatening patient safety and leading to significant negative health, social, and
financial impacts on patients and the health system. This issue disproportionally impacts
vulnerable populations (e.g., seniors, racialized communities).
Nearly 2 million seniors in Canada regularly take at least one potentially inappropriate medication
that can lead to harms such as falls, memory problems, hospitalizations or even death. It is
estimated that annually $419 million is spent in direct costs for these medications, which rises to
$1.4 billion if the health care costs to treat harmful effects are included.
Broad engagement with provinces, territories, health organizations, and system partners to develop
a plan for the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) identified the need to enhance the appropriate use of
pharmaceuticals to improve safety, health outcomes and support prescribers and patients.
Developing a coordinated approach to address appropriate use, one that better supports patients
and prescribers in choosing the best treatments for their care, is an important part of the new
pharmacare legislation. The bill commits the Minister of Health to publishing a pan-Canadian
strategy for appropriate use and to requesting the Canadian Drug Agency report on its progress.
KEY MESSAGES
Almost $38.9 billion worth of prescriptions are written annually in Canada and yet patients
outcomes are not optimal. It is time for us to develop a pan-Canadian appropriate use strategy to
help ensure medications bring true improvements to patient health and safety, and limiting
additional burdens to patients and costs to the health care system.
Provinces and territories, health partners and patients agree that addressing appropriate
prescribing and use should be a focus for the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA). The Strategy will
improve supports for prescribers and patients to make informed decisions regarding optimal
treatments for their care.
In March 2023, we started moving forward with this work by establishing an Appropriate Use
Advisory Committee to provide guidance and recommendations for the development of the
Strategy and eventual program for a CDA. The Committee’s final report and recommendations are
expected this Spring.
A coordinated, national approach to appropriate use, guided by the CDA, is an important element
of moving forward with national pharmacare by supporting the prescribing and use of medications
to improve the health of people living in Canada.
BACKGROUND
Appropriate Use In Canada
Improving access to pharmaceuticals and the appropriate use of drugs has been a shared priority
of federal, provincial and territorial governments since 2016. However, there is currently no
coordinated strategy or approach for the design, implementation or evaluation of initiatives, and no
centralized organization promoting its importance in patient health and safety. Instead,
jurisdictions, pan-Canadian health organizations and non-governmental organizations have
implemented a variety of independent projects. These include:
Academic detailing, one-on-one clinician education, by trained health care professionals, to
provide evidence-based information to improve the appropriate use of medications.
Provincial/territorial prescription drug monitoring programs for controlled prescription drugs such
as opioids to ensure their safe prescribing and use.
Educational tools and resources for patients and prescribers such as doctors, pharmacists, and
nurse practitioners.
Audits and feedback programs for clinicians where they receive personalized information about
their prescribing.
While this patchwork of initiatives demonstrate progress, the lack of a national strategy for the
design, implementation and evaluation of initiatives means their reach and impact is limited and
uncoordinated. This leads to duplication of efforts, gaps in services, misallocation of scare
resources and can accentuate variations in prescribing and use across jurisdictions.
International Comparison
Several Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) countries have
implemented nationally coordinated appropriate use strategies and programs that have effectively
improved health outcomes and delivered cost savings due to hospital avoidance. These include
Australia’s Quality Use of Medications Strategy, the United Kingdom’s National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence, and the Dutch Institute for Rational Use of Medicine in the Netherlands and
others.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
Budget 2018 announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National
Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins.
The Council engaged with Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial, and Indigenous leaders,
health care experts, and stakeholders through regional roundtables, town halls, an online
questionnaire, and written submissions.
On June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the
implementation of national universal pharmacare over several years, including FPT collaboration to
create a new arms-length Canadian Drug Agency (CDA) that would be responsible for providing
guidance on the appropriate use of drugs and monitoring their safe and effective use once on the
market.
The report recommended that the CDA create and implement a national strategy on appropriate
prescribing to support patients and prescribers understand pharmaceutical treatment choices.
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDTAO) was formally established in spring 2021 to work
with provinces and territories (PTs) and stakeholders, conduct analysis, and develop options to
advance a CDA; supported by a $35 million investment (Budget 2019).
The CDATO has received insights from patients, pharmaceutical companies, insurers, prescribers
and academics and many others through over 400 meetings and roundtables.
Enhancing efforts to address appropriate use of medications was one of the priority areas identified
by PTs and stakeholders to improve health outcomes and support system sustainability.
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced its plan to advance with the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency), with appropriate use as one of its
priorities. The Government of Canada is investing $89.5 million over five years to establish the CDA,
in addition to the existing federal funding of $34.2 million annually to support CADTH.
Appropriate Use Advisory Committee
In March 2023, the CDATO established an Appropriate Use Advisory Committee to provide advice
and guidance to the CDATO for the development of a pan-Canadian Appropriate Use Strategy and a
corresponding program for the CDA.
The Advisory Committee is a multidisciplinary group, comprised of representatives from
appropriate use organizations (e.g, Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health,
Choosing Wisely Canada, Canadian Medication Appropriateness and Deprescribing Network)
clinicians, patients, and the public, who bring a diversity of expertise and perspectives to the table.
The committee is chaired by Stephen Samis, the former Deputy Minister for Health and Social
Services for the Yukon.
The Advisory Committee has been mandated to bring together representatives from appropriate
use organizations, clinician and patient communities, and stakeholders, to:
Support the development of a pan-Canadian strategy for appropriate use to provide a common
vision for the design, implementation and evaluation of programs and initiatives.
Advise and provide recommendations on the roles and responsibilities for the CDA appropriate use
program to provide the greatest value and impact to the existing landscape.
Develop a process and identify priority areas to be addressed by the CDA appropriate use
resources.
The Advisory Committee issued an Interim Report in July 2023 with early guidance on the core
components of a pan-Canadian appropriate use strategy and the framework for a CDA appropriate
use program.
The CDATO facilitated consultations on the Interim Report, to hear the perspectives of partners
including, clinicians, patients, industry members, and health system partners. Feedback and
comments will help inform the Advisory Committee’s continued work and final advice and
recommendations.
A final report is expected in Spring 2024.
Pharmacare Legislation
On February 29, 2024, the Government of Canada introduced pharmacare legislation to the House
of Commons that features appropriate use. This legislation requires that the Minister of Health
publish a pan-Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of prescription drugs and related
products within one year of the bill receiving royal ascent. The draft legislation also specifies that
the Minister of Health may request that three years after its publication the CDA prepare a report on
the progress made in advancing the strategy.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
On December 18, 2023, the Government of Canada announced its plan to advance with the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency), built from the Canadian Agency for
Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in partnership with provinces and territories,
featuring an investment of $89.5 million over five years, starting in 2024-25. The CDA will provide
the dedicated leadership and coordination needed to modernize the Canadian pharmaceutical
system, laying a strong foundation to support ongoing growth. The CDA is also featured in Bill C-64,
an Act respecting pharmacare, which signals plans to task the Agency with work on formulary
development, a bulk purchasing strategy, and to support the publication of a pan-Canadian
strategy on the appropriate use of medications.
KEY FACTS
Key reports on the future of the Canadian pharmaceuticals system recommended the creation of a
new national drug agency that would build on existing provincial and territorial successes and take
a coordinated approach to improving system management.
The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office was established in spring 2021 to work with provinces,
territories and key stakeholders on options for a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA); supported by a
Budget 2019 investment of $35 million over four years.
In December 2021, the Prime Minister reinforced the commitment to creating the CDA in the
Minister of Health’s mandate letter, stating the government would “continue engaging with willing
provinces and territories towards national universal pharmacare, while proceeding with a national
strategy on high-cost drugs for rare diseases and advancing the establishment of the Canada [sic]
Drug Agency.”
In March 2022, the Prime Minister elaborated on the mandate of the CDA in the Supply and
Confidence Agreement with the New Democratic Party of Canada, announcing the CDA will
“develop a national formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the
agreement” in 2025. This commitment was reiterated in Budget 2022.
Work to develop a proposal for establishing a CDA has been informed by analysis of the current
pharmaceuticals management system and significant engagement, including over 400 meetings
and roundtables with all provinces and territories, and hundreds of stakeholders such as
healthcare professionals, patient organizations, and industry.
KEY MESSAGES
We are advancing with plans to establish the Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), built from the Canadian
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), in partnership with provinces and territories
and stakeholders. This is supported by an investment of $89.5 million over 5 years, starting in 2024-
25.
The CDA will build on CADTH’s expertise and mandate, establishing a strong foundation to support
evolving system priorities, focusing first on:
Appropriate prescribing and use;
Data and analytics; and
System Coordination.
The CDA will build on CADTH’s existing work to integrate patients and those with lived experience.
The CDA is featured in Bill C-64, an Act respecting pharmacare; the Act provides that the new CDA
work towards the development of a national formulary, develop a national bulk purchasing strategy,
and to support the publication of a pan-Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of
medications.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
The CDA will focus on the system as a whole to address gaps, remove duplication, improve system
coordination and enhance access and equity.
More specifically, the CDA’s core functions will include:
Appropriate Prescribing and Use;
Data and Analytics; and
System Coordination
Through these functions, the CDA will provide the dedicated leadership and capacity that is needed
to implement national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations.
IF PRESSED ON PHARMACARE LEGISLATION
The Government of Canada is committed to working with stakeholders to advance the
implementation of pharmacare. The creation of the CDA will address key system gaps and lay a
strong foundation upon which future pharmacare work can be built, including formulary
development and a bulk purchasing strategy.
We will continue to engage with stakeholders and key partners to establish the CDA so that it is
well-positioned to advance work related to the pharmacare legislation, as required.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS TO DATE
The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories and key
stakeholders to develop a plan to create a CDA.
The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) was established in 2021 to lead this work,
and has since undertaken significant engagement – over 400 meetings and roundtables – with
patients, pharmaceutical companies, insurers, prescribers and academics on a future CDA.
The CDATO has advanced work with key partners to support development of CDA functions.
The Government of Canada will continue to work closely with CADTH and key partners to advance
the establishment of the CDA.
IF PRESSED ON RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
Provincial and territorial healthcare systems, including public drug plans, are facing mounting
pressure, exacerbated by the pandemic.
Our approach will focus on filling gaps, improving access, and system sustainability.
The CDA will respect provincial and territorial jurisdiction and will not duplicate well-performing
functions and organizations.
Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration is the cornerstone of our approach for establishing the
CDA, and we will continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward its launch.
BACKGROUND
Budget Commitments
Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements of
national pharmacare:
Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more consistent
coverage across the country; and,
Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to the
effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support this initiative. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years,
starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases
access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, Budget 2021 and Budget
2022.
On December 18, 2023 the Government of Canada announced approved funding of $89.5 million
over 5 years, beginning in 2024-25, to establish a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA).
The Canadian Drug Agency will be established as a not-for-profit pan-Canadian health organization,
built with, and from, the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) and in
partnership with provinces and territories.
CADTH
CADTH was established in 1989 as an independent pan-Canadian health organization, governed by
a Board of Directors with representation from 7 jurisdictions and non-governmental entities.
CADTH reports directly to the 13 PT Deputy Ministers of Health.
CADTH provides Canada’s health care decision-makers with objective evidence, including health
technology assessments and post-market safety and effectiveness work, support informed
decisions about the optimal use of drugs and medical devices.
CADTH’s 2022-2025 Strategic Plan has supported growth and innovation, promoting innovative
approaches and positioning the organization as a catalyst for system change. Growing capacity
underscored by the recent successful integration of the Post-Market Drug Evaluation (PMDE)
program, formerly situated with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Bill C-64
On February 29, 2024 the Minister of Health introduced Bill C-64, An Act respecting pharmacare
(Pharmacare Act), which proposes the foundational principles for the first phase of national
universal pharmacare in Canada and describes the Government of Canada’s intent to work with
provinces and territories to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a number of contraception
and diabetes medications.
Bill C-64 also provides that the new Canadian Drug Agency work towards the development of a
national formulary, develop a national bulk purchasing strategy, and support the publication of a
pan-Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of prescription medications.
External Perspectives
Media and Public Opinion
Canadians are generally supportive of improving affordable access to prescription drugs but are
also sensitive to cost considerations as government health-related expenses continue to grow,
particularly in the context of COVID-19.
Mainstream media coverage of the pharmaceuticals system focuses primarily on approval of new
treatments, science-based innovation, clinical trail breakthroughs, and accessibility / affordability
of treatments from a human interest perspective.
Media reports are generally factual and link the mandate letter and related federal Budget
announcements. Select media emphasize Quebec’s unique approach to health.
A May 2022 Fraser Institute poll following the federal budget, found that 79% of Canadians support
universal national pharmacare with no costs attached. Support fell by almost half, to 40%, if the
program was to be financed by an increase in the GST.
An October 2020 Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians had to pay for half or
more of their prescription drug costs in the past year. Nearly nine-in-ten Canadians supported the
idea (86%) of an affordable drugs program and more than seven-in-ten (77%) said increasing
coverage should be a high priority for government.
Stakeholders
The stakeholder ecosystem for the pharmaceuticals management system is very large and diverse,
including patients, patient organizations, Indigenous representatives, healthcare professionals,
prescribers, dispensers, scientists and researchers, employers and employees, and innovative and
generic manufacturers. Stakeholder engagement has been neutral to positive, with many signalling
willingness to discuss further collaboration.
Some stakeholders, including brand name manufacturers and unions, have developed written
input to share their perspectives on the mandate and role of a CDA.
Industry emphasizes priorities such as accelerating approvals processes, support for innovation, a
data-driven approach to technology assessment, value analysis, and assessing treatment
outcomes.
Provinces and territories
Through the Council of the Federation, provincial and territorial Premiers publicly and persistently
call on the federal government to increase funding for healthcare through the Canada Health
Transfer (CHT),
Premiers sometimes note pharmaceuticals among the priority areas, including in July 2022.
Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
In recent years, decisions related to system management have been driven by rapidly evolving
system demands, new technologies, and evolving international market factors that have been
challenging to reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and the provisions of the
Canada Health Act.
This has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug
Data, real-world evidence, and analytical capacity
Health outcomes and appropriate use
Negotiations, pricing mechanisms and sustainability
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Contraception
February 29, 2024
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, announced the Government of Canada’s
next step toward national universal pharmacare with the introduction of Bill C-64, An Act respecting
pharmacare, into Parliament, and the intention to provide universal, single-payer coverage for a
range of contraception medications and devices in collaboration with provinces and territories
(PTs).
Contraceptives
Contraception, also known as birth control, is used to prevent pregnancy. In Canada, there are
more than 9 million people of reproductive age, nearly one quarter of the Canadian population.
Contraceptive drugs were chosen as part of this next step of universal pharmacare specifically
because improved access to contraception improves equality. It reduces the risk of unintended
pregnancies and improves reproductive rights.
Cost has been identified by Canadian contraceptive care providers as the single most important
barrier to access to these medications. Oral contraceptives cost approximately $25 per unit, or
$300 per year. Intrauterine Devices (IUDs), which are effective for five years, cost approximately up
to $500 per unit.
Cost can discourage people both from accessing contraception, and from choosing more effective
methods of contraception with a higher upfront cost. For example, oral contraceptives have a
typical use failure rate of 9% compared to 0.20% for IUDs. Not having affordable access to effective
contraception can increase the risk of unintended pregnancies, which can impact life plans such
as going to school and advancing in one’s career.
Some populations are disproportionally affected by the lack of coverage. Women, people with low
incomes and young people, all of whom are all more likely to work in part‑time or contract
positions, often lack access to private coverage. One study found that women and girls from lower-
income households are more likely to use less-effective contraceptive methods or no contraceptive
method.
Although most drug plans list a range of contraceptive products, only a fraction of Canadians are
eligible for prescription birth control at low or no cost through a public drug plan. If they do not have
drug coverage through an employment-based private health benefit plan, Canadians would
typically have access to only a public safety net coverage plan intended to protect residents from
very high drug costs. The high deductibles under these plans (e.g., 3-20% of household income), in
addition to co-payments, mean these plans typically offer little relief for routine drug expenses,
such as contraception.
Studies have demonstrated that publicly funded no-cost universal contraception can result in
public cost savings. Evidence from the University of British Columbia (BC) estimated that no- cost
contraception has the potential to save the BC health care system approximately $27 million per
year.
Types of Contraceptives Being Covered
Today’s announcement will ensure that, following agreement with PTs, people in Canada will have
access to a comprehensive suite of contraceptive drugs and devices to choose from according to
their medical suitability and personal circumstances.
This includes oral contraceptives, copper and hormonal IUDs, injections, implants, rings, and
morning-after pills.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with PTs on providing universal, single-
payer coverage based on the list of contraceptive drugs and devices attached to this backgrounder.
List of contraception to be discussed with provinces and territories for specific coverage
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
Oral birth control pills Alesse 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alesse 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alysena 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Alysena 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Apri 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Apri 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Audrina 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Audrina 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Aviane 21 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Aviane 28 ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.1 mg
Brevicon 0.5/35 (21) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5 mg
Brevicon 0.5/35 (28) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5 mg
Brevicon 1/35 (21) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 1 mg
Brevicon 1/35(28) ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 1 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Drospirenone and Ethinyl Estradiol Tablets 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Freya 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Freya 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Jencycla norethindrone 0.35 mg
Linessa 21 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
desogestrel 0.1/ 0.125/ 0.15 mg
Linessa 28 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
desogestrel 0.1/ 0.125/ 0.15 mg
Marvelon 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Marvelon 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Min-Ovral 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
Levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Min-Ovral 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Mirvala 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Mirvala 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
desogestrel 0.15 mg
Movisse norethindrone 0.35 mg
Mya ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Ovima 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Ovima 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Portia 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Portia 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.15 mg
Synphasic 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5/ 1 mg
Synphasic 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norethindrone 0.5/ 1 mg
Tri-Cira 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Cira 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Jordyna 21 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tri-Jordyna 28 ethinyl estradiol 35 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/ 0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tricira-Lo 21 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
norgestimate 0.18/0.215/ 0.25 mg
Tricira-Lo 28 ethinyl estradiol 25 mcg
Dosage Form Brand Name Generic Name
norgestimate 0.18/ 0.215/ 0.25 mg
Triquilar 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.05/ 0.075/ 0.125 mg
Triquilar 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
levonorgestrel 0.05/ 0.075/ 0.125 mg
Yasmin 21 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Yasmin 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Yaz ethinyl estradiol 20 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Zamine 21 thinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Zamine 28 ethinyl estradiol 30 mcg
drospirenone 3 mg
Copper IUD Flexi-T 300
Flexi-T +300
Flexi-T 380
Liberte UT 380 Short
Liberte UT 380 Standard
Liberte TT 380 Short
Liberte TT 380 Standard
Liberté UT 380 Silver-Copper Standard
Liberté UT 380 Silver-Copper Short
Mona Lisa 10
Mona Lisa 5 Mini
Mona Lisa 5 Standard
Mona Lisa N
Hormonal IUD Kyleena levonorgestrel 19.5 mg
Mirena levonorgestrel 52 mg
Contraceptive Injection Depo-Provera medroxyprogesterone acetate 150 mg
Hormonal Implant Nexplanon etonogestrel 68 mg
Hormonal vaginal ring Haloette etonogestrel / ethinyl
estradiol 11.7 mg / 2.7 mg
Emergency contraceptives Contingency One levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Backup Plan One-Step levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Plan B levonorgestrel 1.5 mg
Backgrounder: Universal Access to Diabetes
Medications, and Diabetes Device Fund for Devices and Supplies
February 29, 2024
Today, the Honourable Mark Holland, Minister of Health, announced the Government of Canada’s
next step toward the first phase of national universal pharmacare with the introduction of Bill C-64,
An Act respecting pharmacare, into Parliament, and the intention to provide universal, single-payer
coverage for a range of diabetes medications in collaboration with willing provinces and territories
(PTs).
In addition, the federal government is announcing its intention to establish a fund to enable work
with PT partners to support Canadians’ access to supplies that diabetics require to manage and
monitor their condition and administer their medication, such as syringes and glucose test strips.
Diabetes medications
Diabetes is one of the most common chronic diseases affecting people living in Canada. Around
3.7 million people in Canada, or 9.4% of the population, live with diagnosed diabetes. The number
of people living with diabetes has doubled over the last decade and is expected to continue to
increase as Canada's population ages and grows.
In 2015, 25% of Canadians with diabetes indicated following their treatments were affected by
cost, in some cases rationing medications to save money. Uncontrolled diabetes can have very
serious short and long-term health impacts and represents a burden to individuals, families, and
Canadian society. High and unnecessary costs are incurred from lost productivity and elevated
health-care system use due to diabetes and its complications, including heart attack, stroke,
kidney failure, blindness and amputation. The full cost of diabetes to the healthcare system in 2018
is estimated to be around $27 billion and could exceed $39 billion by 2028.
Diabetes is a chronic condition that develops when the body either does not produce or effectively
use insulin, which it needs to turn sugar into energy. Diabetes can lead to serious health
complications if not properly managed.
Diabetes disproportionately affects certain populations within Canada. Evidence shows that First
Nations and Métis people, and people of African, East Asian and South Asian ethnic backgrounds
have higher rates of Type 2 diabetes compared to the general population.
There are three major types of diabetes, each with different causes and sometimes different
treatments:
Type 1 diabetes happens when the body stops producing insulin. Type 1 diabetes usually develops
in childhood or early adulthood. About 5 to 10% of people living with diabetes have type 1.
Type 2 diabetes happens when the body does not make enough insulin or does not respond well to
the insulin it makes. People usually receive a diagnosis for Type 2 diabetes after the age of 40, but it
is becoming more common in younger people. About
90% to 95% of people living with diabetes have type 2.
Gestational diabetes is a form of diabetes that develops during pregnancy and disappears after
delivery. Gestational diabetes develops in about 10% of pregnancies.
There is currently no cure for diabetes, but some treatments may help to manage it and improve
quality of life.
Types of Diabetes Medications Being Covered
Today’s announcement would ensure that, following agreement with PTs, diabetics in Canada will
have access to first-line treatments for diabetes that lower blood glucose levels, including:
Insulin, which is used by patients with type 1 and type 2 diabetes. Insulin can cost in the range of
$900-$1,700 per year, depending on the type and dosage required.
Metformin, which is used by patients with type 2 diabetes. Metformin can cost about
$100 per year.
Medications often used in combination with insulin and metformin by patients with type 2 diabetes,
including Sulfonylureas, and SGLT-2 inhibitors. The cost of these medications can range from
approximately $100 to over $1,000 per year.
Existing drug insurance coverage for diabetes medications and supplies varies widely across
Canada. All PTs include many of the commonly-prescribed drugs to treat diabetes on their
formularies although the cost to the patient can vary greatly.
Improving the affordability of these medications will improve the health of Canadians living with
diabetes and reduce the risk of serious life-changing health complications such as blindness or
amputations.
The Government of Canada will be launching discussions with PTs on providing universal, single-
payer coverage based on the list of diabetes drugs attached to this backgrounder.
List of diabetes medications to be discussed with PTs for specific coverage
Drug Class Brand Names Generic Names
Combination Formulations Synjardy Empagliflozin & metformin
Jentadueto Linagliptin & metformin
Komboglyze Saxagliptin & metformin
Insulins Trurapi, Kirsty Aspart biosimilar
Apidra Glulisine
Admelog Lispro biosimilar
Humulin R, Novolin ge Toronto Regular, Human
Entuzity Concentrated Regular, Human
Hypurin Regular Insulin Pure Pork regular insulin
Hypurin Nph Insulin Isophane Pork Insulin Isophane, Pork Pure
Humulin-N, Novolin GE NPH Isophane Human, NPH
Levemir Detemir
Basaglar Glargine biosimilar
Semglee Glargine biosimilar
Humulin 30/70, Novolin 30/70 Reg-Isophane, NPH Human
Insulin Secretagogues Diamicron MR Gliclazide
Glyburide
Biguanides Glucophage Metformin
SGLT2 Inhibitors Forxiga Dapagliflozin
Diabetes devices and supplies
Canadians using insulin require the necessary equipment to administer their medication. This can
include syringes, insulin pens and pen tips, or insulin pumps and supplies such as insertion sets
and insulin cartridges.
People living with diabetes must also closely monitor their blood sugar levels to ensure their sugar
levels are in a safe range, and to adjust their medication as needed. Equipment to monitor sugar
levels can include glucometers, test strips and lancets, as well as flash and continuous glucose
monitoring devices (CGM). Use of CGM or Flash GM devices leads to fewer complications and
reduces long-term costs associated with hospitalization.
These devices and supplies can cost thousands of dollars per year. All PTs offer some form of
coverage or financial assistance for diabetes-related medical devices and supplies but the
programs vary in terms of the support provided and eligibility.
Separate from Bill C-64, the federal government is announcing its intention to establish a fund to
support access to diabetes devices and supplies. Further details regarding this fund will be
provided following discussions with PT partners, who will be essential partners to its roll out.
First Session, Forty-fourth Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II – 1-2 Charles III, 2021-2022-2023-2024
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C- 64
An Act respecting pharmacare
FIRST READING, FEBRUARY 29, 2024
MINISTER OF HEALTH
RECOMMENDATION
Her Excellency the Governor General recommends to the House of Commons the appropriation of
public revenue under the cir- cumstances, in the manner and for the purposes set out in a measure
entitled “An Act respecting pharmacare”.
SUMMARY
This enactment sets out the principles that the Minister of Health is to consider when working
towards the implementation of national universal pharmacare and provides the Minister with the
power to make payments, in certain circumstances, in relation to the coverage of certain
prescription drugs and related products. It also sets out certain powers and obligations of the
Minister — including in relation to the preparation of a list to inform the development of a national
formulary and in relation to the development of a national bulk purchasing strategy — and requires
the Minister to publish a pan-Canadian strategy regarding the appropriate use of prescription drugs
and related products. Finally, it provides for the establishment of a committee of experts to make
certain recommendations.
1st Session, 44th Parliament,
70-71 Elizabeth II – 1-2 Charles III, 2021-2022-2023-2024
HOUSE OF COMMONS OF CANADA
BILL C-64
An Act respecting pharmacare
Preamble
Whereas the Government of Canada recognizes that quality health care, including access to
prescription drugs and related products, is critical to protecting and promoting the health and well-
being of Canadians;
Whereas the Government of Canada plays an important role in ensuring that prescription drugs and
related products are safe, effective and of high quality;
Whereas the Government of Canada acknowledges that when Canadians do not have their
prescriptions 10 filled for financial reasons, their health may worsen, which can lead to increased
use of the health care system and increased health care costs;
Whereas the Government of Canada recognizes the role of the provinces, territories and Indigenous
peoples in the provision of health care, including cover- age for prescription drugs and related
products, and is committed to collaborating and maintaining partnerships with them to support
their efforts to im- prove the accessibility and affordability of prescription drugs and related
products;
Whereas the Government of Canada provides, within federal jurisdiction, health care services,
including coverage for prescription drugs and related products, to certain populations;
Whereas the Government of Canada recognizes that the Advisory Council on the Implementation of
National Pharmacare as well as several studies have recommended establishing universal, single-
payer, public pharmacare in Canada;
Whereas the Government of Canada is committed to continued collaboration with the provinces,
territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and stakeholders on the step-by-step
implementation of national universal pharmacare, which is to be guided by the Canada Health Act
and carried out in accordance with the recommendations of the Advisory
Short Title
Preamble – Sections 1-2
Council on the Implementation of National Pharma- care;
Whereas the Government of Canada recognizes the importance of modernizing the health care
system with standardized health data and digital tools, such 5 as electronic prescribing, to support
better health outcomes and greater efficiency of the health care system;
Whereas the Government of Canada is collaborating with the provinces and territories and other
partners 10 and stakeholders to support the work of the Canadian Drug Agency to improve
coordination within the pharmaceutical system in Canada and better prepare it for the future;
And whereas the Government of Canada has 15 launched the National Strategy for Drugs for Rare
Diseases to improve the accessibility and affordability of those drugs for Canadians;
Now, therefore, His Majesty, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate and House of
Commons of 20 Canada, enacts as follows:
Short Title
Short title
1. This Act may be cited as the Pharmacare Act.
Definitions
Definitions
2. The following definitions apply in this Act.
Indigenous peoples has the meaning assigned by the definition aboriginal peoples of Canada in
subsection 25 35(2) of the Constitution Act, 1982.
Minister means the Minister of Health
pharmacare means a program that provides coverage of prescription drugs and related products.
(pharmaceutical product means a prescription drug or related product that is funded, in whole or in
part, through a pharmacare agreement to which the Government of Canada is a party.
Purpose and Principles
Sections 3-5
Purpose and Principles
Purpose
The purpose of this Act is to guide efforts to improve, for all Canadians, the accessibility and
affordability of prescription drugs and related products, and to support their appropriate use, in
collaboration with the provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders, with the aim of continuing to work toward the implementation of national universal
pharmacare. Its purpose is also to support the development of a national formulary of essential
prescription drugs and related products and to provide for the development a national bulk
purchasing strategy.
Principles
4. The Minister is to consider the following principles and the Canada Health Act when
collaborating with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and stakeholders
with the aim of continuing to work toward the implementation of national universal pharmacare:
a. improve the accessibility of pharmaceutical products, including through their coverage, in a
manner that is more consistent across Canada;
b. improve the affordability of pharmaceutical products, including by reducing financial barriers for
Canadians;
c. support the appropriate use of pharmaceutical products - namely, in a manner that prioritizes
patient safety, optimizes health outcomes and reinforces health system sustainability — in order to
improve the physical and mental health and well-being of Canadians; and
d. provide universal coverage of pharmaceutical products across Canada.
Funding
Funding commitment
5. The Government of Canada commits to maintaining long-term funding for the provinces,
territories and Indigenous peoples to improve the accessibility and affordability of pharmaceutical
products, beginning with those for rare diseases. The funding for provinces and territo- ries must be
provided primarily through agreements with their respective governments.
Funding
Sections 6-7
Payments
6 -1. The Minister may, if the Minister has entered into an agreement with a province or territory to
do so, make payments to the province or territory in order to increase any existing public
pharmacare coverage — and to provide universal, single-payer, first-dollar coverage — for 5 specific
prescription drugs and related products intended for contraception or the treatment of diabetes.
For greater certainty
2. For greater certainty, any agreement referred to in subsection (1) with a province or territory is to
provide for first-dollar coverage to patients.
Payment out of C.R.F.
3. Any amount payable under subsection (1) may be paid by the Minister out of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund at the times and in the manner, and on any terms, that the Minister considers
appropriate.
Minister’s Powers and Obligations
Request for advice
7. The Minister may seek advice from the Canadian Drug Agency on
a. the clinical effectiveness and cost-effectiveness of prescription drugs and related products
compared to other treatment options;
b. the prescription drugs and related products that 20 should be included in prescription drug
coverage plans in Canada and the conditions of that coverage;
c. the collection and analysis of data on prescription drugs and related products;
d. information and recommendations to be provided 25 to health care practitioners and patients on
the appropriate use of prescription drugs and related products; and
e. improvements to be made to the pharmaceutical system, including through greater coordination
between health system partners, patients and other stakeholders.
Minister’s Powers and Obligations
Sections 8-10
National formulary
8- 1. The Minister must, after discussions with the provinces and territories, request that the
Canadian Drug Agency prepare, no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Act
receives royal assent, a list of essential prescription drugs and related products to inform 5 the
development of a national formulary that will establish the scope of prescription drugs and related
products to which Canadians should have access under national universal pharmacare.
Discussions
2. The Minister must, after the list referred to in subsection (1) has been prepared, initiate
discussions based on the list with provinces, territories, Indigenous peoples and other partners and
stakeholders with the aim of continuing to work toward the implementation of national universal
pharmacare.
National bulk purchasing strategy
The Minister must, after discussions with the provinces and territories, request that the Canadian
Drug Agency develop, in collaboration with partners and stakeholders and no later than the first
anniversary of the day on which this Act receives royal assent, a national bulk purchasing strategy
for prescription drugs and related products to support the principles set out in para- graphs 4(a) to
(d).
Appropriate Use Strategy
Publication
10.-1. The Minister must, no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Act receives
royal assent, publish on the website of the Department of Health a pan-Canadian strategy regarding
the appropriate use of prescription drugs and related products.
Progress reports
2. The Minister may, after discussions with the provinces and territories, request that the Canadian
Drug Agency prepare, no later than the third anniversary of the day on which the strategy is
published and no later than every three years following that anniversary, a report on the progress
made in advancing that strategy.
Committee of Experts
Section 11
Committee of Experts
11. -1. The Minister must, no later than 30 days after the day on which this Act receives royal assent,
establish a committee of experts, and provide for its membership, to make recommendations
respecting options for the operation and financing of national, universal, single-payer pharmacare.
Report
2. The committee must, no later than the first anniversary of the day on which this Act receives royal
assent, provide a written report to the Minister setting out its recommendations.
