Created: 2020-09-03T14:10:43.968074
Name: Special_Committee_on_COVID
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/9b79cac9-5915-434b-b35d-915aa9f75acb/resource/4bdfd6af-4da7-4e07-bac7-b9814169513d/download/qp-notes-week-of-may-4th-english-version.pdf
Package ID: 9b79cac9-5915-434b-b35d-915aa9f75acb
Keywords: ['COVID-19', 'Pandemic', 'Coronavirus', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Briefing binder for the Minister of Health’s appearances at the Special Committee on the COVID-19 Pandemic (COVI) – Week of May 4, 2020
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Border Measures
SYNOPSIS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has put in place successive border
measures in response to COVID19 under the Quarantine Act.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to prevent imported cases of COVID19? How are
you protecting Canadians at the border?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action at the border to
limit the introduction and spread of COVID-19 and to protect
the health of Canadians.
 We have enacted emergency orders under the Quarantine
Act to restrict discretionary entry into Canada from abroad,
including the U.S., and to strengthen measures to reduce the
importation risk from other countries.
All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no

matter their country of origin or mode of entry - are required
to quarantine for 14 days.
 There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine so
that critical infrastructure, essential services and economic
supply chains continue between Canada and the U.S.
Essential workers will be permitted to enter Canada,
including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
 Anyone not excluded from mandatory quarantine or isolation
when entering Canada must have a plan and suitable
location where they can isolate or quarantine for 14 days.
They must wear an appropriate non-medical mask or face
covering while in transit to their final destination.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL QUARANTINE SITES
Individuals who do not have an appropriate isolation or self-

quarantine plan will be directed to a federally designated
Quarantine Facility.
 Hotels have been designated as Quarantine Facilities in a
number of cities, including Vancouver, Calgary, Toronto, and
Montreal.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with the
RCMP and provincial law enforcement agencies to verify
compliance with the Mandatory Isolation Order.
 Penalties include a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment
for 3 years, or both, for failure to comply with this Order.
A ticketing scheme is now in place to allow for fines for non-

compliance ranging from $275 to $1000.
BACKGROUND
Since February 3, the Governor in Council has made eleven Emergency Orders under
the Quarantine Act to minimize the risk of exposure to COVID-19 in Canada – to reduce
risks from other countries, to repatriate Canadians, and to strengthen measures at the
border to reduce the impact of COVID-19 in Canada.
PHAC has been working with federal and provincial partners to facilitate commercial
traffic to maintain the flow of essential goods and services, while continuing to protect
the health of Canadians.
A travel ban is currently in place for most people entering Canada, including:
 All foreign nationals entering Canada by air;
 All travellers from the U.S., across all modes, for non-essential travel including
recreation and/or tourism purposes;
 Foreign nationals entering Canada if they arrive from a foreign country other than
the United States, with some exceptions, including temporary foreign workers
and international students; and
 Foreign nationals entering from the U.S. with signs or symptoms of respiratory
illness.
Canada has updated its temporary border agreement with the U.S. until May 21, 2020.
All persons entering Canada, with limited exceptions – no matter their country of origin
or mode of entry - are REQUIRED to isolate or quarantine for 14 days in a suitable
location.
There are exemptions in place on mandatory quarantine/isolation which permit essential
workers to enter Canada, including truck drivers, firefighters and medical workers.
Cross-border supply chains are vital to ensure the continued flow of goods, including
food and medical supplies for all Canadians. As such, the Canada Border Services
Agency (CBSA) is working with other federal partners to share information with
commercial stakeholders to provide assurances that commercial traffic is not impeded.
Enforcement:
PHAC undertakes compliance and enforcement linked to ensuring that travelers are
abiding by the requirement to isolate/quarantine for 14 days. In those instances, where
compliance cannot be confirmed, referrals are made to the RCMP. Maximum penalties
for failing to comply with the mandatory isolation/quarantine order include a fine of up to
$750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
A person who causes a risk of imminent death or serious bodily harm to another person
while willfully or recklessly contravening the Quarantine Act or the regulations could be
liable for a fine of up to $1 million or imprisonment of up to three years, or both.
The Contraventions Act has now been changed to give law enforcement partners
(including RCMP, provincial and local police) the enforcement power to issue tickets to
people who do not comply with the Quarantine Act, with fines ranging from $275 to
$1000.
Communications and Public Education on COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 Communications and public education on COVID-19 are key to maintaining
citizen trust and confidence in the Government’s response, and ensuring
Canadians continue to be aware of the risks to their health and steps they can
take to protect themselves, their families and their communities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to ensure that Canadians are informed
about COVID-19 to protect themselves and stop the spread of this virus?
KEY MESSAGES
 Since the start of the COVID-19 outbreak, the Government
of Canada has provided Canadians and health care
providers with the timely, trusted and evidence-based
information they need to protect themselves, their families,
their communities and their businesses.
 To complement online content, the Government of Canada
continues to update the Canada COVID-19 mobile app,
which provides users with easy access to up-to-date
information about COVID-19, trusted health resources and
allows them to track COVID-19 symptoms daily.
 Similarly, the Wellness Together Canada portal for mental
health and substance use support provides access to
credible information, and to connect Canadians to peer
support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals for confidential chat sessions or phone calls.
 We have also used a wide variety of channels to provide
information and updates to Canadians, including:
o the dedicated website Canada.ca/coronavirus and other
linked pages on the COVID-19 response, which have
had more than 158 million visits since its launch;
o daily briefings to the media; and
o a toll-free information line [1-833-784-4397] with service
available in 200+ languages open from 7 a.m. to
midnight, 7 days a week;
o regular public advisories to inform Canadians and the
media about emerging issues and to dispel
misinformation;
o email subscription service;
o social media;
o digital advertising and;
o nation-wide mail-out to reach Canadians who may not
have access to or use online technology.
 The Government of Canada continues to work closely with
provinces and territories, key partners and stakeholders to
make additional tools widely available to Canadians and
their families.
IF PRESSED ON INFORMATION PROVIDED TO CANADIANS
Through our website, Canadians can access:
 plain-language guidance and advice for travellers,
healthcare professionals, essential workers, Indigenous
communities and all Canadians;
 downloadable factsheets and infographics on a variety of
topics, in multiple languages;
 a self-assessment tool to check for symptoms of COVID-19;
and
 a dashboard that shows how the outbreak of COVID-19 is
evolving in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON RECOVERY STEPS IN CANADA
 We recognize that we will continue to see the transmission
of COVID-19 in the community as things start opening up
again. That is why we need to move slowly, cautiously, as
we live through the next phases of this pandemic, until such
time as we have a vaccine.
 During this reopening phase, we will do our utmost to protect
those at most risk of severe illness due the virus. Our goal is
to minimize overall illness and death from COVID and non
COVID related illnesses. There are key steps all Canadians
can take in this, including physical distancing, frequent hand-
washing, and staying home if they’re sick.
 By opening up health services for all conditions again, and
allowing for some social and economic activity, we hope to
reduce the overall burden of disease and illness in the
community, COVID and non-COVID related.
IF PRESSED ON THE WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA PORTAL
 During these difficult times, it is critical that Canadians have
access to effective tools to support their mental health and
well-being, obtain credible and reliable information about
mental health and substance use, and access support
services.
 The Wellness Together Canada portal provides Canadians
with free access to a virtual network of psycho-social
information services and supports in both official languages.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA COVID-19 APP
 This app has more than 509,000 users as of May 2. It builds
on what provinces and territories are doing, and provides
another valuable resource for Canadians.
 The Canada COVID-19 app is a central resource to access
trusted, evidence-based information about the COVID-19
pandemic across Canada. It does not track personal
information, nor is it a surveillance tool.
 The protection of Canadians’ information is a priority for the
Government of Canada, and any tool used to collect health
care information undergoes a rigorous privacy assessment.
IF PRESSED ON PUBLIC EDUCATION FUNDING
 The $50 million in funding for the Public Health Agency of
Canada is supporting ongoing communications efforts and
the development and implementation of a comprehensive
national public education campaign for COVID-19 that
provides Canadians with credible information that promotes
behaviours that protect individuals and overall public health.
 The public education campaign includes advertising, social
marketing, the development of information resources, the
establishment of partnerships and targeted outreach to at-
risk populations.
 This work complements the ongoing outreach and
communications activities such as the website for
information on COVID-19, a toll-free information line and
regular updates to media.
 Public education plays a critical role in our response to
COVID-19 as it helps to:
o increase awareness and understanding about
symptoms and treatment;
o provide information on preventive measures such as
self-isolation;
o address misinformation and public concerns.
IF PRESSED ON EFFORTS TO COMMUNICATE WITH VULNERABLE
POPULATIONS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is undertaking ongoing
communications and a comprehensive national public
education campaign for COVID-19. This includes targeted
outreach to vulnerable populations.
 Some Canadians are more vulnerable to getting an infection
and developing severe complications due to their health,
social and economic circumstances. These includes the
elderly, those with underlying medical conditions and those
with compromised immune systems.
 To help protect these vulnerable populations, the
Government has ensured that key information on infection
prevention is available to them and their caregivers, in clear
and relatable terms, and in multiple formats, including having
simultaneous interpretation into ASL and LSQ for all media
briefings.
Similarly, we have been supporting outreach to language

minority populations by reproducing 19 communications
resources, including fact sheets and infographics into 33
languages to date.
IF PRESSED ON COVID AND OPIOIDS
 The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring
provinces and territories have the tools they need to manage
the compounding effects of the opioid overdose crisis and
the COVID-19 pandemic.
 Health Canada is taking action to assist community health
services providers and all levels of governments as they
respond to the COVID-19 pandemic as well as continuing to
support harm reduction, treatment, housing and other
services for people who use drugs.
 Health Canada has proactively issued class exemptions
under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to all
provinces and territories (except to Alberta, which has
already renewed its class exemption) for a duration of six
months.
BACKGROUND
Canada has multiple systems in place to prepare for, detect and limit the spread of
infectious disease, including COVID-19, in Canada. The Government of Canada is
working collaboratively with partners at all levels of government to respond to COVID-
19.
Since the outset, the Public Health Agency of Canada and public health authorities at all
levels of government across the country have been working together to ensure that our
preparedness and response measures are appropriate and adaptable, based on the
latest science and the evolving situation.
The communications tactics outlined above aim to meet the following objectives:
 Provide Canadians with timely and accurate information about the COVID-19
situation in Canada and the risks to their health, and persuade Canadians to take
specific actions to protect themselves and minimize illness and death and
disruption to society.
 Communicate the actions the Government is taking in concert with the provinces
and territories to prepare for and respond to the COVID-19 pandemic in Canada
and its related impacts, in order to maintain public trust and confidence in the
Government’s response.
 Detect and address misinformation with the latest evidence and information in
order to reduce fear, anxiety, stigma and other reactions that can lead to further
societal, economic and other disruptions.
Key Statistics
 More than 158 million web visits since launch, as of April 30.
 More than 509,000 users of the COVID-19 App, as of May 2.
 Almost 124,000 calls received on the COVID-19 toll free line since the launch,
as of April 29.
 National postcard mailout sent to 15.5 million households across Canada.
Digital Supports and Virtual Care
SYNOPSIS
 In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada is putting in
place a range of digital supports to help Canadians get the information,
resources and care they need. On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5
million to support Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches. This funding will also
help to support a suite of digital tools, including an online self-assessment tool, a
mobile app to enhance self-assessments and provide a hub for trusted
information and resources and an online portal for access to virtual psychosocial
supports.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What has the Government of Canada done to help Canadians access the
resources they need during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Canadians need ready access to digital tools and resources
to help during the COVID-19 pandemic, including education,
information, mental health and substance use supports,
alerts and screening tools.
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories, vendors and stakeholders to make
these tools widely available to Canadians and their families.
 This past Sunday (May 3) the Prime Minister announced that
the Government of Canada is committing $240M to help
Canadian health systems to accelerate their efforts to meet
health care needs through virtual tools and approaches.
 This will enable Canadians to safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-
conferencing, to have their health needs met. It also means
they can continue to access specialist services throughout
this time of uncertainty.
 As well, through this investment we have already
implemented a suite of digital health tools, including:
o An online self-assessment tool, which has been
accessed by more than 4 million Canadians
o A mobile app called “Canada COVID-19,” which
provides reliable information and resources for
Canadians. In addition, on the app, Canadians are
encouraged to monitor their health on a regular basis
through a daily symptom tracker.
o Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of
virtual mental health and substance use supports
available through the Canada COVID-19 app and
Canada.ca website.
 We will continue to work with all of our partners to ensure
that Canadians have access to up-to-date information, tools
and resources on COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
 The Government of Canada is working with provinces and
territories to support the rapid uptake and use of virtual care
services.
 This means that Canadians can continue to have their
regular health needs met during this unprecedented time in a
safe and secure manner, through telephone, text, or video-
conferencing, in addition to face-to-face visits.
 Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada will help
reduce the pressure on health systems and provide
Canadians with needed health services and authoritative
information in a safe and secure manner.
Health Canada is already engaging in discussions with

provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
 Privacy considerations were – and continue to be – front and
centre at every stage of these initiatives.
 Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are
inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
 The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is
creating stress and anxiety for many Canadians, particularly
those who do not have ready access to their regular support
networks.
 That is why the Government has launched a new online
portal for mental health and substance use supports:
Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for
Canadians to access self-directed tools and find credible
information on mental health and substance use issues.
 It also connects Canadians to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for
confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online
counselling.
 Use of the portal will be closely monitored to ensure that
updates will best align with the needs of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON CONTACT TRACING APPS
 Rigorous contact tracing continues to be an important part of
Canada’s strategy in response to COVID-19, recognizing its
importance to tracking the virus and preventing future flare-
ups.
 That is why the Government of Canada’s national volunteer
recruitment campaign included a call-out for volunteers to
help provincial and territorial authorities with case tracking
and contact tracing.
 Our Government is aware of the many approaches that are
being developed to help digitize the contact tracing process,
including through mobile apps. We recognize that provinces
and territories have jurisdiction in this area.
 It is important that any such apps protect the privacy and
security of users.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL PLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
 Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented
time for Canadians, and are continuing to explore how we
can best take action in innovative ways.
 We will continue to work closely with provinces and
territories and other partners to evaluate needs for digital
supports.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
 On May 3, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital
tools for Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and
needed supports for health systems, as the Government of Canada is working with
provinces and territories to assist health services to undertake virtual care and
provide health services at a distance.
 Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to begin to identify where
support is needed most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020)
 Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of
Canada, this tool is available to all Canadians through the Canada.ca website. The
tool has been visited over 4 million times in the first month since the launch. It is
intended to complement PT self-assessment tools and is empowering Canadians to
make informed decisions on the appropriateness of COVID-19 testing and when to
access other resources like telehealth, primary care providers and emergency
departments.
 The self-assessment tool is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced
on May 3.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020)
 Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app
provides an integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and
engage on issues related to COVID-19. It quickly became the number one medical
app on both the App and Google Play Store.
 On April 11, the app launched its daily symptom tracker, which enables users to take
an active role in their self-care through the daily recording of potential COVID-19
symptoms. With enough users, the symptom tracker will help to provide useful data
to allow public health authorities to track the symptoms of the population as a whole,
providing an indicator of how the disease is evolving in neighbourhoods, regions,
and provinces.
 Canada COVID-19 is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May
3.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April
15, 2020)
 Through this portal, Canadians are able to access digital tools to help them monitor
and manage their mental health and substance use needs, and access trained
mental health professionals through digital platforms.
 Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and
connect users to promotion or prevention resources. This will enable
individuals to determine their level of need, as well as self-manage their
mental health and substance use.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources
promote mental health and prevent poor mental health. These will focus on
enhancing protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and
social networks) and addressing risk factors (e.g., substance use, social
isolation, discrimination and stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential chat
sessions, phone calls and online counselling with peer support workers,
social workers, psychologists and other professionals.
 The portal is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
BlueDot
 Health Canada and PHAC have put in place contracts with BlueDot to enhance and
expand upon existing expertise to provide further insights and understanding into the
emergence, spread and public health risks of COVID-19
 This work is supported through the $240.5M in funding announced on May 3.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
 The Government of Canada has put in place an opt-in email subscription service
called “Get Updates on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to those
Canadians who would like to be alerted to updates on the COVID-19 situation in
Canada.
Contact Awareness/Tracing Apps
 Countries around the world are looking at digital tools to help reduce the workload
burden related to tracing and containing the spread of COVID-19. In Canada, many
jurisdictions are also considering such tools, given their potential value to help
contain the spread of disease as Canadians return to the workforce. Health Canada
has been engaging with provinces and territories to understand proposed
approaches.
Health Canada continues to explore other digital tools with a view to providing
Canadians with the information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during
the COVID-19 pandemic. This includes resources for children to help them better
understand the disease and stay safe and healthy.
Drug Shortages
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 is creating global supply chain challenges and increased demand for
drugs used in supporting patients with the disease. Drug shortages, particularly
in the context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at
risk.
 Health Canada has amplified its surveillance activities and engagement with key
supply chain players. It is also taking steps to help stabilize the supply, with a
focus on drugs in shortage or in high demand.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What action is the government taking to ensure the COVID-19 pandemic does
not create drug shortages in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication
is a top priority for the Government of Canada. Significant
efforts are being made through a whole-of-government
approach to respond to drug shortages during the COVID-19
pandemic.
 We have amplified our monitoring activities. We are
engaging provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and
patient groups - in some cases on a daily basis. Together,
we are assessing supply chain vulnerabilities to ensure
action is taken to help prevent and minimize the impact of
shortages.
 On March 30, 2020, I signed an Interim Order to allow for the
exceptional importation of products related to COVID-19.
When drugs are not available, the department has a legal
pathway to bring alternate supplies of drugs to the Canadian
market.
 We are also taking steps to help mitigate and prevent drug
shortages. Public Services and Procurement Canada issued
seven Requests for Information signaling Canada’s interest
in procuring and building a reserve of critical drugs in
shortage.
 We are also working closely with key international regulatory
partners (US, EU, UK and Australia). This has resulted in
earlier risk identification and response planning.
IF PRESSED ON CURRENT DRUG SHORTAGES
 Our government is taking proactive measures to mitigate the
impact of any drug shortages related to COVID-19.
 Through this work, we have been able to secure additional
supplies of needed drugs for Canada. For example, we
have worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to
additional supplies of drugs such as muscle relaxants (e.g.
cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g.
propofol) to help support COVID-19 patients.
IF PRESSED ON REQUESTS FOR INFORMATION (RFIs)
 The RFIs were posted to identify additional supply that is not
already earmarked to meet Canada’s current needs.
 The initial RFIs focus on critical drugs currently in shortage –
drugs that have the greatest potential impact on the health
care system. These drugs include sedatives, muscle
relaxants and inhalers.
 The Government will also be looking to procure other drugs,
vaccines, and drugs that are showing promise in Clinical
Trials.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients
and health care professionals and is committed to doing its part to prevent shortages
where possible and minimize their impact when they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility
requiring collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners, and the federal government. When national shortages occur, Health
Canada works with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply
chain to determine the details and status of the shortage, coordinate information-
sharing, and identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory measures and
exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies
are available and whether the product is considered medically necessary are all
considered in determining the potential impact and any necessary actions by Health
Canada.
Health Canada also co-chairs the Multi-Stakeholder Steering Committee on Drug
Shortages, which mobilizes provinces and territories and key stakeholder groups to play
a lead role in advancing tools to address drug shortages.
Bill C-13, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act
On March 25, 2020, the COVID-19 Emergency Response Act was brought into force to
support the availability of drugs and medical devices by providing the Government with
the authority to make regulations to address any future shortages of therapeutic
products, including drugs and medical devices. This includes the importation of drugs
and medical devices not authorized for sale in Canada to address certain shortages,
such as for personal protective equipment or drugs required to treat COVID-19, and
changes to the Patent Act to allow for compulsory licencing in health emergencies in the
period up to September 30, 2020.
Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in Relation to COVID-19
On March 30, 2020, the Minister of Health authorized an Interim Order which sets up a
regulatory framework to help prevent and alleviate shortages of drugs, medical devices,
and foods for a special dietary purpose.
It allows for the exceptional importation and sale of products that may not fully meet
Canadian requirements, such as those related to licensing and labelling, but are
manufactured according to comparable standards.
Health Canada designates the products eligible for importation and sale under the
Interim Order. Companies with an establishment licence may import these drugs and
devices after notifying Health Canada five days in advance.
The Interim Order also requires that any shortages of critical medical devices related to
COVID-19, such as ventilators, be reported to Health Canada and publicly
communicated. Public reporting of shortages help manufacturers and the health care
system plan and react to supply disruptions, in order to mitigate the impact on patients.
These new tools allow Health Canada to address critical supply issues in an expedited
manner when shortages occur and help protect the health and safety of Canadians
during the pandemic.
Through this work, Health Canada has been able to secure additional supplies of
needed drugs and medical devices for Canada. For example, the department has
worked with multiple companies to facilitate access to additional supplies of drugs such
as muscle relaxants (e.g. cisatracurium), inhalers (e.g. salbutamol) and sedatives (e.g.
propofol) to help support COVID-19 patients. The issuance of medical device
establishment licences related to the importation and manufacturing of PPE such as
masks and gowns has also been expedited.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories
Drug shortage management requires a multi-stakeholder effort. Over the last number of
years, capacity has been built up across governments leading to a more coordinated
and effective approach to dealing with shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms in place to manage drug
shortages, including an FPT committee infrastructure to identify, report, and assess
shortages in cooperation with industry and patient groups.
Health Canada has leveraged this FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with
provincial and territorial partners to identify shortage signals earlier, especially for critical
drugs required for COVID-19.
Additional Collaboration
Canada has increased cooperation with international regulatory partners (US, EU, UK,
Australia). This has resulted in earlier risk identification and response planning for new
shortages. In addition, the government is working with key federal partners –like Global
Affairs Canada, Innovation, Science and Economic Development and Public Services
and Procurement Canada – to explore ways to increase access to critical drugs. For
example, Health Canada is working with Public Services and Procurement Canada to
develop Requests for Information for critical drugs that are in high demand or are in
shortage. The goal is to access additional supplies of critical drugs above and beyond
current needs, to stabilize and build Canada’s supply of these drugs for future needs as
the pandemic continues to evolve.
Early History (Warnings and Steps Taken) in COVID-19 Outbreak
SYNOPSIS
 Warning of a respiratory illness in Wuhan, China was received on December, 31,
2019. The Government of Canada quickly alerted provincial Chief Medical
Officers of Health followed by enhanced border measures. The World Health
Organization confirmed on January 12, 2020 the novel coronavirus following
which the Government activated its emergency operations centre and posted
signage at airports. Chief Medical Officers of Health were convened well in
advance of the first Canadian presumptive case identified on January 25, 2020.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What warnings did the Government of Canada receive regarding COVID-19, and
what steps were taken in response?
KEY MESSAGES
 Timely intelligence gathering, in collaboration with both
domestic and international partners, allowed early and
coordinated action by the Government of Canada.
 Canada took a number of concrete steps in advance of its
first presumptive case of COVID-19 in late January,
including posting signage at airports, issuing a travel alert,
and convening Ministers of Health and Chief Medical
Officers of Health from across the country.
 Subsequent, rapid actions were taken to mobilize Canada’s
national and provincial public health emergency response
infrastructure as new information became available, and the
risk to the health and safety of Canadians became clearer.
IF PRESSED
 The Chief Public Health Officer of Canada informed all
provincial Chief Medical Officers of Health on January 2nd,
2020 well before Canada’s first presumptive case was
identified on January 25th, 2020.
 On January 12th, the World Health Organization received
confirmation that the respiratory illness that developed in
Wuhan, China, was caused by a new coronavirus.
 Since January 24th, I have convened calls regularly with my
Provincial and Territorial counterparts to ensure national
coordination in the response to COVID-19.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) operates the Global Public Health Intelligence Network
(GPHIN), which is an early-warning and situational awareness system for potential public health threats
worldwide—including outbreaks of infectious disease.
Canada first became aware of a respiratory illness originating in Wuhan, China through an alert through
GPHIN received on December 31 2019. This information was shared by the Dr. Tam, the Chief Public
Health Officer of Canada on January 2, 2020, with all provincial and territorial Chief Medical Officers of
Health of Canada.
The World Health Organization (WHO) posted its first event notification on January 5, 2020, to its secure
Event Information Site (EIS) for International Health Regulations (IHR) National Focal Points regarding a
cluster of pneumonia of unknown etiology reported in Wuhan City, Hubei Province of China. The WHO
found there was limited information to determine overall risk and advised against the application of any
travel or trade restrictions against China.
Precautionary steps were taken as Canada sought additional information from the WHO. On January 7,
2020, PHAC issued a Travel Health Notice and a Public Health Alert on the Canadian Network for Public
Health Intelligence, an extranet for communication with public health partners.
Confirmation of a novel coronavirus in Wuhan, China was received by the WHO on January
12, 2020. On January 14, 2020, Dr. Tam convened a special teleconference of the Council of
Chief Medical Officers of Health (CCMOH) to discuss COVID-19 and convened their first
COVID-19 meeting on January 17. COVID-19 was also the focus of the agenda of the regularly
scheduled CCMOH call on January 23. PHAC escalated its Emergency Operations Centre on
January 15, 2020, to a level 2, to actively monitor early warning signs and to prepare for
possible containment and mitigation of a possible COVID-19 outbreak. In addition, on January
17, 2020, the Canada Border Services Agency implemented signage at major airports to raise
awareness for passengers arriving from China.
Progressive escalation followed Canada’s first presumptive case. Canada’s first
presumptive case was identified on January 25, 2020. Following this, critical public health
emergency management infrastructure was mobilized for the COVID-19 response, including:
- First meeting of the Federal-Provincial-Territorial Special Advisory Committee on
COVID-19 (January 28, 2020, followed by meetings on January 30 and 31, bi-weekly
through February and tri-weekly since March);
- First meeting of Federal-Provincial-Territorial Ministers of Health was January 24, 2020.
They met weekly prior to that date and have met bi-weekly ever since; and,
- G7 Ministers of Health (weekly, starting February 03, 2020)
In addition, the following travel measures were implemented:
- Travel advisory against non-essential travel to China (January 29, 2020); and,
- Enhanced screening measures at major international airports including all travellers from
the Province of Hubei, China (February 9, 2020)
Canada reached its first 100th confirmed case on March 11, 2020.
Health Products Making False or Misleading Claims
SYNOPSIS
 Health Canada has identified health products making false or misleading claims
to prevent, treat or cure COVID-19 through proactive monitoring of online sites
and complaints received. This activity is illegal and Health Canada has been
taking actions to stop this.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing about health products on the market claiming to
treat, prevent or cure COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of all Canadians is Health Canada's
top priority and we are taking measures to protect
consumers from illegal, false or misleading advertising of
products claiming to mitigate, prevent, treat, diagnose, or
cure COVID-19.
 To date, Health Canada has not authorized any product to
prevent, treat or cure COVID-19. Selling health products that
make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19 is illegal in Canada.
 As a result of proactive monitoring of online sites and
complaints received, Health Canada has identified a wide
range of health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19. Health Canada takes this matter very
seriously and is taking action to stop this illegal activity.
 Health Canada has issued compliance letters to multiple
companies directing them to immediately stop selling such
products and remove references to these products from their
websites. Health Canada has also been working with major
online retailers to stop the posting of these products on their
sites.
 On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory
warning Canadians about the risks of buying health products
that make false or misleading claims to prevent, treat or cure
COVID-19.
 To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a
table which lists products and corresponding companies or
advertising media found to engage in non-compliant
marketing, which are currently under review or have been
resolved. Health Canada took compliance and enforcement
action against these organizations, as required.
 The Department is also coordinating with other government
agencies, such as the Competition Bureau and the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police, to address the issue of false and
misleading claims related to COVID-19.
IF PRESSED
 Health Canada has followed up on hundreds of cases
regarding health products making false or misleading claims
related to COVID-19 identified through proactive monitoring
activities or complaints received.
 Various compliance and enforcement options are available
to manage the risk posed to public health and safety by false
or misleading claims related to COVID-19, including on site
inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public
communications or product seizures.
 In certain circumstances, when the regulatory enforcement
responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance, Health
Canada may refer its findings to the Public Prosecution
Service of Canada for potential prosecution.
BACKGROUND
Status of Products to Treat or Cure COVID-10
Health Canada has not approved any product to treat or cure COVID-19. Selling or
advertising health products making false or misleading claims is illegal in Canada under
Sections 9 (1) and 20 (1) of the Food and Drugs Act . Health products that have been
authorized for sale by Health Canada will have an eight-digit Drug Identification Number
(DIN), Natural Product Number (NPN) or Homeopathic Drug Number (DIN-HM).
Health Canada’s Actions in Addressing Products Making False or Misleading
Claims
Health Canada has followed up and taken action on numerous cases regarding health
products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 identified through
proactive monitoring of online sites or complaints received.
Companies have been sent compliance letters and directed to immediately stop selling
such products and to remove references to these products from their websites. Health
Canada has been actively monitoring websites and working with major online retailers
to ensure products making false or misleading claims related to COVID-19 are removed
from their sites.
On March 27, 2020, Health Canada issued a public advisory to warn Canadians about
the risks associated with products making false and misleading claims related to
COVID-19. Canadians were encouraged to report any information on potential false and
misleading advertising or the sale of products that have not been approved by Health
Canada. To keep Canadians informed, Health Canada has posted a table which lists
products and corresponding companies or advertising media found to engage in non-
compliant marketing, which are currently under review or have been resolved. Health
Canada took compliance and enforcement actions against these organizations, as
required. This list is updated bi-weekly.
When Health Canada identifies or is notified of potential non-compliance with the Food
and Drugs Act or its associated regulations, it takes steps to confirm whether non-
compliance has occurred and takes action based on the risk to the health of Canadians.
A number of compliance and enforcement options are available to manage the risk
posed to public health and safety by false or misleading claims related COVID-19
including on site inspections, regulatory letters, recalls, public communications or
product seizures. Recently, Health Canada inspectors, in collaboration with the RCMP,
seized over 1500 unapproved kits from a resident in British Columbia, who had acquired
and sold some of them online without authorization. Health Canada determined that
these kits were not authorized for sale in Canada, meaning that the Department has not
evaluated their safety and effectiveness. In certain circumstances, when the regulatory
enforcement responses are not appropriate to achieve compliance Health Canada may
also refer its findings to the Public Prosecution Service of Canada for potential
prosecution.
The Department will continue to monitor and take action as needed to ensure that
health products making false and misleading claims to diagnose, prevent, treat, or cure
COVID-19 are removed from the market.
Health Human Resource Capacity during COVID-19 (New QP)
SYNOPSIS
 Since early March, PTs have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms that allow
experienced health care professionals who are not currently practicing to be
deployed in the COVID-19 response. While health human resource (HHR)
capacity to respond to acute care needs appears to be sufficient for now, the
disproportionate impact of COVID-19 on long-term care facilities has created a
significant HHR challenge for some jurisdictions in a vulnerable population group.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of healthcare
providers, particularly in long-term care homes?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada has identified over
53,000 volunteers through a national volunteer
recruitment campaign. Over 6,000 of these volunteers
have expertise in long-term care support work.
 We continue to work with provinces to identify their
needs and to provide surge capacity in key areas. We
are working with the Canadian Red Cross to support
the coordination and training of volunteers, including
in Quebec.
 More than 24,000 referrals from the inventory have
been shared with provinces and territories to provide
surge capacity, primarily for contact tracing and
support for long-term care facilities.
 When requested by provinces and territories, the
Government of Canada has also sent members of the
Canadian Armed Forces as surge support to long-
term care facilities.
 The Government of Canada remains committed to
working with provinces and territories and taking the
necessary actions to protect the health and safety of
Canadians during this pandemic.
BACKGROUND
Health is a shared responsibility between federal, provincial, and territorial
governments. Provinces and territories (PTs) are responsible for the administration and
delivery of health care and the management of their health workforces.
Provincial and Territorial Efforts to Increase HHR Supply
Since early March, PTs have worked to maximize their supply of health human
resources through emergency and conditional licensing mechanisms that allow
experienced health care professionals who are not currently practicing to be deployed in
the COVID-19 response. This included physician and nurse retirees, students and some
internationally educated health professionals.
Government of Canada National Recruitment Campaign
On April 2, as part of a comprehensive response to COVID-19, the Government of
Canada created a virtual inventory for the mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide
surge capacity in key areas. As needs evolve, supports will be identified for other areas
requiring assistance. The Government of Canada is working the Canadian Red Cross
(CRC) to respond to requests for assistance through the inventory, with CRC providing
PTs with support for security and medical verifications, and training of volunteers.
To date the PSC’s National Recruitment Campaign has provided contact referrals to the
majority of jurisdictions who have made requests for contact tracing including; NS
(1,302 referrals), SK (992 referrals), NWT (50 referrals), QC (1,157 referrals), and ON
(21, 033 referrals), while MB and NU’s requests are still pending.
Some of the requests targeted specific expertise or skill sets in a particular job category.
For example, QC, NS and NWT’s requests sought volunteers with PSW experience,
while ON has requested referrals for physicians and nurses. The majority of requests
however, were broader in scope, seeking contact lists of all volunteers available. To
date, no referrals have been hired.
Impacts of COVID-19 on Long-term Care (LTC) HHR
LTC facilities are facing pre-existing HHR challenges. For example, personal support
workers (PSWs) who provide the majority of hands-on care are an unregulated
workforce and characterized by low pay, poor benefits, and part-time work. These
challenges plus increased pressures due to the pandemic have led to difficulty in
maintaining staff to resident ratios. Workers with part-time positions may also work at
multiple sites; therefore, being a source of cross-infection infection.
Long-Term Care Homes
SYNOPSIS
 All Canadians have a role to play in helping to protect seniors and medically
vulnerable people, who are at greatest risk of severe health complications from
COVID-19. Many long-term care homes in Canada have been experiencing
outbreaks of COVID-19 resulting in numerous deaths. The Public Health Agency
of Canada has provided evidence-informed guidelines to help residents, seniors
and healthcare workers in long-term care homes remain safe and healthy. These
recommendations complement provincial and territorial public health efforts to
prevent and control healthcare associated infections.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Given the severe impacts of COVID-19 on Long-Term Care facilities across
Canada, what actions has the federal government taken to support provinces
and territories control spread of the infection in these facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
The Government of Canada is committed to taking the

necessary action to continue to protect the health and safety
of all Canadians during this pandemic.
 Residents of long-term care homes are at risk of COVID-19
infection due to shared living spaces, underlying chronic
conditions and age.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided infection
prevention and control guidance to help prevent COVID-19
infections among residents in long-term care and assisted-
living facilities.
 Following this guidance reduces the possibility of introducing
COVID-19 into these facilities and helps protect workers and
residents.
To support the care of residents, the Government of

Canada’s Volunteer Recruitment Campaign provides an
inventory that can be drawn upon to support staffing needs
in facilities.
The military continues to work closely with all levels of

government in the fight against COVID-19, including the
governments of Quebec and Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON LONG-TERM CARE GUIDANCE
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance on infection
prevention and control in long-term care facilities is designed
to limit the possibility of introducing COVID-19 into these
facilities by recommending that only those who are essential
to the care of residents can enter the facility.
 Staff in long-term care facilities are encouraged to take their
own steps to protect the residents by monitoring their health
twice a day, following routine infection control practices and
wearing a mask for the duration of their shifts.
 This guidance also recommends that staff restrict their work
to only one facility in order to prevent transmitting COVID-19
between facilities.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL VOLUNTEER RECRUITMENT CAMPAIGN
 The Government of Canada is supporting provinces and
territories by facilitating an inventory for recruitment and
mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity in
the following key areas:
- Case tracking and contact tracing;
- Health system surge capacity; and
- Case data collection and reporting.
 As of April 24, there were 53,769 volunteers registered in the
inventory from which provincial and territorial governments
can draw upon as needed.
BACKGROUND
All Canadians have a role to play in helping to protect seniors and medically vulnerable
people, who are at greatest risk of severe health complications from COVID-19. Many
long-term care homes in Canada have been experiencing outbreaks of COVID-19
resulting in numerous deaths. The Public Health Agency of Canada has provided
evidence-informed guidelines to help residents, seniors and health care workers in long-
term care homes remain safe and healthy. These recommendations complement
provincial and territorial public health efforts to prevent and control healthcare
associated infections.
The Government of Canada is working to ensure healthcare workers have the personal
protective equipment (PPE) and medical supplies they need. We are doing this through
collaborative bulk procurement with the provinces and territories, building domestic
production capacity, and identifying potential alternatives and ways to extend product
life.
For seniors living in long-term care homes or assisted-living facilities, there is an even
greater risk of infection and transmission of the virus owing to proximity. The movement
of workers from one facility to another increases the risk of spread of infection, which
ultimately puts seniors more at risk of contracting the virus. Therefore, the guidelines
recommend identifying staff who work in more than one location and ensuring efforts
are made to prevent this where possible.
Volunteer Recruitment
As part of the comprehensive federal, provincial and territorial response to COVID-19,
the Government of Canada is supporting provinces and territories by facilitating an
inventory for recruitment and mobilization of skilled Canadians to provide surge capacity
in key areas.
To assist provinces and territories, the Government of Canada is working with them to
identify their needs. They have identified contact tracing and case recording as areas
where they require assistance. Therefore, the skills required include case management,
data collection and management, public outreach and telephone interview skills.
Referrals from the inventory have also been shared with a number of jurisdictions for
help in long-term care facilities. Other call-outs may be issued as jurisdictions identify
new areas requiring assistance. As needs evolve, support in other areas requiring
assistance will be provided.
The Government of Canada is reaching out in stages. The first stage was to enlist
qualified federal public servants who are currently not in roles essential to ongoing
federal work to assist in those jurisdictions feeling the most pressure. The second stage
includes leveraging the inventory established as part of a COVID-19 Volunteer
Recruitment campaign, and reaching out to faculties of health, public health and science
across the country to disseminate a call for interested individuals to register in the
inventory. A third stage will involve reaching out to all health professional and health
science associations for retirees or individuals currently not engaged in the COVID-19
response.
As of April 24, there were more than 53,769 volunteers registered in the inventory. To
date, referrals from the inventory have been shared with a number of jurisdictions,
mostly to support long term care needs:
 919 volunteers referred to Nova Scotia
 1,118 volunteers referred to Quebec
 24 volunteers referred to Northwest Territories
 Saskatchewan and Ontario are also in the process of seeking referrals
COVID-19 Medical Device Authorizations
SYNOPSIS
 As an emergency public health measure, the Interim Order for Medical Devices
has allowed expedited access to COVID-19-related medical devices in Canada
since March 18, 2020. Health Canada has also expedited the process for issuing
Medical Devices Establishment Licences in the fight against COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the devices
needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada will continue to leverage all regulatory tools
to ensure Canadians have access to safe and effective
health products to fight COVID-19.
 To date, we have authorized 99 COVID-19 medical devices
including:
- 15 diagnostic testing devices; and
- 109 devices including personal protective equipment,
decontamination devices for N95 respirators,
ventilators, reagents, and swabs.
 A medical device is authorized after Health Canada
completes a scientific assessment, ensuring that it meets
requirements for safety and effectiveness.
 Health Canada also continues to expedite applications for
medical device establishment licences for products such as
masks, gowns, respirators and ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on mobilizing manufacturing capacity
 Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders who are
scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to
provide much needed tests or medical supplies.
 Across the federal government, we are mobilizing industry
and providing support for research, market approval,
manufacturing and supply.
 We are working closely with provinces and territories to
ensure that they have the medical devices that they need.
IF PRESSED … on N95 respirators decontamination
 Extending the use of personal protective equipment through
decontamination is one way of helping Canada meet supply
needs.
 Health Canada is looking at ways to safely and effectively
decontaminate single use N95 respirators.
 Health Canada has authorized devices to decontaminate
N95 respirators under the Interim Order for Medical Devices.
IF PRESSED … on investigational testing and special access
 As of April 30, Health Canada has authorized:
- two investigational testing authorizations, and two
applications are under review; and
- 38 Special Access Program applications for COVID-19
test kits, ultrasonic systems, endotracheal tubes and
ventilators.
IF PRESSED… on exceptional import and sale of COVID-19 devices
 The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and
Foods for a Special Dietary Purposes helps prevent or
alleviate the effects of shortages related to COVID-19.
 Under this IO, as of April 30, Health Canada has added 27
medical devices to the List of Medical Devices for
Exceptional Import and Sale.
 Importers with medical device establishment licences can
import these medical devices after notifying Health Canada
five days in advance.
BACKGROUND
Streamlined regulatory processes
The Interim Order for medical devices signed on March 18, 2020, allows expedited
access to COVID-19-related medical devices, including diagnostic test kits. Health
Canada can also consider approvals granted by foreign regulatory authorities in
deciding whether to approve an application for the importation or sale of COVID-19-
related medical devices. Use of existing devices, where the approved, intended use was
not originally COVID-19-related, can also be expanded under this Interim Order.
The Interim Order Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary
Purpose in relation to COVID-19 helps prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
directly or indirectly related to COVID-19. Under the Interim Order, the Minister can
permit the exceptional importation and sale of products that do not fully comply with
Canadian requirements, but are manufactured according to comparable standards.
In recent weeks we have:
• addressed shortages by permitting the importation and sale of medical devices
that are not approved in Canada, subject to certain requirements;
• facilitated access to products that may not fully meet current regulatory
requirements, such as bilingual labelling, including personal protective equipment
(such as masks and gowns), swabs, hand sanitizers, and hard-surface
disinfectants
• amended the Food and Drugs Act and the Patent Act to support efforts to help
prevent and alleviate shortages.
Health Canada continues to monitor and assess the safety, quality, and efficacy of all
products allowed for import and sale under these special measures.
Decontamination of N95 respirators
Health Canada has authorized several decontamination systems: Stryker’s Sterizone
VP4 Sterilize,; ASP’s Sterrad sterilization systems, Cleanworks’s Clean Flow Healthcare
Mini sterilizer; and Ecolab’s Bioquell. The Department continues to evaluate new
decontamination method applications submitted under the Interim Order for medical
devices. A series of webinars was held with provincial and territorial healthcare
partners, industry and healthcare professionals to provide information and guidance on
the decontamination and re-use of N95 respirators.
COVID-19 Modelling
SYNOPSIS
 The Government of Canada models COVID-19 to look at the national picture.
Modelling is used for planning purposes and is not a prediction of the future. The
Government uses data and modelling to guide Canada’s response to COVID-19,
and to help inform public health and policy decisions to control Canada’s COVID-
19 epidemic. Some provincial and territorial public health authorities are also
conducting their own modelling to determine the projected numbers of COVID-19
related cases and deaths to aid in their health system capacity planning.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why are there differences in the COVID-19 models produced by the federal and
provincial governments?
KEY MESSAGES
 Modelling is one of the tools that support planning our
response to the COVID-19 epidemic. The Public Health
Agency of Canada is conducting modelling studies that tell
us the number of COVID-19 cases that could occur
nationally depending on how effective we are in controlling
the epidemic.
 Surveillance data indicate that the measures we are taking
to slow the spread of COVID-19 are working but models and
the experience of other countries suggest that we need to
continue to be vigilant.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works with the
provinces and territories to share their data to inform the
national COVID-19 model.
 We know that the COVID-19 epidemic varies across
provinces and territories. There is alignment with the national
level modelling results, but provincial models provide more
specific projections for planning within each of the provinces.
IF PRESSED…
 Many factors contribute to regional differences in the
epidemiology of COVID-19 in Canada.
These include differences in the timing and patterns of

community spread, changes in laboratory testing practices,
and differing timelines for introduction of a range of public
health measures.
 Notwithstanding these variables, we are observing slowed
epidemic growth of COVID-19 and a levelling off of epidemic
trajectories across Canada.
BACKGROUND
The COVID-19 epidemic in Canada comprises a number of different epidemics in the
different provinces and territories. The Public Health Agency of Canada regularly uses
data to update models for guiding public health and policy decisions.
While models are imperfect, they do allow experts to forecast infection and illness rates
in the short-term, and to explore the effectiveness of different combinations and timing
of public health measures to control the epidemic.
Nationally, Canada is using two modelling approaches: forecasting and dynamic
models. Forecasting models use actual data on the cases being reported over time in
Canada to estimate forward on how many new cases might be expected in the coming
week. Dynamic models do not use actual real-life case data, yet are useful in that they
permit a longer-term view based on our knowledge of how the virus behaves – this
helps us to visualize potential epidemic growth scenarios and impacts of control
measures that mitigate growth over time.
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) Management
SYNOPSIS
 A recent media story highlighted the disposal of approximately 2 million expired
masks and 440,000 expired gloves during the closure of the NESS warehouse in
Regina in 2019. The masks and gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had
passed the limit of five years for their use, as recommended by the manufacturer.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 How can we be sure that the Government of Canada has the right system in
place to have the necessary stockpile of health supplies to support Canada in
pandemics and other emergencies? Why did the Public Health Agency of
Canada dispose of N95 masks and gloves in 2019? Why did the Public Health
Agency of Canada close federal stockpile locations?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is working closely with
provinces and territories to procure the necessary health
supplies to continue responding to the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The NESS was initially built on the assumption that
provincial, territorial and local governments would be
prepared for the most common emergencies. Consequently,
it was designed to provide health emergency assets when
local and provincial and territorial resources were exhausted.
 Jurisdictions have traditionally sourced Personal Protective
Equipment (PPE) directly from known suppliers, and the
NESS has historically only carried relatively small amounts.
 With the unprecedented nature of the current pandemic, the
NESS quickly stepped into a much more active role in
procurement and will continue with this expanded role as
long as required. As we move forward, we will adjust, and
lessons learned will inform the future of the NESS.
IF PRESSED ON INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
 NESS reviews its stock regularly. Expired, obsolete, or
unusable items are disposed of as per Treasury Board
policy.
 PHAC continues to explore ways to optimize product life
cycle management and minimize the disposal of expired
stock.
IF PRESSED ON WAREHOUSE CLOSURES
 A decision was made in 2013 to modernize and optimize our
warehouse national footprint.
 In 2012, NESS supplies were held in 11 warehouses in 9
locations. In 2019, holdings were consolidated into 8
warehouses in 6 locations. In March 2020, an additional
warehouse was leased in Ottawa, given the volume of
supplies being donated to and purchased by the NESS as
part of the federal government’s COVID-19 response.
 When a warehouse is closed, usable supplies are moved to
a new location, while obsolete and expired supplies are
disposed of as per Treasury Board policy.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING LEVEL
 Since 2012-13, the operating budget of the NESS, including
salaries and operating has consistently been around $3
million annually.
 On top of the NESS core operational budget, there have
been investments made for particular initiatives, stocks of
supplies and medical countermeasures. Over the last 10
years, these investments have varied year over year, and
have amounted to over $79 million.
BACKGROUND
Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that
provinces and territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease
outbreaks, natural disasters and other public health events, when their own resources
are not enough. These supplies include a variety of items such as: medical equipment
and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and blankets.
NESS Mandate
The fundamental assumption underpinning emergency management is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to a reasonable extent for the most
common emergencies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is
twofold:
 It provides surge capacity to provinces and territories at their request when their
own resources are not sufficient; and
 It is the sole provider of certain assets required for rare public health
emergencies, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes.
NESS Deployments
Over the past decade, the NESS has deployed assets to assist with a range of events
and emergencies, including the 2010 Olympics, 2013 Alberta Floods, Operation Syrian
Refugees, the Fort McMurray wildfires, and the 2018 G7 Summit in Quebec. The NESS
has also made international donations in support of the West African Ebola Outbreak,
Hurricane Harvey, and to China during the current COVID-19 outbreak.
NESS Footprint
NESS facilities consist of a central depot in the National Capital Region and
warehouses strategically located across Canada. In recent years, the NESS moved
from nine warehouse locations across Canada to six. An independent assessment
indicated that the six strategic locations would maintain the NESS’ role as timely surge
support. As of 2019, all NESS holdings were consolidated in eight warehouses in six
locations. In March 2020, an additional warehouse was leased in Ottawa, given the
volume of supplies being donated to and purchased by the NESS as part of the federal
government’s COVID-19 response.
Regina Closure
In 2019, approximately 2 million expired masks and 440,000 expired gloves were
disposed of during the closure of the NESS warehouse in Regina. The masks and
gloves had been purchased in 2009 and had surpassed the limit of five years for their
use, as recommended by the manufacturer.
Intersection of COVID-19 and Substance Use
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic is exacerbating a number of long-standing challenges
regarding substance use and the overdose crisis. People who use drugs are
currently facing additional barriers to accessing health and social services,
increasing the risk of unsafe use and overdose, as well as disease spread and
mortality.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to support people who use drugs
during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 During the pandemic, we must not forget that many regions of the
country continue to struggle with historic rates of drug overdose and
harms.
 Tragically, in many communities, the pandemic is compounding a deadly
and ongoing public health crisis of opioid overdose and death
 The Government is very concerned that people who use drugs are at
increased risk of CoVID-19. This is due to risks that come with multiple
close contacts and unique difficulties of social distancing; increased
likelihood of underlying health conditions; and increased risks of
overdose when using drugs alone.
 In response, the Government has taken important measures to enable
the health system to better meet the needs of people with substance use
disorder as a part of its response to the pandemic. We have made it
easier for them to access the medications they need, such as those
necessary for opioid agonist treatment, like Suboxone and methadone.
We have also made it easier for overdose prevention sites to be rapidly
established in temporary community shelters
 Health Canada is also supporting community-based projects funded
under the Substance Use and Addictions Program in order to allow for
funds to be re-directed to support immediate CoVID-19 needs in their
communities.
 In addition, my department is working to identify additional areas where
federal exemptions, national guidelines or funding opportunities could
help mitigate the impacts of the dual public health crises of CoVID-19
and opioid-related overdose and death.
 By providing for these new measures, vulnerable people will be better
able to get the supports they need, while respecting public health
directives for physical distancing and self-isolation.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ACTIONS TO ADDRESS COVID-
19 IN COMMUNITIES WHERE THERE IS CHRONIC OVERCROWDING,
INCLUDING A SHORTAGE OF HOUSING
 We understand the unique challenges associated with containing the
spread and protecting homeless Canadians from COVID-19.
 On April 6, we proactively took steps to make it easier for overdose
prevention sites to be rapidly established in temporary community
shelters for individuals exposed to COVID-19, and to allow existing
supervised consumption site operators to adjust their services to support
physical distancing and respect public health directives.
 We have also developed a set of resources to help frontline service
providers understand and comply with existing regulations associated
with medications for substance use disorder or as a safer,
pharmaceutical grade alternative to the street supply.
 These measures will not only make it easier for people who are staying
at shelters to respect public health directives to distance and isolate,
they will also protect them from the risks and harms of overdose.
 These efforts will help ensure vulnerable Canadians have access to the
health services they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL INVESTMENT TO ADDRESS ISSUES AT
INTERSECTION OF SUBSTANCE USE AND COVID-19
 Budget 2019 committed to address persistent gaps in harm reduction
and support communities in their response to problematic substance
use.
 Recent investments made through Health Canada’s Substance Use and
Addictions Program are helping to relieve some of the extraordinary
stresses placed on people, communities and health organizations
struggling to deal with the dual demands of overdose crisis harm
reduction and pandemic response.
 In February of this year, our Government announced funding of over $32
million over five years to support 26 projects across the country that will
address a range of harm reduction and treatment needs, including:
o $10 million to support 13 projects relating to Harm Reduction,
Community-led and Front Line Initiatives;
o $16 million in support of 5 projects aimed at Increasing Access to
Pharmaceutical-Grade Medications (also referred to as “safe
supply”); and,
o $6 million to support 8 projects aimed at finding Approaches to
Problematic Methamphetamine Use.
BACKGROUND
In March, 2020, jointly with the provinces and territories, the Government of Canada released
updated data indicating that 14,700 Canadians lost their lives between January 2016 and
September 2019 to apparent opioid-related overdoses.
In many regions of the country, the COVID – 19 pandemic is compounding ongoing public
health crises related to high rates of opioid overdose and deaths as well as acute substance use
harms. These crises are exacerbated in communities where there is chronic overcrowding,
including a shortage of housing or other shelters. At the intersection of these public health
crises, people who use drugs (PWUD) are experiencing a number of increased risks:
• Mortality due to COVID-19 given higher prevalence of underlying health conditions
(respiratory illnesses, immune comprised, etc)
• Spread of COVID-19 due to multiple close contacts, including in the community to
support drug-seeking behaviours and/or within primary care system for harm
reduction/treatment
• Other severe health risks such as drug withdrawal for those who must self-isolate or
quarantine
• Overdose and other harms related to an increasingly toxic illicit supply
Substance use, mental health, and pain and are inter-connected and it is often challenging to
manage one without attending to the others. Many people who live with pain are coping with
underlying health conditions or receiving pain treatments (ongoing use of opioids and other
medications, steroid injections used in pain interventions), which are immune suppressing,
placing people living with pain at higher risk of contracting and experiencing severe illness due
to COVID-19. Public health measures required to respond to the pandemic have also increased
the risk of social isolation, mental illness, and suicidality, which are already prevalent among
people with chronic pain. Health and social services that help maintain function and keep
disability at bay, such as psychological supports, physical therapies, and self-management
options are more difficult to access. Canadians living with pain are therefore reporting
decreased functional capacity and quality of life, fear and anxiety, cancellations of needed in-
person care, surgeries and diagnostics, and drug shortages of certain pain medications (i.e.,
opioids, hydroxychloroquine).
Federal actions to date on this issue have been:
Increasing the reach of health system, including enabling Opioid Agonist Treatment (OAT)
Issued on March 19th, exemptions that, if permitted within the applicable provincial/territorial
scopes of practice: permit pharmacists to extend and/or transfer prescriptions; permit
prescribers to issue verbal orders to extend or refill a prescription; and permit pharmacy
employees to deliver prescriptions of controlled substances to patient’s location. These
measures facilitate self-isolation or quarantine to prevent the spread of COVID-19.
 Fully implemented in BC, AB, SK, ON, QC, NB, NS; Partially implemented (no verbal
prescriptions) in PEI, NL; Being considered in MB, YU, NU; No information NWT
Flexible access to harm reduction services
Issued on April 6th, class exemptions for all provinces and territories, for a duration of 6 months,
allowing them to modify the operations of existing SCS and establish new temporary spaces for
the safe consumption of drugs, without having to apply to Health Canada. This saves valuable
time for local officials who want to establish temporary overdose prevention services within
shelters or other temporary sites to house homeless or housing unstable people.
 No formal notice of implementation in any provinces to date, however BC has expressed
strong interest
Disseminating information and guidance
Developing and will disseminate new “tool kit”, by end of April, to support service provides and
PWUD to socially distance and self-isolate:
 Providing an an easy-to-understand summary of the various exemptions now in place for
HCP and allied HCP which facilitate flexible models of care during the pandemic;
 Consolidating prescribing and practice guidelines for HCP to foster an increase in
prescribing of medications to address symptoms of withdrawal experienced by PWUD,
including Suboxone, methadone and medications considered “safer supply” (hydrophone,
prescription grade heroin);
 Assisting PWUD, harm reduction advocacy groups and families who support PWUD to
understand how to effectively navigate the changing healthcare environment to secure
medications and treatment supports as well as educate on harm reduction measures.
Increasing access to mental health supports, including those for problematic substance use,
and provide advice for overall well-being during the pandemic to reduce risk of overdose death
and prevent spread of COVID-19
Leveraging the existing mental health as well as crisis lines and services, including the Federal
COVID-19 – Mental Health and Substance Use Portal, to provide support for substance use and
people experiencing chronic pain, including referrals to community services.
Guidance on the Use of Personal Protective Equipment
SYNOPSIS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work closely with Provinces
and Territories to provide infection prevention and control guidance for a variety
of health care settings, including long-term care facilities. The Agency has also
provided advice to workplaces and businesses on how to reduce the risk of
COVID-19 infections in the workplace, which may include the use of Personal
Protective Equipment (PPE).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why isn’t the Government recommending PPE, including N-95 masks, for all
front-line workers?
KEY MESSAGES
 The appropriate use of personal protective equipment or
PPE is one component of infection prevention and control.
 Working closely with provinces and territories, the Public
Health Agency of Canada has developed evidence-based
guidance on infection prevention and control for acute care
and long-term care settings, including the appropriate use of
PPE.
 The Agency has also provided advice to workplaces and
businesses outside the health sector on how to reduce the
risk of COVID-19 infections in the workplace, which may
include the use of PPE in some workplaces.
 The Government of Canada continues to emphasize that
staying at home, physical distancing, hand hygiene and
coughing or sneezing into your arm or sleeve are the most
effective ways to prevent transmission of the COVID-19
virus.
 Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering when you
cannot maintain a 2-metre physical distance from others, is
an additional measure you can take to prevent further
transmission of the virus to others.
 Non-medical masks for face coverings are not PPE, but they
are a way to prevent spread of the COVID-19 virus to others.
IF PRESSED ON USE ON NON-MEDICAL MASKS FOR HEALTHCARE WORKERS:
 Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical,
medical procedure masks and respirators such as N95
masks.
IF PRESSED ON WHY POSITION ON MASK USE BY THE GENERAL PUBLIC HAS
CHANGED:
 Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has
been changing as the evidence base and our understanding
of COVID-19 is rapidly evolving. We are continually looking
at the evidence as it is being produced and working with our
partners across the country and around the world to learn
more.
 Wearing a non-medical mask is an additional measure we
can take to protect others, particularly when physical
distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g., grocery
shopping, in close settings such as public transit).
BACKGROUND
Canadian public health guidance related to COVID-19 has been adjusted as the
evidence base and our understanding of COVID-19 evolves.
Healthcare workers need medical masks, including surgical, medical procedure masks
and respirators such as N95 respirators. It is extremely important that we have enough
supply of medical masks for healthcare workers where it is urgently needed for medical
procedures and to care for individuals who have COVID-19.
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) in healthcare settings
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) interim guidance on infection prevention
and control in acute healthcare settings was updated in line with our approach to keep
guidance current and to ensure we provide comprehensive recommendations based on
the best available evidence. The guidance emphasizes the need for environmental and
administrative controls in facilities to protect healthcare workers and patients, as well as
the fundamental importance of training in the use of PPE. It indicates that droplet and
contact precautions are appropriate for most patient care. Aerosol-generating medical
procedures require N95 respirators along with other PPE. The guidance remains interim
as it is subject to revision based on new scientific evidence.
In new technical guidance, PHAC recommends that all healthcare workers in acute care
hospitals wear medical masks and eye protection/face shields for the full duration of a
shift in acute healthcare settings. Wearing a medical mask throughout the duration of a
shift is an important measure to help reduce the risk of transmission from a healthcare
worker to a patient. This recommendation applies to healthcare workers who are in
direct contact with patients, as well as environmental services staff working in patient
care areas. In addition, any healthcare workers who have COVID-19-related symptoms
should immediately go home and only return to work following the advice of their local
public health units.
Healthcare workers should refer to their province or territory’s guidance, as well as
facility policies on the use of masks, eye protection, and other PPE, including any PPE
conservation strategies that are in place.
Public use of non-medical face coverings
Wearing a non-medical mask or face covering in the community has not been proven to
protect the person wearing it. However, with the emerging information regarding pre-
symptomatic and asymptomatic transmission, and the goal to stop the spread of
COVID-19, wearing a non-medical mask can be an additional measure that can be
taken to protect others when physical distancing is not possible in public settings (e.g.,
grocery shopping, in close settings such as public transit).
Wearing a non-medical mask in the community does not mean you should stop
practicing the public health measures that are known to work, such as physical
distancing. All of the recommendations regarding staying home, physical distancing,
and hand hygiene are based on what is known to work best to protect from infection. It
is important that Canadians understand what wearing a mask will achieve, and that if
they choose to wear non-medical masks, they need to use them safely. Non-medical
masks will not prevent COVID-19 spread without consistent and strict adherence to
good hygiene and public health measures, including frequent handwashing and physical
distancing.
PPE may be an important component of infection prevention efforts in non-healthcare
workplaces. However, the choice and use of PPE is based on occupational health and
safety advice specific to the job and workplace. PHAC provides information to help
employers and employees determine what infection prevention and control measures,
which might include PPE, are necessary in their workplaces.
COVID-19 Testing Reagent Procurement
SYNOPSIS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As
of May 1, 2020, 832,222 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. We are
testing between 21 to 22 thousand individuals a day. Global shortages of testing
reagents have resulted in the Government of Canada implementing an
aggressive procurement strategy to supply reagent to meet current and future
demand.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Has the Government of Canada procured a sufficient supply of reagents to meet
current and future demand for COVID-19 testing?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking action on all fronts to
mitigate the impact of the global shortage of testing reagent
on Canada’s testing capacity.
 We are procuring testing supplies both domestically and
abroad. We are investing to build sustainable capacity in
Canada.
 Public-private collaborations are helping us meet reagent
needs. For example, a testing reagent developed by the
National Microbiology Laboratory is being produced by
Luminultra, a New Brunswick-based company that will
supply reagent for 500,000 tests a week for the next year.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
laboratory testing they need in response to the serious
health threat posed by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON CAPACITY TO TEST MORE CANADIANS
 Canada has and will continue to test symptomatic
individuals, as part of our evidence-based approach, while
considering the evolving science on other testing
scenarios. As the science evolves, our approach will keep
pace, and policies and protocols will be updated
accordingly.
 As new products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire new products and platforms to augment existing
testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT OTHER STEPS CANADA HAS TAKEN TO ENSURE THERE
IS SUFFICENT REAGENTS FOR TESTING
 The Public Health Agency of Canada has also worked
closely with provincial public health laboratories to provide
access to different test platforms. This enables provincial
public health laboratories to leverage other platforms to
mitigate reagent shortages.
 The Government of Canada is investigating other in-Canada
options for the production of reagents for testing purposes.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) National Microbiology Laboratory (NML)
is working in close collaboration with provincial and territorial public health laboratories
to perform diagnostic testing for the virus that causes COVID-19.
As of May 1, 2020, 832,222 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Testing in
Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with COVID-19.
Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak of COVID-19 spreads.
PHAC works with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing strategy that will
help us maximize the impact of our testing resources and delay the spread of COVID-19
in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Reagents are chemicals that are used to extract, amplify, and/or detect the virus.
Internationally, there has been a shortage of reagents to support laboratory testing.
Health Plan to Support Restarting the Economy
SYNOPSIS
 Canada, along with Provinces and Territories, has taken decisive measures to
slow and contain the spread of COVID-19 infections. These strong public health
measures have had a major impact on Canada’s economy.
 Epidemiological data now suggests that some jurisdictions may be past their
peaks and planning is underway to safely restore economic activity while
protecting the health of Canadians.
 Until there is a vaccine or effective treatment, strong measures must be in place
for this new normal phase of living with COVID-19 to control future waves or
outbreaks and to protect both citizens and economies across the country.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the government doing to allow Canadians to return back to normal?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is working in collaboration with provinces
and territories on a coordinated approach to gradually restart
the economy while protecting the health and safety of all
Canadians.
 On April 28th, the federal, provincial and territorial
governments released a set of common principles, criteria,
and measures to help guide governments as they restart,
economic activity, based on a public health approach.
 First Ministers acknowledged the importance of restarting
the economy through a gradual and phased approach with
specific focus on protecting health of Canadians; protecting
high-risk groups; ensuring public health capacity remains
strong and supporting a broad range of economic sectors.
 Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, all orders of
government have been working together to slow and contain
the spread of virus.
 As the first wave of virus’ activity passes, provinces and
territories will move at their own pace to safely restore
economic activities within their jurisdictions, while protecting
the health of Canadians.
IF PRESSED…
 The specific criteria and thresholds underpinning our health
plan have been developed by the Chief Public Health Officer
working in consultation with her colleagues from across the
country as part of the Special Advisory Committee.
BACKGROUND
Since the onset of the COVID-19 epidemic in Canada, the federal government has been
working closely with PT governments to manage the epidemic. Many wide-ranging
public health measures have been taken, which has resulted in a reduced and delayed
peak of infections. Epidemiological evidence suggests that some jurisdictions are
beyond their initial peak of infections leading the way for planning to safely restore
economic activity, while protecting the health of Canadians.
Until there is a vaccine or effective treatment, strong and continued FPT collaboration
will be required. PT governments will make decisions suited to their jurisdictions,
geography and disease activity, but these decisions will be informed by experiences in
other countries in Asia, Europe, and around the world – particularly those who had
outbreaks earlier than Canada and who have achieved demonstrable successes. A
shared key objective by all PTs is to minimize the risk of another wave of COVID-19 that
forces governments to reimpose severe restrictions, further damaging the social and
economic fabric of communities.
FPT plans to gradually lift restrictions will have a shared focus on:
 Protecting the health of Canadians;
 Easing restrictions gradually;
 Protecting high risk groups (e.g. those vulnerable due to age, protecting high-risk
groups (e.g., those vulnerable due to age, underlying health
conditions, remote location, close living spaces and temporary or unstable living
spaces);
 Ensuring our public health capacity remains strong to prepare for and respond to
any
future waves of the pandemic, including through enhanced testing and contact
tracing; and,
 Supporting a broad range of economic sectors.
COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
SYNOPSIS
 The Government of Canada has established a COVID-19 Immunity Task Force
to oversee the coordination of a series of country-wide blood test surveys that will
tell us how widely the virus has spread in Canada and provide reliable estimates
of potential immunity and vulnerabilities in Canadian populations. Over the next
two years, at least one million blood samples will be collected and tested for the
presence of SARS-CoV-2 antibodies. Knowledge of the level of immunity in the
general population, and in vulnerable populations such as the elderly and
healthcare workers, will guide important public health decisions and
immunization strategies once a vaccine becomes available.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Who will be part of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force Leadership Group?
 How will privacy and confidentiality concerns regarding the results of these blood
tests be addressed?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will mobilize Canada’s
top public health professionals and scientists to undertake
coordinated studies on the extent of COVID-19 infection in
the population.
 Understanding the potential immunity to COVID-19 in
specific high-risk groups like the elderly or health-care
workers will give us information on the best strategies to re-
open the economy while guarding against a second wave of
infection.
 It will contribute to global data collection on immunity to
COVID-19 to accelerate efforts to understand this virus and
how to fight it.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 IMMUNITY TASK FORCE
 The composition of the COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will
reflect key agencies of the Government of Canada and
include representation from several provincial Ministries of
Health as well as experts from across Canada in matters
related to serologic surveillance, immunology, virology,
infectious diseases, public health, and clinical medicine.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will operate under the
direction of a Leadership Group composed of experts who
are recognized for their scientific leadership, international
public health experience in knowledge translation and
networks, and experience leading complex initiatives.
 The Leadership Group, which includes Canada’s Chief
Public Health Officer and Canada’s Chief Science Advisor,
had its first meeting on April 30, 2020, to identify roles and
initial priority areas of work.
 The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force will put in place the
necessary mechanisms to ensure that privacy, confidentiality
and ethical considerations are guiding the direction and
implementation of this initiative.
BACKGROUND
As the first wave of COVID-19 begins to peak in Canada, it is important not only to
marshal all available resources to manage the immediate surge of patients needing
care, but also to anticipate what lies beyond the peak. In Canada, we do not know the
degree of immunity to COVID-19 in the population.
Serology testing (collecting and testing blood samples for antibodies to SARS-CoV-2) of
large numbers of people will provide the data needed to understand the scale of
infection in the Canadian population. This approach will help us capture not only
symptomatic individuals, but also asymptomatic or mildly symptomatic people who we
are not aware of as they did not seek healthcare. The importance of coordinated, rapid
and representative national surveys cannot be understated. They provide critical
information on the current spread of COVID-19, and help us prepare for possible future
waves of infection, both in the general population or vulnerable groups.
Targeted sero-surveys on the levels and trends in immune status amongst specific
groups such as public-facing workers or among children and youth can inform the best
timing of decisions for safe return to work and to school. They can help to direct
proactive preventive efforts with vaccines and disease-modifying or even disease-
preventing therapies should they become available. And they inform targeted
surveillance efforts to contain and stop further outbreaks before they become
epidemics.
The COVID-19 Immunity Task Force, a pan-Canadian consortium for COVID-19
serology surveillance, is being established to catalyze, support, and harmonize the
design and rapid implementation of population-based studies that will generate reliable
first estimates of SARS-CoV-2 immunity, overall and in vulnerable populations across
Canada. This work will also contribute to what is happening globally. For example, as
part of the World Health Organization global initiatives that provide standardized
protocols: Solidarity II (pool findings from large-scale antibody studies around the
world); and Unity Studies (population based sero-prevalence, household transmission).
Testing Capacity
SYNOPSIS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As
of May 1, 2020, 832,222 people in Canada were tested for COVID-19. We are
testing between 21 and 22 thousand individuals a day. Shortages of testing
supplies will present a barrier to the significant ramp up of testing anticipated in
provinces and territories as we enter the recovery phase of the epidemic and
begin to open up the economy.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by a lack of testing capacity
in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking all action necessary to
protect the health and safety of Canadians during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response. We are supporting provinces and territories as
they deploy testing to detect and control the spread of
COVID-19.
 Shortages of COVID-19 testing supplies are a global
problem. Canada is implementing an aggressive
procurement strategy to meet both current and future
demand as testing continues to ramp up across the country.
 On March 18, 2020, the Government of Canada approved
an interim order to expedite the review of medical devices,
including test kits. An interim order is one of the fastest
mechanisms available to address large-scale public health
emergencies.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING TESTING CAPACITY
 My health portfolio continues to work with colleagues in
Public Services Procurement Canada and Innovation,
Science and Economic Development Canada to identify new
products and platforms.
 As new test products or platforms become available and
approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will work with provincial public health laboratories to
acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
 These efforts will help ensure Canadians have access to the
testing they need during the serious health threat posed by
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON SEROLOGY TESTING
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working on
developing a number of in-house serological tests in addition
to evaluating a variety of commercial tests for COVID-19.
 Developing and applying a serological test for COVID-19
poses challenges as this is an emerging virus and the
performance of new tests require additional research.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory, working with Health
Canada and other partners, is assessing a number of
serological tests and is collecting blood samples to evaluate
and identify serological tests that will produce accurate and
reliable results.
BACKGROUND
The Public Health Agency of Canada works closely with provincial and territorial
laboratories to conduct laboratory testing for the virus that causes COVID-19. As of May
1, 2020, 832,222 patients in Canada were tested for COVID-19. Over the last week, an
average of 21,136 individuals were tested a day in Canada.
Testing in Canada is focused on people who present with symptoms consistent with
COVID-19. Canada’s testing strategies continue to evolve as the outbreak spreads.
PHAC continues to work with provincial and territorial partners on a national testing
strategy that will help maximize the impact of testing resources and delay the spread of
COVID-19 in high-risk settings, such as hospitals and long-term care facilities.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for
commercial diagnostic devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic
capacity.
COVID-19 Test Kits
SYNOPSIS
 On March 18, 2020, the Minister of Health approved an Interim Order (IO) to
expedite the review of medical devices, including test kits.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to ensure Canada has access to the testing
devices needed during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Early diagnosis is critical to slowing and reducing the spread
of COVID-19 in Canada.
 The Government of Canada is ensuring quicker and more
flexible approval to import and sell medical devices that are
necessary for Canada’s response to COVID-19. This
includes test kits.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada reviewers to ensure that it is
supported by evidence showing it meets standards for safety
and effectiveness.
 Health Canada has authorized 15 test kits through an
expedited regulatory review process under the Interim Order
for medical devices issued on March 18, 2020.
 Only diagnostic tests authorized by Health Canada can be
imported or sold in Canada. Unauthorized tests may not
produce accurate results, leading to potential misdiagnosis.
IF PRESSED on authorization for serological tests:
 Health Canada has received submissions for:
- nucleic acid-based tests
- serological-based tests
 These technologies have different levels of reliability and are
used for different purposes.
 Nucleic acid based testing diagnoses COVID-19 infection
and detects the virus itself. Public health laboratories across
Canada and worldwide use it to detect active infections of
COVID-19.
 Health Canada has authorized 15 nucleic acid-based tests
as of April 30.
 Serologic tests are not used to diagnose COVID-19. They
detect antibodies developed against the virus and could be
useful in assessing the extent of COVID-19 spread in the
population.
 My department is working with leading regulators and world-
renowned national laboratories to identify serological tests
that will produce accurate and reliable results.
 To date, Health Canada has not authorized any serological
test.
IF PRESSED on the accuracy of the test kits:
 Health Canada has maintained a science-informed approach
to managing the pandemic.
 A medical device is authorized only after a scientific
assessment by Health Canada to ensure that it is supported
by evidence showing it meets standards for safety and
effectiveness.
 As with all medical devices, Health Canada will assess and
monitor the safety and effectiveness of the devices once
they are on the market.
IF PRESSED on the accuracy and status of Spartan test kits:
 On April 11, 2020, Health Canada completed its scientific
review to ensure that the device was supported by evidence
that it meets requirements for safety and effectiveness.
 Health Canada’s regulatory decision was based on in-
laboratory testing of the device . The review took into
consideration that further validation would be carried out by
public health laboratories in order to determine performance
in clinical settings. This regulatory approach is consistent
with those taken by other trusted regulators.
 On May 1, 2020, the NML provided Health Canada with a
final report of clinical testing performed in three provinces
(Alberta, Ontario and Manitoba) using Spartan swabs to
collect specimens directly from patients under clinical
conditions.
 The report identified that while the Spartan Cube performed
in a laboratory setting, as per manufacturer specifications,
there were performance issues identified in the clinical trial.
These issues appears be related to the proprietary swab,
which may not sufficiently collect mucosal material
necessary for testing.
 In light of the clinical results, on May 2, 2020, Health Canada
has placed conditions on the company’s authorization to
restrict the sale of the product to research use only, until
adequate evidence of clinical performance can be provided.
 It’s important to note that the company informed the
Department that none of the tests were used for diagnosis
purposes.
 Health Canada will continue to work with Spartan as they
address the regulatory requirements to enable utilization of
the point of care test kit.
IF PRESSED on fraudulent test kits:
 Health Canada has identified companies engaging in non-
compliant advertising activities associated with COVID-19
and unauthorized products including test kits.
 In these cases, Health Canada works to verify compliance
and will take action should any non-compliance be identified.
BACKGROUND
Early diagnosis and isolation of patients infected with COVID-19 are essential to slowing
the spread of the novel coronavirus across Canada. Diagnostic testing is important for
clinical care and public health management.
Under the IO, manufacturers must submit an abbreviated application to support the
safety, effectiveness and quality of their medical device. Fees associated with an
application through the IO pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received submissions for two types of testing devices:
1. nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the virus)
Public health laboratories across Canada and around the world use nucleic acid-based
testing to reliably diagnose COVID-19 infection by detecting the virus itself. The review
of diagnostic tests using nucleic acid technology has been prioritized to increase the
number of tests available in Canada to detect active infections of COVID-19.
2. serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Serologic tests detect the antibodies developed against the virus. Health Canada is not
aware of a serological-based test that can diagnose COVID-19. Serological tests are
not appropriate for early diagnosis of COVID-19, given the time required after infection
to develop antibodies.
Health Canada has not authorized any serological tests for sale in Canada. The
Department continues to consider applications for serological devices and could
authorize them for specific purposes other than diagnosis in the near future. Health
Canada's position regarding serological assays is in line with the World Health
Organization's (WHO) view that serological assays will play an important role in
research and surveillance but are not currently recommended for case detection.
Serological tests will play an important role in an overall testing strategy for Canada as
they will provide evidence in assessing the true extent of COVID-19 in the general
population.
Health Canada collaborates with the National Microbiology Laboratory and provincial
public health laboratory partners and will leverage the studies of immune responses and
serological technologies underway in Canada and internationally. The uses for which
serological technologies are authorized will depend on the type of evidence that Health
Canada receives from the manufacturer and from these studies.
Access to Drugs and Vaccines for COVID-19
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
medical system, and there is a need for drugs and vaccines to support the
response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to help Canadians get access to drugs and
vaccines for COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The COVID-19 pandemic is unlike anything we have
seen in recent history. Health Canada is proactively
doing all it can to respond to the pandemic in its role
as health product regulator.
 At this time, there are no drugs or vaccines that have
been proven safe and effective for the treatment or
prevention of COVID-19. Several therapies are in
development , and existing drugs are being assessed
for this potential .
 As of May 1, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 23
clinical trials for treatments targeting COVID-19. An
up-to-date list of all these trials is available on Health
Canada’s website.
 Health Canada will expedite the review and approval
of drugs and vaccines to address COVID-19, while
continuing to ensure that these products are safe,
effective and of high quality.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE AVAILABILITY
 Health Canada is closely monitoring global vaccine
development and is in active discussions with several
vaccine manufacturers and researchers to provide regulatory
and scientific advice for vaccine trials that may launch in
Canada.
 While recognizing the urgent need for a vaccine, Health
Canada will require all products to demonstrate a high level
of safety, efficacy and quality before coming to the Canadian
market.
IF PRESSED ON CLINICAL TRIALS
 Since no drugs have yet been proven safe and efficacious
for COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that any
potential treatments for this disease be investigated through
clinical trials. The Department is working hard to facilitate
and expedite as many of clinical trials for COVID-19 in
Canada as possible, without compromising the quality
standard of these trials.
 Clinical trials are conducted to determine whether new drugs
are safe and effective in humans. Clinical trials ensure the
quality of the study, protection of the patient, and the proper
collection and retention of outcomes. It is the best
mechanism to provide trial volunteers access to new drugs
before they are approved.
IF PRESSED ON POTENTIAL DRUG TREATMENTS
 At present, there is insufficient evidence to recommend any
specific anti-COVID-19 treatment for patients outside of
clinical trials.
 Results from large, well-designed studies are needed to
make any conclusions on the safety and efficacy of any
drugs or vaccines.
IF PRESSED ON REMDESIVIR
 Health Canada has been closely monitoring developments
for potential treatments for COVID-19, including the
experimental drug remdesivir. Some early clinical trial
evidence coming from the National Institute of Allergy and
Infectious Diseases (NIAID) in the US suggests that it may
help patients to recover sooner.
 Health Canada is working collaboratively with our
international counterparts, including the US Food and Drug
Administration, to share scientific information and align
requirements for safety and efficacy where possible to
expedite the review and approval process.
 Remdesivir is still considered an experimental therapy. To
date, Health Canada has approved two clinical trials for
remdesivir in the context of COVID-19 in Canada
 Remdesevir has also been accessed on a case-by-case
basis through Health Canada’s Special Access Program
(SAP) which provides emergency access to medications for
serious or life-threatening conditions.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
 Health Canada is leveraging its strong international
partnerships with the US Food and Drug Administration, the
European Medicines Agency, and the World Health
Organization, amongst others, to share information and to
raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based
approaches for vaccines and treatments. The objective is to
work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to
stay informed of any potential treatments.
IF PRESSED ON STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT
 Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the
health product industry to proactively identify, track and
provide support to sponsors of clinical trials for vaccines and
treatments for COVID-19.
 Health Canada recognizes that many stakeholders, health
professionals and Canadians are looking for the latest
information about health products for COVID-19. The
department has created a new website for the health product
industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval
and who to contact for questions. We are also making sure
information relevant to health professionals and Canadians
is up-to-date on our website.
IF PRESSED ON UNAPPROVED PRODUCTS
 The most appropriate way to determine what treatments may
be effective for COVID-19 is through properly designed and
conducted clinical trials. Health Canada is expediting the
review of clinical trials so that products can be studied and
made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
BACKGROUND
New Legislative Authorities
In order to be able to take rapid action, on March 25, 2020, amendments to the Food
and Drugs Act and the Patent Act were passed that will streamline processes and
provide the Government with additional powers.
The amendments will:
 help prevent and mitigate shortages of drugs and medical devices;
 seek additional information from companies to confirm that products are safe for
Canadians; and
 allow making, using, or selling a patented invention, such as a medication, that is
needed to respond to this pandemic.
Interim measures are also improving access to products that are approved or registered
in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory frameworks and quality assurances, but may
not fully meet some of the regulatory requirements under the Food and Drugs Act —
such as packaging requirements.
Mobilizing manufacturing capacity
Health Canada is working closely with stakeholders in other sectors of our economy,
many of which are scaling up or re-tooling their manufacturing capacity to provide much
needed tests or medical supplies. We are taking a whole-of-government approach to
mobilize industry, providing them with information and support for research, market
approval, manufacturing and supply.
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a new
website for the health product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory
approval and who to contact for questions. Information relevant to health professionals
and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials, potential
diagnostic tests, treatments and vaccines related to COVID-19.
Clinical Trials
Health Canada is facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada. Clinical trials
are conducted to determine whether new drugs, diagnostics or treatments are both safe
and effective in human beings. Several existing drugs have been repurposed to assess
their potential in treating or preventing COVID-19, while other new drugs are under
development. Since no drug treatments have been proven safe and efficacious for
COVID-19, Health Canada recommends that any treatments be investigated in clinical
trials.
Clinical trial applications will be reviewed and approved by Health Canada in under 15
days. As of May 1, 2020, Health Canada has authorized 23 clinical trials for treatments
targeting COVID-19, most of which are repurposing existing drugs.
Until a vaccine or drug is available on the Canadian market, another option for access is
Health Canada's Special Access Program. This Program is available to practitioners
requiring access to unapproved drugs that could be used in the treatment of the
infection. Our goal is to ensure that Canada is prepared for whatever challenges come
our way.
Hospital/Health Care System Impacts
SYNOPSIS
 Management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address COVID-19’s impacts on the health
care system?
KEY MESSAGES
 As a result of the unprecedented efforts taken so far to
implement public health measures across Canada and to
free up hospital capacity, Canada’s hospitals have not been
overwhelmed by COVID-19 as was initially feared.
 Provinces and territories have freed up capacity to meet
projected needs, such as cancelling elective surgeries,
physically reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create
more isolation areas, and transferring patients who no longer
need to be in hospital to other settings.
 Many provinces have also increased use of publicly funded
virtual care services and online screening assessments. This
can take pressure off of emergency departments and
support physical distancing.
 Virtual care is an area of focus of the federal government, in
collaboration with provinces and territories. On May 3, the
Prime Minister announced $240.5 million in funding to
develop, expand, and launch virtual care and mental health
tools to support Canadians.
 These investments will be used to, among other things,
create digital platforms and applications, improve access to
virtual mental health supports, and expand capacity to
deliver health care virtually, including projects to reach
vulnerable Canadians.
 Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have
worked with provinces and territories to model potential
pressure points related to the availability of beds and
ventilators, which in turn informed decisions on how to
allocate resources.
 We will continue to work with provinces and territories as
they implement their recovery plans to ensure health care
system capacity.
IF PRESSED on how modelling is helping to inform decisions about health
system capacity
 Governments continue to work collaboratively to model
demands on health systems under different modelling
scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national
level with support from the Canadian Institute for Health
Information.
 As provinces and territories make decisions on when to
resume some health care services, such as elective
surgeries, they are also taking into account the need to
maintain sufficient surge capacity to meet the subsequent
waves of infection we unfortunately expect to see until a
vaccine is available.
IF PRESSED on whether we will have enough capacity
 At this time, provinces and territories have indicated that
they have sufficient hospital capacity to address COVID-19
for their epidemic control scenarios.
 But we know too that in our worst case scenario models, our
systems would be severely stressed, despite efforts to put in
place extra capacity.
 That is why governments are now thinking very carefully
about how best to de-escalate public health restrictions in a
way that will avoid future spikes in demand for health
services as we live with COVID-19 in the new normal.
BACKGROUND
 A committee of federal/provincial/territorial Deputy Ministers of Health is meeting
regularly to address challenges in responding to the pandemic and to share best
practices for the health care system response.
 This joint work builds on the work provinces and territories are already doing to put
into action the pandemic plans and procedures they prepared for use in times like
this, based on international experiences and guidance. Provinces and territories
have taken a range of actions to increase system capacity and meet projected
needs. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically reconfiguring spaces to
fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients who no
longer need to be in hospital to other settings.
 Many provinces have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on emergency
departments and is also complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces
and territories are also running training exercises and simulations, and are hiring or
rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
 At the same time, because the surge of COVID-19 cases has been lower than
predicted by provinces to date, there is currently significant capacity sitting idle.
Once the services cancelled to free up extra capacity are reintroduced into the
system – like elective surgeries – addressing pent up demand for those services will
pose its own challenges for system capacity. Governments will share best practices
for when and how best to ease restrictions in a way that will best balance the needs
of COVID-19 and non-COVID-19 patients.
Trikafta
SYNOPSIS
 In October 2019, the US Food and Drug Administration approved Trikafta, the
first triple combination therapy available to treat patients with the most common
cystic fibrosis mutation. The annual cost of treatment with Trikafta is over
$300,000 USD. Although Health Canada has not received a new drug
submission for Trikafta, as of May 6, 2020, there have been 95 Special Access
Program (SAP) requests for this drug for 98 patients. Media interest is high
around the funding and availability of the drug, particularly because of its use in
the pediatric population. The Department has also received many letters from
patients and their supporters expressing their desire to have this drug available in
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to make Trikafta available to Canadians with cystic
fibrosis?
KEY MESSAGES
 The health and safety of Canadians is our top priority.
 Health Canada recognizes the importance of patient access
to new therapies for serious or life-threatening conditions. To
date, the manufacturer of Trikafta has not submitted an
application to market this product in Canada.
 While Health Canada encourages manufacturers to submit
an application for authorization of this drug for sale in
Canada, it is the manufacturer’s decision whether or not to
apply to market their product in Canada.
 For serious or life-threatening conditions, such as cystic
fibrosis, physicians may request access to the drug through
Health Canada’s Special Access Programme (SAP). As of
May 6, 2020, there have been 95 SAP requests for Trikafta
for 98 patients.
 To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments,
we are working with provinces, territories and other partners
to develop a national strategy for high cost drugs for rare
diseases. This is an important step in working with provinces
and territories on national pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON THE DRUG APPROVAL
 Health Canada carefully reviews new drugs to determine
that they are safe, effective and of good quality. This
decision is distinct from price-setting and reimbursement
decisions, which are managed by agencies separate from
Health Canada.
 One of the first steps in a new drug approval process is to
conduct clinical trials which can also be a potential way to
access unauthorized drugs. Although there are currently no
clinical trials for Trikafta open in Canada, Health Canada is
available to provide guidance to a sponsor wishing to
conduct a clinical trial.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF THE MODERNIZING THE PMPRB
 Our Government is committed to improving Canadians’
access to, and the affordability of, necessary prescription
medicines.
 Canada will continue to be an important market for new
medicines. In fact, many countries with much lower medicine
prices gain access to new medicines in the same time frame,
or even faster than Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
BACKGROUND
Trikafta, by the drug manufacturer Vertex Pharma, is the first triple combination therapy
available to treat patients with the most common cystic fibrosis mutation. It is reported to
increase lung function by an average of 14%, which is a significant improvement for
many patients struggling with the effects of cystic fibrosis.
Under the Food and Drug Act and Regulations, all products sold or marketed in Canada
and making a therapeutic claim need to be approved by Health Canada. The drug
authorization process is initiated when a manufacturer submits an application to Health
Canada for review. Every submission is then reviewed by scientists to assess the
product’s safety, efficacy and quality. At this time, Health Canada has not received a
new drug submission for Trikafta although Health Canada and Vertex Pharma have
been in contact in regards to this product. While Health Canada encourages
manufacturers to submit an application for authorization of this drug for sale in Canada,
it is the company’s decision whether or not to submit a new drug application.
Products containing compounds found in Trikafta are approved by Health Canada for
use in treating Cystic Fibrosis. The products are:
 KALYDECO (Ivacaftor)
 SYMDECO (Ivacaftor and Tezacaftor)
 ORKAMBI (Ivacaftor and Lumacaftor)
All drug products approved for sale in Canada are listed on the Drug Product Database,
available at: https://health-products.canada.ca/dpd-bdpp/index-eng.jsp.
The Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests from practitioners treating
patients with serious or life-threatening conditions for drugs that are unavailable for sale
in Canada when conventional treatments have failed, or are deemed unsuitable for the
patient. Decisions by SAP are taken on a case-by-case basis. They are based on the
clinical details of the patient’s unique situation as well as the clinical reasons why other
marketed therapies may not be suited for a patient. As of May 6, 2020, SAP has
received 95 requests for access to Trikafta for 98 patients.
SAP does not provide drug funding to Canadians for access to medication and does not
have a role in the drug reimbursement process. Decisions on insurance coverage or
funding are under the jurisdiction of the provinces and territories.
The Government of Canada is committed to improving the affordability and accessibility
of prescription drugs for all Canadians. That is why we are working with provinces and
territories as an active member of the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to
combine the governments’ collective buying power to negotiate lower prices on brand
name drugs for all public plans, including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
Additionally, in August 2019, the Government announced final amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations. These amendments will give the Patented Medicine
Prices Review Board (PMPRB) the tools it needs to protect Canadians from excessive
prices and make patented medicines more affordable for all payers - public and private
drug plans, as well as Canadians who pay out of pocket for their prescription drugs,
including high cost drugs for rare diseases.
Spartan Biosciences
SYNOPSIS
 Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan
Biosciences, Health Canada authorized the sale of the Spartan diagnostic test
device on April 11, 2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders
from Spartan Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92
million tests in order to ensure access to point of care testing in regions where it
is needed to support rapid turn-around of test results. Before distributing testing
devices for clinical use, the National Microbiology Laboratory conducts clinical
validation to ensure satisfactory test performance in the real-world clinical
setting. On May 1, the National Microbiology Laboratory shared the findings of
their clinical validation of the Spartan device with Health Canada. In light of the
poor results of clinical performance of the device, Health Canada is amending
the Interim Order authorization of this device to “for research use only”.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the health and safety of Canadians be impacted by the results of the Spartan
test kit?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is taking all action necessary to
protect the health and safety of Canadians during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
 Testing is an essential component of Canada’s COVID-19
response.
 The Spartan test is a point of care test that offers rapid test
results and is particularly useful in northern and remote
communities.
 As soon as problems were identified with the performance of
the Spartan test, Health Canada amended its authorization
to limit use of the test to research purposes only. All testing
devices that had been sold to date were for research use.
The National Microbiology Laboratory worked with other

public health laboratories to validate the Spartan test and
has provided data to Spartan to assist the company with test
improvements.
 Canada is implementing an aggressive procurement strategy
to meet both current and future demand as testing continues
to ramp up across the country.
BACKGROUND
Spartan Biosciences, an Ottawa-based company, created a made-in-Canada rapid
COVID-19 analyzer, the Spartan Cube, and test reagents. Spartan’s research is
supported by the National Research Council of Canada’s Industrial Research
Assistance Program. The company was awarded a Government of Canada contract to
accelerate the development of the rapid COVID-19 diagnostic test.
Based on analytical data from laboratory studies provided by Spartan Biosciences,
Health Canada completed a scientific review of the Spartan diagnostic test device on
April 11, 2020. The Public Health Agency of Canada had placed orders from Spartan
Biosciences for 700 test devices and test kits to perform 1.92 million tests in order to
ensure access to point of care testing is in regions where it is needed to support rapid
turn-around of test results.
English-Only Labelling on Certain Imported Health Products
SYNOPSIS
 The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s
health care system, and there is an urgent need for certain health products, such
as hand sanitizers and disinfectants, to support the response.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why is Health Canada temporarily allowing English-only labelling on some
imported health products during the COVID-19 pandemic?
KEY MESSAGES
 Health Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of
Canadians, and the Department is doing everything possible
to facilitate access to products needed to slow the spread of
COVID-19.
 In light of the unprecedented demand and urgent need for
products to help limit the spread of COVID-19, Health
Canada is facilitating access, on a temporary basis, to
certain imported health products that are labelled in only one
official language to increase access to products that are in
high demand.
 Many global suppliers have indicated that they are labelling
products in English only to expedite production and that they
will ship only to countries that will accept English-only
labelling.
 Importers will be required to post bilingual label text on their
websites and provide sellers with a means to inform
consumers, at the point of sale, of where they can access
bilingual information on the product.
 As of May [6], 2020 all new importers of these products
through the interim measure must have bilingual labelling
text available to consumers. As of June 8, 2020, importers
previously authorized are required to have bilingual label text
available on their websites and a means for sellers to inform
consumers of this website at the time of sale.
 As of May [6], 2020, all new Canadian manufacturers of
these products must use bilingual labelling. Canadian
manufacturers of hand sanitizers who are currently licensed
and are using unilingual labelling under the interim measure
will be required to move to bilingual labeling by June 8,
2020.
 Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing
any non-compliance identified.
 Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular
supply stabilizes.
IF PRESSED…
Technical Grade Ethanol
 Health Canada is aware that there is a critical shortage of
pharmaceutical and food-grade ethanol for use in hand
sanitizers. To meet this shortage, we have temporarily
authorized the use of certain sources of technical-grade
ethanol in hand sanitizer products.
IF PRESSED…
Bilingual Language Requirements for Domestic and Imported Products
 Health Canada is focused on expediting review and approval
of hand sanitizers and disinfectants to address the COVID-
19 pandemic, while continuing to ensure that these products
are safe and effective for Canadians.
 As of May [6], 2020 all new importers of these products
through the interim measure must have bilingual labelling
text available to consumers. As of June 8, 2020, importers
previously authorized are required to have bilingual label text
available on their websites and a means for sellers to inform
consumers of this website at the time of sale.
 As of May [6], 2020, all new Canadian manufacturers of
these products must use bilingual labelling. Canadian
manufacturers of hand sanitizers who are currently licensed
and are using unilingual labelling under the interim measure
will be required to move to bilingual labeling by June 8,
2020.
BACKGROUND
Interim measures
In March and April 2020, Health Canada implemented a number of interim measures to
facilitate expedited access to products that do not fully meet regulatory requirements
(e.g., labelling) set out in regulations under the Food and Drugs Act. These measures
have enabled access to the Canadian marketplace, health care settings, and
commercial and industrial settings.
The interim policies include facilitating the importation of:
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are already authorized for sale in
Canada but are not fully compliant with Health Canada requirements (e.g.,
English-only labelling, different packaging from what was authorized); and
 hand sanitizers and disinfectants that are not authorized for sale in Canada,
but are authorized or registered in other jurisdictions with similar regulatory
frameworks and quality assurances.
Some of these products may have unilingual labelling, or labelling in English or French
and another language.
Importers of disinfectants and hand sanitizers will be required to post bilingual labels on
their website and to provide sellers with a means to inform consumers, at the time of
sale, of the website where bilingual label text is posted. This could be made available
through a sticker applied directly to the products, or posters or signage with take-away
pamphlets at the point of sale.
Domestically, one of the specific requests from industry was a flexibility for small local
distilleries that did not have the capacity for bilingual labelling to be able to use
unilingual labelling in non-bilingual regions.
Given the increase in availability of hand sanitizers, domestic manufacturers of new
hand sanitizers require bilingual labelling on their products, effective immediately.
Existing product licence holders using unilingual labels under the interim measure are
required to move to bilingual labelling by June 8.
Health Canada acknowledges that it may take some time before bilingual labelling or
information directing consumers to the company’s website for bilingual content will
appear on retail shelves. Health Canada will take a risk-based approach to addressing
any non-compliance identified.
Health Canada will lift the interim measures when the regular supply stabilizes.
Stakeholder Engagement
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the natural health product and
food industry to proactively identify, engage and provide support to manufactures,
packagers, labelers and/or importers of hand sanitizers and disinfectants in response to
the COVID-19 pandemic.
Health Canada brought together industry partners to facilitate the supply of key
ingredients and to maximize the domestic production of hand sanitizers and
disinfectants, and companies who do not typically operate in health product
manufacturing such as distilleries, breweries and refineries producing hand sanitizers.
International Collaboration
Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships and working with the
United Kingdom Health and Safety Executive and the United States Food and Drug
Administration to share information on best practices and evidence-based approaches
for hand sanitizers and disinfectants.
Cancellation of CIHR Spring Grant Competition
SYNOPSIS
 COVID-19 continues to draw public, political and media attention with most
recent scrutiny on funding decisions for non-COVID-19 and COVID-19 research,
notably CIHR’s Rapid Research Response and the Spring 2020 Project Grant
Competition.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Why did CIHR cancel its Spring 2020 Project Grant Competition?
 How were Covid-19 research grants selected and approved for funding?
KEY MESSAGES
Spring 2020 Project Grant Competition
 I want to assure you that CIHR did not take the decision
lightly to postpone the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition
and consulted closely with the research community when
considering options in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 In March, it became clear that asking hundreds of
researchers to travel to Ottawa to review thousands of
applications was not the right thing to do. Physical distancing
had to be respected and researchers were preoccupied with
the closing of their labs across Canada.
 This is why, instead of launching the Spring Competition,
CIHR decided to act quickly to support the research
community in this difficult time and granted extensions to
researchers who currently hold a CIHR grant.
 No funding from the Spring Competition was used in the
funding of research related to COVID-19; all remaining funds
will be reinvested in future Project Grant Competitions.
Rapid Research Response to COVID-19
 As you know, research is a critical component of both
domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19- and
the Canadian research community has risen to the
challenge.
 With respect to CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Research
Response, standard processes were expedited though, as
per usual, each application was subjected to rigorous peer
review.
 And I want to thank the research community for responding
in record time to identify the most promising research
projects to fight this virus. To keep the COVID-19 funding
competition moving quickly, many researchers volunteered
their time and effort to peer review the applications CIHR
received.
 As such, I have confidence that the research funded through
CIHR’s Rapid Research Response to COVID-19 represents
projects that have the greatest potential to help Canada
address this public health crisis.
BACKGROUND
Why did CIHR cancel the Spring 2020 Grant Competition?
CIHR made the decision to cancel the spring competition following consultations with its
partners at the U-15, Universities Canada, HealthCareCAN, and the University
Delegates Network, among others. CIHR made this decision for the following key
reasons:
 Virtual review is currently not feasible. With the situation continuing to evolve, we
could not be certain about the reliability of the critical infrastructure required to
deliver a high-quality competition.
 Many of our peer reviewers are clinician scientists and health professionals who
have heeded the call to lend a hand as resources are stretched thin on the
ground. It would have been irresponsible for CIHR to divert their attention at this
critical time of need.
 With researchers following public health advice to curtail travel and self-isolate,
carrying out face-to-face peer review for the Spring 2020 Project Grant
competition would have been contrary to all public health advice.
 Our pool of peer reviewers is made up of many professors who are now faced
with the task of modifying their courses and final exams to switch to delivering
them in an online format. This shift will entail a great deal of work, and we do not
want to add to their burden.
 Finally, we know that, just as we all are, the researchers who would normally
peer review for this competition are occupied with looking after the health and
safety of their families and loved ones, as well as additional care-giving roles,
which need to be their top priority.
How will the funds from the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition be
redistributed to the research community?
CIHR had planned to invest $275M in this competition and, as with all competitions, this
investment would have been made over multiple fiscal years. Similar to the measures
taken when the Spring 2017 Project Grant competition was delayed, CIHR will use
some of the funds that were planned for the Spring 2020 competition to financially
extend all existing investigator-initiated research grants scheduled to expire between
June 30, 2020 and March 30, 2021, for one year. This extension applies only to
Nominated Principal Applicants (NPAs) with a grant expiring within the date range who
applied to the Spring 2020 competition, as these applicants were applying for a grant to
replace one that was expiring. Additionally, CIHR will financially extend all bridge grants
provided to NPAs in the Fall 2019 Project Grant competition who also applied to the
Spring 2020 Project Grant competition.
These measures are anticipated to cost $31M and will be taken from the $275M that
was planned for the Spring 2020 Project Grant competition. The remaining amount
(approximately $244M) will be allocated to the Project Grants program to help mitigate
the effects of increased application pressures for future competitions. In addition,
CIHR’s emergency funding for COVID-19 research was not taken from the Project
Grant envelope. It is specifically a component of the Government of Canada response
to this crisis and is new money to CIHR (i.e., not from our base budget). The specific
budgets available for those future Project Grant competitions will be announced when
the next funding opportunity launches this summer.
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to the global response to COVID-19 and
is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research
funding agency, has moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research
community and deliver programs while maintaining rigour in funding the most
outstanding research.
Canadians will benefit from this research through enhanced prevention, detection, and
treatment options for COVID-19 as well as an evidence base on which to inform
effective social and public health policy responses.
To mobilize Canada’s research community, CIHR and its federal and provincial partners
accelerated their timelines to launch the initial two COVID-19 Rapid Research
Response competitions, totaling $54.3M that translated into 99 research grants.
The medical countermeasures funding accounts for 52 of the 99 projects funded for a
total of $36.5M, including research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics,
therapeutics and clinical management. The social and policy countermeasures funding
accounts for 47 of the 99 projects funded for a total of $17.7M, including research into
coordination, governance, and logistics; public health response and its impact; social
dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
 CIHR used the priorities identified by the WHO and GloPID-R to inform this
initiative.
 Hundreds of researchers volunteered their expertise to peer review the
applications received so that the funding competition could be completed in
record time.
 Grants funded for two-year terms and with an agreement that data and findings
would be openly shared.
On April 23, 2020, CIHR was approved for an additional $114.9M in funding through the
Prime Minister’s announcement of new support for countermeasures against COVID-19.
Building on the initial investment of $54.3M to support 99 research projects on COVID-
19, the majority of the new investment of will enable researchers to accelerate the
development, testing and implementation of medical and social countermeasures to
mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on people,
communities, and health systems.
Procurement of Personal Protective Equipment
SYNOPSIS
 The global COVID-19 pandemic has resulted in an unprecedented shortage in
personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies. To support the
needs of Canada’s frontline healthcare response, the Government of Canada, in
coordination with the provinces and territories, launched a significant bulk
procurement, engaging a diverse number of new suppliers and manufacturers
both internationally and through the Government of Canada’s domestic “Call to
Action” to increase domestic production.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address shortages of PPE and other
medical supplies?
 How is the Public Health Agency of Canada equipping frontline healthcare
workers with the PPE required to protect their health and mitigate the spread of
COVID-19?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is continuously working to
secure critical personal protective equipment (PPE) supplies
and medical equipment, and to expedite delivery of supplies
to our frontline healthcare workers.
 Canada is receiving PPE shipments, and is working rapidly
to allocate the supplies to the provinces and territories as per
an approach agreed upon by federal-provincial-territorial
Ministers of Health.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is also deploying PPE
and ventilators from its National Emergency Strategic
Stockpile in response to urgent requests for assistance from
provinces and territories.
 In addition, the Government of Canada is also receiving
offers of donations from international and domestic
organizations via the donations portal on the Government of
Canada COVID-19 website.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
GLOBAL SHORTAGE OF PPE SUPPLIES …
 The Government of Canada, through the leadership of
Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC), and
Innovation Science and Economic Development Canada,
has galvanized Canadian industry to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to
produce PPE and medical equipment and supplies, including
ventilators and rapid testing kits.
 PSPC has confirmed contracts for a variety of PPE and
other medical supplies including over 150 million N95
respirators and equivalents (e.g., KN95 respirators), 315
million surgical masks, 118 million protective gowns, and 32
thousand ventilators.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is receiving staggered
delivery of shipments, and to date, has allocated
approximately 2 million N95 respirators and equivalents
(e.g., KN95 respirators), 30 million surgical masks, 11 million
pairs of nitrile gloves, and 700 thousand face shields to
provinces and territories, and more is expected to arrive and
be distributed in the coming days.
 Additionally, the Public Health Agency of Canada has also
distributed to provinces and territories donations of over 400
thousand N95 and equivalent respirators, 450 thousand
surgical masks, and 350 thousand pairs of gloves.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ENSURING THE
QUALITY OF PPE SUPPLIES …
Due to intense global competition for PPE and other medical

supplies, countries have needed to engage with a diverse
number of new suppliers and manufacturers.
 As a result, PPE and medical supplies received by the Public
Health Agency of Canada, whether procured or donated, are
verified to meet the safety specifications for COVID-19 prior
to distribution to provinces and territories.
 For example, a KN95 respirator undergoes visual inspection
to verify for defects in design and construction, and is tested
to confirm performance expectations. Surgical masks
undergo a fluid resistance and a breathing resistance test.
 Supplies that do not meet specifications are subsequently
assessed for potential for use in non-healthcare settings.
 Through this process, approximately 2 million KN95
respirators were assessed as not passing technical
requirements for use in healthcare settings.
F PRESSED ON REUSE AND STERILIZATION OF N95 RESPIRATORS….
 Health Canada has already authorized certain machines to
decontaminate N95 respirators under the Interim Order for
Medical Devices.
The Public Health Agency of Canada has procured 82

sterilization devices with Stryker Canada. Of these, 81 units
have been allocated to provinces and territories based on
their needs, and one unit allocated to the National Research
Council.
These units will provide a total additional national capacity to

reprocess approximately 275 thousand N95 respirators a
week.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA IS ADDRESSING THE
EXPEDITED DELIVERIES OF PPE SUPPLIES TO PROVINCES AND
TERRITORIES…
 The Government of Canada awarded a contract to Amazon
to facilitate the logistics of distributing PPE and supplies to
support the COVID-19 response.
 Amazon is working directly with the Canadian Armed Forces
and Canada Post to manage warehousing, and Purolator, to
deliver the products to provincial and territorial health
authorities, across the country, for the frontline healthcare
response.
BACKGROUND
To address the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care
response to COVID-19, the Government of Canada deployed a multi-pronged approach
of interdepartmental coordination that includes the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC), Health Canada, National Research Council (NRC), Global Affairs Canada, the
Department of National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC),
and Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada (ISED).
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (F/P/T) Bulk Procurement
ISED and PSPC continue to galvanize Canadian industries to increase domestic
manufacturing capacity, including re-tooling facilities to produce equipment and supplies
including portable ventilators, surgical masks, and rapid testing kits.
Throughout this process, PHAC, Health Canada and the NRC are playing a critical role,
conducting technical reviews to verify that the products meet the Government of
Canada technical specifications for COVID-19 as available on the PSPC’s buy and sell
website.
Urgent need is further facilitated by Health Canada, expediting regulatory approvals of
product reviews and licenses through the Interim Order for Medical Devices signed by
the Minister of Health on March 18, 2020. As the regulatory authority, Health Canada
also continues to monitor the safety, quality, and efficacy of all medical devices for use
in the diagnosis, treatment, mitigation and prevention of COVID-19.
PSPC has an online overview of the Government of Canada’s purchases of selected
PPE that includes the quantities received as of April 30, 2020. The quantities received
by PHAC has since increased; as such, the approximate numbers allocated to P/Ts no
longer align with the online reporting (e.g., website reports receipt of 26 million surgical
masks; however, PHAC has allocated over 30 million). Additionally, the website reports
on numbers procured and received of N95 respirators, this number includes equivalent
alternatives such as KN95 respirators.
PPE Testing and Quality Assessments
Sourcing PPE from new suppliers (both domestically and abroad) is challenging. Once
products are delivered to PHAC they must undergo quality verification before
distribution to provinces and territories (P/Ts). This process is supported by testing
capacity within the NRC.
Test results are also used to inform future procurements. PSPC and PHAC work with
suppliers to address issues at the source or avoid purchasing from unreliable suppliers
in the future once issues are identified.
Reuse and sterilization
Due to increased demand of N95 respirators, PHAC has also been working closely with
Health Canada, the NRC, and ISED on identifying companies with experience
manufacturing the equipment used in reprocessing in order to authorize these
technologies to safely and effectively reprocess N95 respirators.
Health Canada issued its first authorization under the Interim Order for Medical Devices
to Stryker for its Sterizone VP4 on April 5, 2020, and has since authorized additional
devices including Sterrad and Steris sterilizers that are widely available and distributed
across Canadian hospitals.
F/P/T Allocation and Distribution
As agreed to by F/P/T Ministers of Health, PHAC is allocating procured PPE using an
80/20 formula—80% is distributed to P/Ts on a per capita basis and the remaining 20%
replenishes the inventory of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS),
including a 2% allocation to Indigenous Services Canada. The purpose of the NESS is
to provide surge capacity to P/Ts when their own resources are not sufficient.
To support distribution, PSPC awarded a contract with Amazon valued at up to $5
million. This contract is primarily for use of the Amazon interface to push out the
allocation of supplies to P/Ts. Amazon is working with the Canadian Armed Forces,
Canada Post and Purolator.
Modernization of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
SYNOPSIS
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced amendments to the
Patented Medicines Regulations to provide the PMPRB with the tools and
information needed to protect Canadians from excessive medicine prices.
 These amendments will result in lower prices for patented medicines in Canada,
which are currently among the highest in the world. It is estimated that the
amendments will result in savings for governments and private payers of
approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years.
 The brand-name pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have
expressed concerns that the amendments could result in reduced
pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to medicines. On November 21,
2019, the PMPRB launched consultations on draft guidelines to operationalize
the amendments. The PMPRB is making revisions to the draft guidelines in
response to the feedback it has received.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Will the amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations reduce access to
new medicines in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is committed to improving Canadians’
access to, and the affordability of, necessary prescription
medicines.
 These regulatory amendments will help Canadians to afford
the prescription medicines they need.
 Canada will continue to be an important market for new
medicines. In fact, many countries with much lower medicine
prices gain access to new medicines in the same time frame,
or even faster than Canada.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT ON PHARMACEUTICAL
INVESTMENTS IN CANADA
 Other countries benefit from significant pharmaceutical
industry investments, while having considerably lower prices
than Canada. For example, Belgium receives four times
more investment dollars than Canada despite prices being
20% less.
 Our Government recognizes the importance of the life
sciences sector to the Canadian economy, innovation, and
quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the
innovation ecosystem in Canada.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products, and significantly strengthened intellectual property
protection in recent trade agreements.
If Pressed on concerns with the PMPRB Guidelines
Consultation Process
 The PMPRB has published all written submissions it
received during its consultation with stakeholders and the
public on the draft Guidelines.
 The PMPRB is making revisions to the draft Guidelines in
response to the feedback it has received.
If Pressed on Delaying the Coming-into-Force of the
Regulatory Amendments
 Our Government remains committed to improving access to,
and affordability Government of, necessary prescription
medicines.
 Our Government will continue to assess the COVID-19
situation and will adjust the course of action, as needed.
If Pressed on Concerns with Impacts on Revenue to Industry
and Drug Access
 Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales
are expected to continue growing over the next ten years in
Canada.
 Drug companies are expected to launch their products in
Canada at the same rate as they do today. In fact, industry
sponsored studies have found that many countries with
lower prices than Canada have faster access to new
medicines, including the Netherlands, Sweden, the United
Kingdom and Norway.
 Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes
supporting faster access to the Canadian market for
products.
BACKGROUND
 The prices of patented medicines in Canada are regulated to be ‘non-excessive’
by the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), a quasi-judicial federal
agency created in 1987 under the Patent Act.
 On May 16, 2017, former Minister Philpott announced the Government of
Canada’s intention to modernize the PMPRB’s regulatory framework through
proposed amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations.
 On August 9, 2019, the Government of Canada announced the final
amendments which were then published on August 21, 2019 in Canada Gazette,
Part II. The amendments are scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
 The most significant reforms to the regulations since their introduction in 1987,
these amendments lay the groundwork for national pharmacare by giving the
PMPRB the tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices and making
patented medicines more affordable.
 The amendments include three main elements:
o Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that
consider the price of patented medicines relative to their value and impact
on the Canadian health care system;
o Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of
all adjustments (e.g. rebates, discounts), so that the PMPRB is informed
of actual market prices in Canada; and,
o Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with
comparable consumer protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine
markets as Canada. Specifically, the list of countries has been updated to
remove the U.S. and Switzerland, and to add Australia, Belgium, Japan,
the Netherlands, Norway, and Spain.
 The Cost Benefit Analysis that accompanies these amendments estimates 10-
year savings to Canadian consumers of $13.2B ($8.8B net present value [NPV]).
This amounts to about a 10.8% reduction of patented medicine revenues in
Canada by year ten after implementation.
 An industry sponsored impact analysis of the PMPRB’s draft Guidelines
published on February 12, 2020 claims that the the draft Guideline changes will
have an estimated impact to industry revenues of up to $41.8 B NPV over 10
years.
 On August 23, 2019, five brand-name pharmaceutical firms (the Canadian
subsidiaries of Merck, Janssen, Bayer, Boehringer Ingelheim, and Servier) filed a
constitutional challenge against the amendments in the Superior Court of
Quebec, arguing that the federal government does not have the constitutional
authority to regulate pharmaceutical pricing, claiming that this authority rests
within provincial jurisdiction.
 On September 2, 2019, Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC), which represents
Canada’s brand-name pharmaceutical industry, and sixteen Canadian
subsidiaries of brand-name pharmaceutical companies, filed an application for a
judicial review of the amendments by the Federal Court of Canada.
 On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations on its
accompanying Guidelines, which will define operational implementation of the
amendments, including specific price tests that will be applied. The PMPRB is
making revisions to the draft Guidelines in response to the feedback it has
received.
COVID-19 Outbreak In Kearl Lake, Alberta
SYNOPSIS
 An outbreak of COVID-19 was declared at the Imperial Oil Kearl Lake, Alberta
worksite on April 14, 2020. There are 90 cases linked to this worksite, 19 of
which are reported in jurisdictions outside of Alberta (BC, SK, NS). Two cases
have been hospitalized. There are no deaths reported.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to help minimize the impact of this
outbreak on Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our top priority is the health and safety of Canadians.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with Alberta
and the other affected provinces and territories in preventing further
spread associated with this outbreak.
 Imperial Oil and Alberta Health Services have put measures in place
to reduce transmission, protect their workforce and prevent further
spread of COVID-19 to the community.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is providing increased capacity
for epidemiological and laboratory analysis.
BACKGROUND
Kearl Lake is a large oil sands worksite approximately 70 km north of Fort McMurray.
Numerous companies have workers on the site, with Imperial Oil being the largest. The
site also has a work camp for employees – accommodations provided by Civeo
Corporation. The work camps function as a residence for workers, most of whom fly in
from across the country for seven-day on, seven-day off shifts.
Cases of COVID-19 began to emerge on the site in mid-March. An outbreak was
declared by Alberta Health (AH) on April 14, 2020. Of the 90 cases that have been
observed:
- 19 cases are being reported from other jurisdictions (including BC, SK, NS);
- 85% are male;
- The average age of cases is 45 years;
- Two cases have been admitted to ICU; and,
- No cases have died.
Control measures
A Public Health Alert (PHA) was issued to all provinces and territories by AH on April
20, 2020.
As part of COVID-19 preparedness activities, the site had undertaken a number of
precautionary measures prior to the outbreak (such as: closing the buffet at the camp,
increasing cleaning measures, enforcing hand hygiene practices, and temperature
screening) to prevent the emergence of COVID-19.
Since the outbreak was declared on April 14, further control measures were put in place
by Alberta Health Services (including the masking of food service workers, and the end
of communal dining). The latest illness onset was April 26, 2020. AH considers the
outbreak ongoing at this time.
Mass voluntary testing was undertaken for asymptomatic individuals on the site from
April 19 to 23, 2020. A total of 1,888 tests were completed. As of April 30, 2020, 28
individuals tested positive from this mass testing.
On April 25, 2020, the government of Alberta released the COVID-19 Information
Guidance for Managers and Operators of Industrial Work Camps.
Jurisdictions are providing a range of public messaging and advice to workers returning
from Kearl Lake, from self-monitoring to mandatory self-isolation for 14 days.
Cases in other jurisdictions
Nineteen of the 90 cases are being reported by BC, SK, and NS. A cluster of cases
linked to the Kearl Lake worksite have been identified in the First Nations community of
La Loche, Saskatchewan. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is working with
Saskatchewan to understand the size of the cluster.
AH has shared a list of workers who were on the site with affected jurisdictions to
facilitate contact tracing, however the limited amount of contact information provided to
public health by the site has hampered the ability to identify and follow-up with workers
potentially exposed to COVID-19 on the work site. AH continues to work with Imperial
Oil and Civeo to gather additional worker contact information.
PHAC’s National Microbiology Lab is supporting with genetic sequencing of the cases to
help understand transmission, and to help identify any sub-clusters of transmission
among the cases.
International Issues
SYNOPSIS
 Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with
international partners such as the G7, the G20 and the World Health
Organization, to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts on fighting COVID-19.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How is the Government of Canada working with international partners on COVID-
19?
KEY MESSAGES
 With the outbreak evolving rapidly around the world, we are
working closely with our international partners, including the
World Health Organization, to protect the health and safety
of Canadians and the global community.
 We remain committed to advancing a whole-of-government
and multi-sectoral response to COVID-19. The Prime
Minister and my cabinet colleagues are also engaged with
their international counterparts.
 Since early February, I have been engaging my G7
counterparts on a weekly basis to share information on
public health measures, to learn from others’ experiences
and best practices and identify possible joint actions to
tackle this outbreak.
On May 4th, Canada also joined several countries in co-

hosting the launch of the Coronavirus Global Response, an
online pledging event to raise $8 billion US to help
researchers and innovators develop solutions to test, treat
and protect people and to prevent the further spread of
COVID-19.
IF PRESSED on Suspension of U.S. Contributions to the WHO
 Canada has no plans to cut funding to the WHO. Canada
has and will continue to be a strong supporter of the WHO.
Since February 11, our government has provided $15.5
million to WHO, and a further $1.5 million to Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), the regional WHO office for the
Americas, to prepare and respond to COVID-19 events.
IF PRESSED on Conducting a review of the WHO’s role in the global response
 Our continued commitment to the WHO includes our interest
in making it a strong, accountable, and well-governed
institution.
 This includes after-action reviews, which will be important at
all levels following this crisis and can provide critical insights
to support necessary change
 However, now is not the appropriate time to draw resources
and focus away from where they are needed most: the
health and safety of Canadians and people around the
world.
IF PRESSED on Dr. Bruce Aylward’s appearance before HESA
 Dr. Aylward is an international civil servant with diplomatic
immunities employed by the WHO as a Senior Advisor to the
Director General; he does not represent the Government of
Canada at the WHO and is not a Government of Canada
employee.
BACKGROUND
Canada has engaged with international partners to learn from the experience of others
and best practices, to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts to fight against COVID-19. Since February, Canada has participated in weekly
G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss COVID-19. On April 19, 2020, Canada
participated in the G20 Health Ministers Meeting. Although the meeting concluded
without a declaration, G20 members shared national best practices and exchanged
views on the importance of multilateral collaboration. Given the magnitude of this
pandemic’s impact across sectors, the Prime Minister and other Ministers are engaging
regularly with their international counterparts, including Finance, Foreign Affairs,
Agriculture and Employment.
On May 4th, Canada joined the European Union, France, Germany, Norway, the United
Kingdom, Japan, Saudi Arabia as the current G20 presidency and Italy as the future
G20 presidency in co-hosting an international online pledging event, the Coronavirus
Global Response. Canada is pledging over $850M towards the fundraising target of $8B
US to support the development of rapid coronavirus diagnostics, treatments and
vaccines.
As a founding member, Canada has long been a strong supporter of the World Health
Organization (WHO), averaging approximately $75 million annually in assessed and
voluntary contributions to support the work of the organization from 2008-2018. The
WHO has played a valued leadership and coordination role on many aspects of the
COVID-19 response and is supporting the most vulnerable countries in their
preparedness and response efforts. Canada has also valued WHO’s timely and
evidence-based guidance during this rapidly evolving pandemic.
On April 14, U.S. President Donald Trump announced that the U.S. will temporarily
suspend funding to WHO while the Administration conducts a review of the organization
due to misgivings over the WHO’s management of the pandemic and a perceived bias
towards China. The Administration has long been of towards the United Nations system
and multilateralism more broadly.
Canada supports a review of the global response post-crisis, which would consider the
role of all actors and partners, including the WHO. However, Canada’s view is that
undermining the credibility of the WHO at this point in time is not helpful. The focus
should continue to be on the global pandemic response and the health of people in
vulnerable situations around the world, with an emphasis on facts and evidence based
approaches.
Federal Correctional Facilities
SYNOPSIS
 The Government of Canada has taken measures to: strengthen the capacity of
federal correctional institutions across Canada to prevent introduction of COVID-
19 into facilities; to rapidly identify and contain any outbreaks that may occur; and
to ensure that federal inmates have access to appropriate COVID-19 health care
as all Canadians.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the federal government doing to prevent the introduction and
transmission of COVID-19 in federal corrections facilities?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
Correctional Service Canada to continue to strengthen
measures to prevent introduction and transmission of
COVID-19 into federal correctional institutions across
Canada.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada and Correctional
Service Canada are working with local and
provincial/territorial public health authorities across the
country to ensure that all of the appropriate public health and
infection prevention and control practices are in place to
prevent or rapidly control further outbreaks.
 The National Microbiology Laboratory is working with
provincial public health laboratories to ensure that federal
correctional institutions have access to sufficient laboratory
testing capacity to rapidly identify and manage cases.
 We are collaborating closely with local and
provincial/territorial public health authorities to ensure that
federal inmates have access to COVID-19 testing and health
care, including hospital based care if it is required.
IF PRESSED ON THE COVID-19 OUTBREAK AT MISSION …
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with
officials at Correctional Service Canada, as well as with the
public health authorities locally and with British Columbia’s
Centre for Disease Control, to bring the outbreak at Mission
under control.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is in daily contact with
Correctional Service Canada, and have mobilized experts in
epidemiology, infection prevention and control, and
workplace health and safety to Mission to support
Correctional Services Canada and local public health
authorities in bringing the outbreak under control.
BACKGROUND
Correctional Service Canada (CSC) and the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
are focusing on preventing and containing the spread of the virus across correctional
institutions by:
 Assessing and strengthening measures to prevent and contain the transmission
of the virus;
 Reviewing and auditing the infection prevention and control practices; and
 Reviewing and auditing the workplace health and safety practices.
Outbreak at Mission
CSC has been working in concert with PHAC to identify additional measures required to
control the outbreak at the Mission facility in B.C. and to prevent or contain outbreaks
elsewhere.
Recommendations to improve infection prevention and control, and workplace health
and safety measures at Mission have been rapidly implemented. Further reviews of
these practices will be undertaken at federal correctional institutions across Canada.
