Created: 2024-02-23T14:52:37.410783
Name: Hazardous_substance_assessment_-_Diethylene_Glycol_Monomethyl_Ether
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-health/occupational-health-safety/workplace-hazardous-materials-information-system/hazardous-substance-assessments/diethylene-glycol-monomethyl-ether.html
Package ID: 9bfacfdc-8110-4dd0-91ad-a57a847623c2
Keywords: ['Hazardous substance assessments', 'Hazardous Products Regulations', 'HPR', 'HPR amendments', 'Diethylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether']
Notes: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Hazardous substance assessment - Diethylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Environmental and Workplace Health Occupational Health and Safety Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS) Hazardous substance assessments Hazardous substance assessment - Diethylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether Important note: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations. For more information on supplier roles and responsibilities, visit supplier responsibilities. This hazardous substance assessment was conducted according to the former Hazardous Products Regulations (HPR). Learn more about the HPR amendments and transition period. Identification Chemical name: Diethylene glycol monomethyl ether (DEGME) CAS #: 111-77-3 Chemical composition: C5H12O3 Synonyms: Ethanol, 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)-; 2-(2-Methoxyethoxy)ethanol; Methyl carbitol; Methoxydiglycol; DEGME; Dowanol 16; EGME-di; (French name) Éther de diéthylèneglycol et de monométhyle. UN #: Not available Pictogram(s): Figure 1. Figure 1 - Text description The symbol within the pictogram is a black silhouette of a person's head and chest with a white star shape spreading out from the center of the chest. This symbol indicates that hazardous products with this pictogram can cause certain health effects for example: carcinogenicity, specific target organ effects following single or repeated exposure, or reproductive toxicity. WHMIS classification Health hazards: Reproductive toxicity: Category 2 Physical hazards: Flammable Liquids: Category 4 Health hazards Acute Toxicity (Oral): Does not meet criteria LD­50: 7,128 mg/kg (rat) Footnote 1. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Oral). Acute Toxicity (Dermal): Does not meet criteria LD50: 9,404 mg/kg (rabbit) Footnote 1. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Dermal). Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Gas): No data available Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Vapour): Does not meet criteria LC50: >1.47 mg/L, 4 h (0/10 deaths – saturated vapour concentration) (based on study summary Footnote 2). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Inhalation - Vapour). Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Dust and Mist): No data available Skin Corrosion / Irritation: Does not meet criteria In a skin irritation study performed similar to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Test Guideline (OECD TG) 404, 6 rabbits (3/sex) received 0.5 mL of the test substance on an intact skin for 4 h under occlusive conditions (based on study summary Footnote 2). No irritation was observed at any time point up to 3 days. The average scores (24, 48, and 72 h) for erythema and edema were 0. In a Draize study, application of DEGME at a dose as high as 20 g/kg to rabbit and guinea pigs' skin resulted in slight skin irritation Footnote 1. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion / Irritation. Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation: Does not meet criteria In an eye irritation study performed in accordance with OECD TG 405, DEGME tested negative for eye irritation when 0.1 mL was applied to 6 rabbit eyes (based on study summary Footnote 2). The average score (24-48-72 h) was 0.1/3 for conjuctivae; 0.1/4 for chemosis and 0 for cornea and iris. One drop of undiluted DEGME in to rabbit eyes for 6 consecutive days caused very slight irritation with no corneal effects Footnote 3. A repeat application of undiluted test material into rabbit eyes daily for 5 days, 10 times in 2 weeks, failed to cause more than a mild irritation in another eye irritation study, no further details given Footnote 4. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation. Respiratory Sensitization: No data available Skin Sensitization: Does not meet criteria Human data: Results were negative in a human patch test when tested at 20% in petrolatum Footnote 5. Animal data: In an OECD TG 406 compliant guinea pig maximization study, DEGME showed no signs of skin sensitization (based on study summary Footnote 2). Intradermal induction was performed using 5% DEGME in isotonic saline and dermal induction and challenge exposures used undiluted material. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Skin Sensitization. Germ Cell Mutagenicity: Does not meet criteria No in vivo data are available. Results were negative in the Ames test in bacterial cells with and without metabolic activation Footnote 6. Results were also negative in a chromosomal aberration assay in Chinese Hamster Ovary cells, with and without metabolic activation Footnote 5. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Germ Cell Mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity: No data available DEGME has not been reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the National Toxicology Program (NTP), or the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Reproductive Toxicity: Category 2 In a developmental toxicity study performed in accordance with OECD TG 414, pregnant rats were administered with DEGME orally in doses of 0, 200, 600, and 1,800 mg/kg during GD7 -17 of gestation Footnote 7. Fetotoxicity without maternal toxicity was observed at 600 mg/kg and teratogenicity with slight maternal toxicity which manifested in the form of small but significant weight reduction, particularly thymus, occurred at 1,800 mg/kg. Fetal body weights in both sexes were decreased in a dose-dependent manner with significance at 600 and 1,800 mg/kg. External malformations were observed in 14.1% of the fetuses at 1,800 mg/kg and visceral malformations were observed at both 600 mg/kg (2.4%) and 1,800 mg/kg (28.0%). Ossification was considerably affected at doses >600 mg/kg. The high dose animals showed evidence of developmental toxicity, with a significant reduction in the number of live pups and an increase in gestation period by about 2 days. The body weight gain of pups during the first 21 days was slightly decreased at 600 mg/kg. In a screening study, DEGME, when administered orally to mice at 4,000 mg/kg (representing 10% maternal mortality - LD10) on days 7-14 of gestation, resulted in a significant reduction in viable litters, number of live pups /litter, and percent pup post-natal survival (p<0.05) (16% viable litters vs 97% for controls) Footnote 8. This dose also produced maternal toxicity in the form of reduced weight gain and adverse hematological changes. In studies with rabbits, DEGME was administered topically to pregnant rabbits at doses of 0, 50, 250, and 750 mg/kg on days 6-18 of gestation Footnote 9. Maternal toxicity in terms of reduced weight gain and hematological changes was observed in the high dose group (750 mg/kg) only. There were no statistically significant differences in reproductive parameters compared to controls, although the incidence of resorptions was slightly higher in this dose group. Fetotoxicity in the form of lower fetal body weights, fetal malformation and delayed ossification of the skull and cervical spurs was seen in the 250 and 750 mg/day dose groups. No evidence of teratogenic effects was found at levels up to 750 mg/kg. Similar effects were observed in another study when pregnant rabbits were administered with DEGME dermally at 1,000 mg/kg/day on days 6-18 of organogenesis Footnote 10. The available data meet the classification criteria for Reproductive Toxicity – Category 2 [HPR 8.7.1(1)]. Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: No human data are available. Based on high oral LD50 value in rats (7,128 mg/kg) Footnote 1, DEGME does not meet classification criteria. Dermal Route of Exposure: No human data are available. Based on the high dermal LD50 value in the rabbit (9,404 mg/kg) Footnote 1, DEGME does not meet classification criteria. Inhalation Route of Exposure: No human data are available. In an animal acute toxicity study performed according to OECD TG 403, rats were exposed to a single dose of the saturated vapour concentration of DEGME for a period of 6 h (based on study summary Footnote 2). No signs of toxicity were observed. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure. Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: No human data are available. In animal studies, administration of 1,000 mg/kg DEGME in rats for 20 days reduced thymus weight to about 65% of control; however, no effect on testes or thymus weight was observed at a lower dose of 500 mg/kg Footnote 11. Decrease in liver weights were reported at 2,000 mg/kg when DEGME was administered for 20 days in rats Footnote 12. Similar results were reported in another well conducted sub-acute study where rats (10/group) were administered daily with 900, 1,800, and 3,600 mg/kg DEGME, 5 days a week for 6 weeks. A number of adverse effects were seen in the high dose group, the most notable being adverse testicular changes. At mid dose, inconsistent increases or decreases were reported in either relative or absolute organ weights. No treatment related changes were seen in the low dose group Footnote 1. Since adverse effects were reported at high doses only, results of these studies do not meet criteria for classification. Dermal Route of Exposure: No human data are available. In a 13 weeks study, guinea pigs were exposed to 40, 200, and 1,000 mg/kg of DEGME, 6 h/day, 5 days/week Footnote 13. Exposed animals showed decreased splenic weights in the 200 and 1,000 mg/kg dose groups only. Isolated but significant changes were also seen in the high dose group's clinical chemistry (LDH level) and haematology (MCHC level). The effects occurred at doses that exceed the concentration value range and hence do not meet classification criteria. Inhalation Route of Exposure: No human data are available. In an animal study, male and female rats were exposed to 0, 30, 100, or 216 ppm DEGME vapors (0, 0.15, 0.49 or 1.06 mg/L) 6 h per day, 5 days per week, for 13 weeks Footnote 14. The high concentration tested is the maximum practically attainable concentration. No significant clinical effects were noted. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure. Aspiration Toxicity: No data available Biohazardous Infectious Materials: Not applicable DEGME is not a microorganism, protein, or nucleic acid. Physical hazards Explosives: Not Evaluated* * Explosives are excluded from the Hazardous Products Act and Regulations. Explosives are regulated under the Explosives Act. For more information, visit Natural Resources Canada. Flammable Gases: Does not meet criteria DEGME presents no significant physicochemical hazard with respect to flammability. Based on information available in secondary sources, the flammability of the substance ranges from 1.4% (Lower Explosion Limit) to 23% (Upper Explosion Limit) (based on study summaries Footnote 2). This information combined with the data on the flash point/low vapour pressure led to the conclusion that this substance does not meet criteria for this category. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Flammable Gases. Flammable Aerosols: No data available In order for a substance to produce flammable aerosols, it has to be packaged in an aerosol can and no information is available in this regard for this substance. No data are available to determine whether DEGME meets the classification criteria for Flammable Aerosols. Oxidizing Gases: Not applicable DEGME is not a gas. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Gases do not apply to this substance. Gases Under Pressure: Not applicable DEGME is not a gas. The classification criteria for Gases Under Pressure do not apply to this substance. Flammable Liquids: Category 4 A number of values are available for the flashpoint of DEGME. All of these values are derived from a secondary source with no original source of data. The flash point is reported to be between 91°C and 96°C (closed cup) and 83°C (open cup) (based on study summary Footnote 2). Considering that closed cup measurements include the upper limit for classification (93°C), DEGME meets the classification criteria for Flammable Liquids – Category 4 The available data meet the classification criteria for Flammable Liquids – Category 4 [HPR 7.6.1(2)]. Flammable Solids: Not applicable DEGME is not a solid. The classification criteria for Flammable Solids do not apply to this substance. Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria According to secondary sources, a number of auto-ignition temperatures are available for DEGME, ranging from 215°C to 250°C (based on study summaries Footnote 2). Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures must have a self-accelerating decomposition temperature (SADT) of ≤75°C to meet the minimum classification in this category. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures. Pyrophoric Liquids: Does not meet criteria The substance DEGME does not ignite on contact with air (based on study summary Footnote 2). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Pyrophoric Liquids. Pyrophoric Solids: Not applicable DEGME is not a solid. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Solids do not apply to this substance. Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria DEGME has an auto-ignition temperature between 215 °C and 250 °C (based on study summary Footnote 2), which is above the spontaneous ignition temperature for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures. Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gasses: Not applicable DGME has a chemical structure that does not contain metals or metalloids and is, therefore, excluded from classification [HPR 7.12.1(1)]. DEGME does not ignite on contact with air (based on study summary Footnote 2). Oxidizing Liquids: Not applicable Section 7.13.1(1)(b) of the HPR excludes from classification any organic liquid that contains oxygen, fluorine or chlorine if those elements are chemically bonded only to carbon and hydrogen. Substance DEGME contains oxygen that is chemically bonded to carbon and hydrogen. Oxidizing Solids: Not applicable DEGME is not a solid. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Solids do not apply to this substance. Organic Peroxides: Not applicable DEGME is not an organic peroxide. The classification criteria for Organic Peroxides do not apply to this substance. Corrosive to Metals: Does not meet criteria In spite of extensive use in products exposed to metal [such as products for cleaning and caring for automobiles (auto shampoo, polish/wax, undercarriage treatment, brake grease etc.)], there is no evidence that DEGME is corrosive to metal. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Corrosive to Metals. Combustible Dusts: Not applicable DEGME is not a solid. The classification criteria for Combustible Dusts do not apply to this substance. Simple Asphyxiants: Not applicable Substance DEGME is not a gas. The classification criteria for Simple Asphyxiants do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Gases: Not applicable DEGME is not a gas. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Gases do not apply to this substance. Regulatory and other information Regulatory information: Hazardous substance assessments are prepared by Health Canada as educational and information resources. Under the HPA, suppliers of hazardous products must, upon the sale or importation of a hazardous product, provide a safety data sheet and label that meet the requirements set out in the HPR. Other information: The information and classifications contained in these hazardous substance assessments are based on publicly available sources, such as peer-reviewed literature or reports by international bodies. New information, including proprietary information, could have an impact on the classification of substances or hazardous products containing them. It is the responsibility of the supplier to ensure the accuracy, sufficiency, and reliability of their hazardous product classifications. Last updated: 2020 Prepared by: Workplace Hazardous Materials Bureau, Health Canada References Footnote 1 Eastman Kodak Co. (1992) Initial submission: letter from Eastman Kodak Co to USEPA regarding toxicity studies of nine glycol ethers with and cover letter dated 092892. EPA/OTS Doc #: 88-920008915. NTIS/OTS0570960. Return to footnote 1 referrer Footnote 2 European Chemicals Agency (2019) 2-(2-methoxyethoxy)ethanol - REACH dossier. Available at: http://www.echa.europa.eu/ Return to footnote 2 referrer Footnote 3 Dow Chem Co (1954) Results of Range Finding Toxicological Tests on Diethylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether (sanitized). EPA/OTS Doc #: 86-890001169S. NTIS/OTS0520309. Return to footnote 3 referrer Footnote 4 Dow Chemical Company (1947) Results of Range Finding Toxicological Studies on Some of the Dowanols. EPA/OTS Doc #: 86-890001227. NTIS/OTS0520737. Return to footnote 4 referrer Footnote 5 European Chemicals Bureau (2000) 2-(2-methoxythoxy)ethanol. CAS No: 111-77-3. EINECS No: 203-906-6. European Union Risk Assessment Report. 2nd Priority List. Volume 10. Office for Official Publications of the European Communities, Italy. Return to footnote 5 referrer Footnote 6 BASF Corp. (1989) Diethylene glycol monomethylether: Ames test (Standard plate test and preincubation test with salmonella typhimurium) With attachments and cover sheet dated 061289. EPA/OTS Doc #: 86-890000729. NTIS/OTS0521259. Return to footnote 6 referrer Footnote 7 Yamano, T. et al (1993) Effects of diethylene glycol monomethyl ether on pregnancy and postnatal development in rats. Archives of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 24:228-235. Return to footnote 7 referrer Footnote 8 Schuler, R. L. et al (1984) Results of testing fifteen glycol ethers in a short-term in vivo reproductive toxicity assay. Environmental Health Perspectives 57:141-146. Return to footnote 8 referrer Footnote 9 Scortichini, B. H. et al (1986) Teratologic evaluation of dermally applied diethylene glycol monomethyl ether in rabbits. Fundamental & Applied Toxicology 7:68-75. Return to footnote 9 referrer Footnote 10 Dow Chem Co (1983) Dermal Teratology Method Development Study in Rabbits Using Diethylene Glycol Monomethyl Ether (sanitized). EPA/OTS Doc #: 86-890001170S. NTIS/OTS0520310. Return to footnote 10 referrer Footnote 11 Kawamoto, T. et al (1990) Acute oral toxicity of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and diethylene glycol monomethyl ether. Bulletin of Environmental Contamination and Toxicology 44:602-608. Return to footnote 11 referrer Footnote 12 Kawamoto, T. et al (1990) Effect of ethylene glycol monomethyl ether and diethylene glycol monomethyl ether on hepatic metabolizing enzymes. Toxicology 62:265-274. Return to footnote 12 referrer Footnote 13 Hobson, D. W. et al (1986) A subchronic dermal exposure study of diethylene glycol monomethyl ether and ethylene glycol monomethyl ether in the male guinea pig. Fundamental & Applied Toxicology 6:2:339-348. Return to footnote 13 referrer Footnote 14 Chem Mfgs Assn (1989) Five health & safety studies on glycol ethers and notification of an ongoing study with cover letter dated 060589. Dow Chem Co. EPA/OTS Doc #: 86-890000267. NTIS/OTS0516800. Return to footnote 14 referrer Page details Date modified: 2023-02-27 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy