Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:31.406800
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2018-2019:_Cosmetic_Regulations_(Cosmetic_Wipes)
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/cosmetic-regulations-2018-2019.html
Package ID: 9f0bf960-f4f8-4a35-a573-f5c1f0bb5c7c
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'cyclical enforcement project', 'cosmetic wipes', 'specific requirements', 'FDA', 'Cosmetic Regulations']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of cosmetic wipes with specific requirements of the FDA and the Cosmetic Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Cosmetic Regulations (Cosmetic Wipes) - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Cosmetic Regulations (Cosmetic Wipes) Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Food and Drugs Act (FDA) and its Cosmetic Regulations. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry’s compliance of cosmetic wipes with specific requirements of the FDA and the Cosmetic Regulations. For this project, compliance of select cosmetic wipes with the FDA and the Cosmetic Regulationswas determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with specific requirements listed under the FDA was verified through testing at the Health Products Microbiology Laboratory. Compliance to specific requirements listed under the Cosmetic Regulations was verified by regional inspectors. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to identify companies that sell or manufacture cosmetic wipes in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2018-2019 fiscal year, microbial testing for 30 products was carried out and no corrective actions were required to address non-compliance to the specific requirements of the FDA. Verification of compliance to the specific requirements listed under the Cosmetic Regulations for the 30 products resulted in 3 establishment commitments to address non-compliance. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Caboo Caboo Baby Wipes Whole Foods Product has not been notified Establishment has been requested to submit a Cosmetic Notification. Cardinal Health Cardinal Health Personal Cleansing Cloth Cardinal Health No compliance issues identified None Compliments Little Ones by Our Compliments - Baby Wipes Sobeys No compliance issues identified None Compliments Compliments – Make-up Remover Sobeys No compliance issues identified None Cute Seal Cute Seal Baby Wipes Cute Seal Inc. (Canada) No compliance issues identified None Elleair GOO.N Baby Wipes PMAI Labelling issues identified Establishment has voluntarily committed to correcting the label. Epilvite/Hairaway Lingettes nettoyantes post-épilatoire/post-depilatory cleansing wipes Laboratoires Reynard No compliance issues identified None Equate Unscented Baby Wipes Wal-Mart Canada Corp. No compliance issues identified None Gaia Bamboo Baby Wipes Gaia Skin Naturals No compliance issues identified None Garnier Makeup Removing Micellar Wipes- Normal and Sensitive Skin Garnier Canada No compliance issues identified None H & M Wet Wipes - Hand & Face (with scent of pink flowers) H & M Hennes & Mauritz New York, NY No compliance issues identified None Health Gard Health Gards Disposable cleaning cloths - with Aloe & Lanolin Hospeco Product has not been notified Establishment has been requested to submit a Cosmetic Notification. Honest Brand Honest Wipes The Honest Company No compliance issues identified None Huggies Natural Care Kimberly-Clark Worldwide LLC No compliance issues identified None Kirkland Signature Baby Wipes, Ultra Soft Costco Wholesale Canada Ltd. No compliance issues identified None Kleenex Gentle Clean Kimberly-Clark Worldwide LLC No compliance issues identified None Klorane Klorane - Lingettes nettoyantes douceur au lait de toilette sans rinçage/Gentle cleansing wipes with no-rinse cleansing lotion Pierre Fabre Dermo-Cosmétique No compliance issues identified None Li'l Goat's/Petite Chèvre par/by Canus Li'l Goat's/Petite Chèvre par/by Canus - Baby wipes ultra-moisturizing/débarbouillettes ultra hydratantes Canus No compliance issues identified None Miniso Miniso Eyes Makeup Removing Wipes Miniso (Canada) Store Inc. No compliance issues identified None Mustela Mustela Lingette Nettoyante Laboratoire Expanscience No compliance issues identified None Nature Republic Hawaiian Deep Sea Cleansing Tissue NR1 Cosmetics Canada Inc. No compliance issues identified None Pampers Pampers Aqua Pure Wipes Procter & Gamble No compliance issues identified None Precision Beauty Collagen Make-Up Removing Cleansing Wipes Distributed by: SWISSCO, LLC New York, NY No compliance issues identified None President’s Choice PC Unscented Baby Wipes Loblaw Companies Ltd. No compliance issues identified None Sephora SEPHORA - Lingettes démaquillantes eau de coco/Coconut water cleansing wipes Sephora No compliance issues identified None Seventh Generation Seventh Generation Free & Clear Wipes Unilever Canada Inc. No compliance issues identified None SweetSpot Labs Unscented On-The-Go Wipes Spirit Spa No compliance issues identified None Tena Tena Ultra Adult Wipe SCA Personal Care No compliance issues identified None Uriage Uriage Eau micellaire thermale Lingette Laboratoires Dermatologiques d'Uriage No compliance issues identified None Vagisil Gentle & Calming Feminine Wipes Corlison Pte. Ltd. No compliance issues identified None Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2020-01-29 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy