Created: 2024-02-23T14:52:40.505883
Name: Hazardous_substance_assessment_-_Sodium_Hydroxide
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-health/occupational-health-safety/workplace-hazardous-materials-information-system/hazardous-substance-assessments/sodium-hydroxide.html
Package ID: a16468fd-15b7-462f-b78f-d4137354656d
Keywords: ['Hazardous substance assessments', 'Hazardous Products Regulations', 'HPR', 'HPR amendments', 'Sodium Hydroxide']
Notes: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Hazardous substance assessment - Sodium Hydroxide - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Environmental and Workplace Health Occupational Health and Safety Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS) Hazardous substance assessments Hazardous substance assessment - Sodium Hydroxide Important note: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations. For more information on supplier roles and responsibilities, visit supplier responsibilities. This hazardous substance assessment was conducted according to the former Hazardous Products Regulations (HPR). Learn more about the HPR amendments and transition period. Identification Chemical name: Sodium hydroxide CAS #: 1310-73-2 Chemical composition: NaOH Synonyms: Caustic soda, Sodium hydrate, lye. UN #: 1823 (solid), 1824 (liquid) Pictogram(s): Figure 1. Figure 1 - Text description The symbol within the pictogram shows a container dripping liquid onto a piece of metal and another container dripping liquid onto a hand. This symbol indicates that hazardous products with this pictogram can damage or destroy metal, cause irreversible damage to the skin (e.g., burns, blisters, scarring), and/or produce tissue damage in the eye or vision loss that is irreversible or not fully reversible within 21 days. WHMIS classification Health hazards: Skin Corrosion / Irritation: Category 1 Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation: Category 1 Physical hazards: Sodium hydroxide does not meet the criteria for classification. Health hazards Acute Toxicity (Oral): No data available Acute Toxicity (Dermal): No data available Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Gas): Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas. Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Vapour): No data available Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Dust and Mist): No data available Skin Corrosion / Irritation: Category 1 Human data: A case report showed that a single exposure can induce a permanent alteration in the epidermal maturation process and cause a hyperkeratotic condition of the skin (based on study summary Footnote 1). Another case report described a human subject that had severe chemical burns after exposure to Sodium hydroxide Footnote 2. A 0.5% Sodium hydroxide solution was shown to be an irritant to humans in a 4-hour human patch test Footnote 3, and in 30 volunteers exposed for 1 hour, with about half the volunteers reacting after 1 hour of treatment Footnote 4. Response was so vigorous that exposure for a greater duration was not undertaken at any site. The available human data meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion – Category 1 [8.2.2(1)]. Animal data: In a CORROSITEX in vitro assay, Sodium hydroxide solid was tested as corrosive, Category B1 (substances that produce a large change in pH when they are added to the base buffer, as indicated by a strong color change of the base buffer solution), packing group II (test samples from Category A1 and B1 that produce a detectable color change in the Chemical Detection System (CDS) after more than 3 min, and up to 30 min) Footnote 5. In a study conducted according to the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development Test Guideline (OECD TG) 404, Sodium hydroxide showed corrosive effects at concentrations between 5-30% Footnote 6. In a study conducted in rabbits, a 2% solution was corrosive, while 1% was not Footnote 7. The available human and animal data meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion – Category 1 [HPR 8.2.2]. Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation: Category 1 Human data: In a case report, Sodium hydroxide was shown to cause extreme damage in the anterior segment of the eye very quickly Footnote 8. In the worst burns, there is a tendency for the cornea to ulcerate and perforate. In less severe burns, the cornea may become densely vascularized and opaque, resulting in blindness. Another study described the sequelae of alkali burns to the eye as mild-to-severe corneal scarring and vascularization, early corneal slough in the case of massive burns, and early conjunctival slough Footnote 9. Late corneal slough and breakdown can also occur years after the original injury, and may include perforation of the cornea, followed by prolapse of the iris (falling down, or sinking, of the iris) and adherent leukoma (dense, opaque, white opacity of the cornea). Cataracts, inflammation of the uvea (the vascular middle coat of the eye), glaucoma, retinal detachment, inversion of the lower eyelid and the eyelashes, squamous epithelization of the connective tissues forming the eye, adhesion between the eyelid and eyeball, and atrophy of the eye may be later complications. Human data support a Category 1 classification Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation. Animal data: A report from the Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals Task Force (ECETOC, report No. 48, with data generated in studies carried out according to OECD TG 405) showed that a 10% solution of Sodium hydroxide caused eye damage that was not fully reversible within an observation period of 21 days Footnote 10. In another study, a 3% solution of Sodium hydroxide caused eye damage in rabbits with mean Draize scores over the threshold of 3 for corneal opacity and 1.5 for iritis Footnote 11. Animal data showed that a 1% solution met criteria for Category 2B [HPR 8.3.2(3)] [10,12]. A 2% solution showed corneal opacity and iritis scores below the threshold for Category 1; however, there was no data after 96h and, therefore, no confirmation of reversibility after 21 days Footnote 12. A Smyth & Carpenter study showed a score indicative of serious eye damage Footnote 13. Animal data support classification as Category 1 for solutions above 1%. The available data meet the classification criteria for Serious Eye Damage - Category 1 [HPR 8.3.2(1)] for Sodium hydroxide solutions above 1% [10,11]. Respiratory Sensitization: No data available Skin Sensitization: Does not meet criteria In a study in which young healthy adults (with no history of atopy or specific illness) were exposed to different concentrations of Sodium hydroxide then challenged to a 0.125% solution of Sodium hydroxide after 7 days, the irritant response correlated well with the concentration of Sodium hydroxide, but the trial failed to elicit any sensitization Footnote 14. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Skin Sensitization. Germ Cell Mutagenicity: Does not meet criteria Sodium hydroxide was negative in an in vitro Ames reversion assay without metabolic activation Footnote 15. In another in vitro study, exposure of Chinese hamster ovary cells to Sodium hydroxide with metabolic activation resulted in chromosomal aberrations in 7.8% of the 400 cells scored Footnote 16. The chromosome aberration frequency increased to 17% along the S9 concentration, but excessive cell toxicity was not seen, and the authors concluded that the mutagenic response was due to the combined effects of pH and metabolic activation, and not to the mutagenicity of Sodium hydroxide. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Germ Cell Mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity: No data available Sodium hydroxide has not been reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the National Toxicology Program (NTP), or the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Reproductive Toxicity: No data available Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: Human data: Death and burns to mouth, pharynx, esophagus, and stomach were reported in humans after ingestion of Sodium hydroxide solutions (autopsy results) Footnote 17, in case reports of burns in oral mucosa Footnote 18, and in a case of surgical treatment following extensive corrosive stricture of esophagus and stomach after ingestion of strong Sodium hydroxide Footnote 19. Effects are secondary to the corrosivity of the substance. Animal data: In an experimental study where rats were administered a 10% solution, Sodium hydroxide caused severe acute corrosive esophagitis and gastritis, some of which lethal Footnote 20,Footnote 21. In rabbits, corrosive injury to the oesophagus led to the development of oesophageal strictures below saccular dilations Footnote 22. Food packed the dilation and stricture tightly, causing chronic infection. Aspiration of food particles from the stricture area caused pneumonic foci in the lungs. Effects are secondary to the corrosivity of the substance. Dermal Route of Exposure: No data available. Inhalation Route of Exposure: In a human case report, severe irritation of respiratory tract following inhalation of 98% Sodium hydroxide manifested as chest pain, breathlessness, and pneumothorax (lung collapse) Footnote 23. Effects were reversible in 48 hours after medical intervention. The authors of this case report postulate that the effects are secondary to the corrosivity of the substance on a distal alveolus (adjacent to the pleura) or on a pre-existing lung lesion. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure. Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: In an experimental study where rats were administered a 10% solution, Sodium hydroxide caused severe acute corrosive esophagitis and gastritis, some of which lethal Footnote 20. Effects are secondary to the corrosivity of the substance. Dermal Route of Exposure: No data available. Inhalation Route of Exposure: In a case report, Sodium hydroxide caused irreversible obstructive airway disease in a worker after long term (for 20 years) regular unprotected exposure (no respiratory protective equipment) Footnote 24. The authors postulated that this outcome was due to a bronchial inflammatory reaction caused by the corrosive effect of Sodium hydroxide over the years. Effects are considered as secondary to the corrosivity of the substance. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure. Aspiration Hazard: Does not meet criteria No human data are available, and Sodium hydroxide is not a liquid hydrocarbon. Biohazardous Infectious Materials: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a microorganism, protein or nucleic acid. Physical hazards Explosives: Not Evaluated* * Explosives are excluded from the Hazardous Products Act and Regulations. Explosives are regulated under the Explosives Act. For more information, visit Natural Resources Canada. Flammable Gases: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas (its boiling point is 1,388 °C) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Flammable Gases do not apply to this substance. Flammable Aerosols: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is a solid and cannot produce aerosols (its melting point is 323 °C) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Flammable Aerosols do not apply to this substance. Oxidizing Gases: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas (its boiling point is 1,388 ºC) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Gases do not apply to this substance. Gases Under Pressure: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas (its boiling point is 1,388 ºC) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Gases Under Pressure do not apply to this substance. Flammable Liquids: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a liquid (its melting point is 323 ºC) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Flammable Liquids do not apply to this substance. Flammable Solids: Does not meet criteria Sodium hydroxide does not react with oxygen, as there are no chemical groups associated with oxidizing properties present in the molecule Footnote 20. Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures: No data available No data are available to determine whether Sodium hydroxide meets the classification criteria for Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures. Pyrophoric Liquids: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a liquid (its melting point is 323o C) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Liquids do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Solids: No data available No data are available to determine whether Sodium hydroxide meets the classification criteria for Pyrophoric Solids. Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures: No data available No data are available to determine whether Sodium hydroxide meets the classification criteria for Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures. Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gasses: Does not meet criteria Sodium hydroxide is a strong alkaline substance that dissociates completely in water into the Sodium ion (Na+) and hydroxyl ion (OH-). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gasses. Oxidizing Liquids: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a liquid (its melting point is 323 °C) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Liquids do not apply to this substance Oxidizing Solids: Does not meet criteria Sodium hydroxide has no chemical groups associated with oxidizing properties Footnote 20. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Oxidizing Solids. Organic Peroxides: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not an organic peroxide Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Organic Peroxides do not apply to this substance. Corrosive to Metals: Does not meet criteria Data suggest that Sodium hydroxide is corrosive to several metals (aluminum, zinc and zinc-containing brasses and bronzes, types 1010, 1020, 1075 and 1095 carbon steel, copper, and silicon copper); however, the data are insufficient to classify as Category 1 Footnote 25. Indeed, Schweitzer's "Corrosion resistance tables" classified the corrosivity of Sodium hydroxide using a threshold of 50 Mils/year (1 Mils is a thousandth of an inch), equivalent of 1.27 mm/year, which is under the 6.25 mm/year threshold for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Corrosive to Metals. Combustible Dusts: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is a white orthorhombic crystal and is hygroscopic Footnote 20. Simple Asphyxiants: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas (its boiling point is 1,388 ºC) Footnote 20. The classification criteria for Simple Asphyxiants do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Gases: Not applicable Sodium hydroxide is not a gas. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Gases do not apply to this substance Regulatory and other information Regulatory information: Hazardous substance assessments are prepared by Health Canada as educational and information resources. Under the HPA, suppliers of hazardous products must, upon the sale or importation of a hazardous product, provide a safety data sheet and label that meet the requirements set out in the HPR. Other information: The information and classifications contained in these hazardous substance assessments are based on publicly available sources, such as peer-reviewed literature or reports by international bodies. New information, including proprietary information, could have an impact on the classification of substances or hazardous products containing them. It is the responsibility of the supplier to ensure the accuracy, sufficiency, and reliability of their hazardous product classifications. Last updated: 2020 Prepared by: Workplace Hazardous Materials Bureau, Health Canada References Footnote 1 Nielsen, T. K. et al (2009) Recurrent cyclic hyperkeratotic eczema after occupational alkali burn: traumatic chronic irritant dermatitis. Contact Dermatitis 60:6:345-346. Return to footnote 1 referrer Footnote 2 Jolly, K. et al (2016) Ongoing effects of burns. BMJ (Online) 352:Article Number: i1104 Return to footnote 2 referrer Footnote 3 Basketter, D. A. et al (1997) The classification of skin irritants by human patch test. Food & Chemical Toxicology 35:8:845-852. Return to footnote 3 referrer Footnote 4 Griffiths, H. A. et al (1997) Interlaboratory evaluation of a human patch test for the identification of skin irritation potential/hazard. Food & Chemical Toxicology 35:2:255-260. Return to footnote 4 referrer Footnote 5 Gordon, V. C., Mirhashemi, S., and Wei, R. (1998) Evaluation of the corrositex method to determine the corrosivity potential of surfactants, surfactant-based formulations, chemicals and mixtures. In: Advances in Animal Alternatives for Safety and Efficacy Testing. H. Salem Ed. CRC Press, pp.309-329. Return to footnote 5 referrer Footnote 6 Department of Transportation (1976) Toxicological and skin corrosion testing of selected hazardous materials. DOT-OS-30077 (PB-264-975), United States Testing Co Inc, NTIS/OTSPB264975. Return to footnote 6 referrer Footnote 7 Vernot, E. H. et al (1977) Acute toxicity and skin corrosion data for some organic and inorganic compounds and aqueous solutions. Toxicology & Applied Pharmacology 42:417-423. Return to footnote 7 referrer Footnote 8 Burns, R. P. and Hikes, C. E. (1979) Irrigation of the anterior chamber for the treatment of alkali burns. American Journal of Ophthalmology 88:1:119-120. Return to footnote 8 referrer Footnote 9 Girard, L. J. et al (1970) Severe alkali burns. Trans American Academy of Ophthalmology and Otolaryngology 74:788. Return to footnote 9 referrer Footnote 10 ECETOC (1998) Eye Irritation: Reference Chemicals Data Bank. Second Edition. European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals, Brussels, Belgium. Volume 48(2). Return to footnote 10 referrer Footnote 11 Murphy, J. C. et al (1982) Ocular irritancy responses to various pHs of acids and bases with and without irrigation. Toxicology 23:281-291. Return to footnote 11 referrer Footnote 12 Jacobs, G. A. (1992) OECD eye irritation tests on Sodium hydroxide. Journal of the American College of Toxicology 11:6:725. Return to footnote 12 referrer Footnote 13 Carpenter, C. P. and Smyth, H. F., Jr. (1946) Chemical burns of the rabbit cornea. American Journal of Ophthalmology 29:1363-1372. Return to footnote 13 referrer Footnote 14 Park, K. B. and Eun, H. C. (1995) A study of skin responses to follow-up, rechallenge and combined effects of irritants using non-invasive measurements. Journal of Dermatological Science :10:159-165. Return to footnote 14 referrer Footnote 15 De Flora, S. et al (1984) Genotoxic activity and potency of 135 compounds in the Ames reversion test and in a bacterial DNA-repair test. Mutation Research 133:161-198. Return to footnote 15 referrer Footnote 16 Morita, T. et al (1989) Effects of pH in the in vitro chromosomal aberration test. Mutation Research 225:55-60. Return to footnote 16 referrer Footnote 17 Emoto, Y. et al (2016) Autopsy results of a case of ingestion of Sodium hydroxide solution. Journal of Toxicologic Pathology 29:1:45-47. Return to footnote 17 referrer Footnote 18 Marathon Oil Co. (1981) Acute oral toxicity in rats (14 day) ph 402-ma-001-81 marasol 3045 with cover letter. Pharmakon Labs. EPA/OTS Doc #: 87-8214199. NTIS/OTS0206495. Return to footnote 18 referrer Footnote 19 Mori, N. et al (2012) A case of surgical treatment for extensive corrosive stricture of esophagus and stomach after ingestion of strong hydroxide. Esophagus 9:3:172-176. Return to footnote 19 referrer Footnote 20 European Chemicals Agency (2016) Sodium Hydroxide-REACH dossier. Available at: http//www.echa.europa.eu Return to footnote 20 referrer Footnote 21 Han, S. et al (2011) Management of gastrostomy to prevent perforation in acute severe corrosive esophagitis and gastritis: An experimental study. Turkish Journal of Gastroenterology 22:2:117-121. Return to footnote 21 referrer Footnote 22 Krey, H. (2009) On the treatment of corrosive lesions in the oesophagus. An experimental study. Acta Otolaryngologica (Sweden) 102:1-22. Return to footnote 22 referrer Footnote 23 Nash, P. E., Tachakra, S. S., and Baird, H. (1988) Pneumothorax following inhalation of caustic soda fumes. Archives of Emergency Medicine 5:1:45-47. Return to footnote 23 referrer Footnote 24 Rubin, A. E., Bentur, L., and Bentur, Y. (1992) Obstructive airway disease associated with occupational Sodium hydroxide inhalation. British Journal of Industrial Medicine 49:213-214. Return to footnote 24 referrer Footnote 25 Schweitzer, P. A. (1995) Corrosion resistance tables : metals, nonmetals, coatings, mortars, plastics, elastomers and linings, and fabrics. 4 Edition. Marcel Dekker, New York. Corrosion Technology, pp.2685-2708. Return to footnote 25 referrer Page details Date modified: 2023-02-27 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy