Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:32.294697
Name: International_Cooperation_on_Cosmetics_Regulation_(ICCR)_15th_Annual_Meeting_held_virtually_from_June_21-23,_2021
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/cosmetics/international-cooperation/annual-meeting-virtually-june-21-23-2021.html
Package ID: a1b26b47-7364-4194-9f88-c6cb1e0ed4b5
Keywords: ['International-Cooperation on Cosmetics-Regulation', 'ICCR', '15th annual meeting', 'cosmetics regulatory authorities', 'cosmetics safety-and-regulation', 'cosmetics industry trade-associations']
Notes: The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities from Brazil, Canada, the European Union, Japan, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, and to enter into a constructive dialogue with their relevant cosmetics industry trade associations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 15th Annual Meeting held virtually from June 21-23, 2021 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Cosmetics International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) 15th Annual Meeting held virtually from June 21-23, 2021 The International Cooperation on Cosmetics Regulation (ICCR) held its 15th Annual Meeting (ICCR-15) from June 21-23, 2021 under the United States Chairmanship. The meeting was held virtually due to travel restrictions related to the COVID-19 pandemic. The ICCR is a voluntary international group of cosmetics regulatory authorities, comprising the Steering Committee (SC) from Brazil, Canada, Chinese Taipei, the European Union, Japan, Republic of Korea, and the United States. This group of regulatory authorities meets on an annual basis and holds quarterly teleconferences to discuss common issues on cosmetics safety and regulation, as well as enters into a constructive dialogue with the SC's relevant cosmetics industry trade associations. As stated in the Terms of Reference, the purpose of this multilateral framework is to maintain the highest level of global consumer protection, while minimizing barriers to international trade. In 2021, representatives from Argentina, Chile, Colombia, Indonesia, Israel, People’s Republic of China, Saudi Arabia, South Africa, Thailand, and the United Kingdom participated in the meeting as observers. As part of this meeting, the regulators had a dialogue with the cosmetics industry trade associations from each respective jurisdiction (including observers) on June 22, 2021. The Director of the Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition (CFSAN), US Food and Drug Administration (US FDA), Dr. Susan T. Mayne, welcomed the group and made opening remarks. Opening statements on behalf of the cosmetics industry were made by both Ms. Lezlee Westine, President and Chief Executive Officer of the Personal Care Products Council (PCPC), and Dr. Kenneth Marenus, President of the Independent Beauty Association (IBA). The following Joint Working Group (JWG) topics were discussed at the meeting: Consumer Communications Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessment of Cosmetic Ingredients Microbiome and Cosmetics An open stakeholder session was held on June 23, 2021. Representatives from Burt’s Bees and the Environmental Working Group (EWG) made presentations regarding ISO 16128: Natural and Organic Cosmetics and The Case for Cosmetics Reform [in the United States], respectively. The following are the outcomes of the ICCR-15 cycle: Updates to ICCR Standard Operating Procedures. Amendments to ICCR Terms of Reference. ICCR Logo Usage Guidelines finalized and will be posted on ICCR website. Consumer Communications ICCR SC agreed to work on advancing the topic of Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ) for allergens. Integrated Strategies for Safety Assessments of Cosmetic Ingredients JWG II ICCR SC accepted the "Terms of Reference". Microbiome and Cosmetics JWG II ICCR SC accepted the "Terms of Reference". The next ICCR annual meeting will be hosted by the Republic of Korea in 2022. Page details Date modified: 2022-06-14 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy