Created: 2022-10-06T18:31:20.651058
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_health_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(A)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/a339f466-9f08-4d7c-997c-5d190dbe14b8/resource/f6780285-1547-48a3-9a6b-d6d887d2d3c1/download/disclosure-hesa-appearance-en-plain-text.pdf
Package ID: a339f466-9f08-4d7c-997c-5d190dbe14b8
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'budget', 'health']
Notes: Appearance of the Minister of Health Before HESA on the Supps A

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
HESA Appearance
Supplementary Estimates (A)
Minister Duclos
June 8, 2022
MINISTER OF HEALTH
TABLE OF CONTENTS
APPEARANCE AT HESA SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (A)-June 2022
FINANCIAL MATERIAL
1.Supps A Overview Card Health Canada
2.Supps A Overview CardPublic Health Agency of Canada
3.Crosswalk of Supps A Line Items
PART B:
PANDEMIC-GENERAL
4.Border Measures (PHAC)
5.Covid Alert App (PHAC)
6.Global Efforts/Assistance (COVAX) (PHAC)
7.GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network) (PHAC)
8.Longer Term Effects of COVID-19 (PHAC)
(b) CIHR Material Longer Term Effects of COVID-19
9.Mobility Data (PHAC)
10.NACI Recommendations (PHAC)
11.NESS and PPE (PHAC)
12.Review of the Pandemic Response (PHAC)
13.CIHR-Funded COVID-19 Research (CIHR)
PANDEMIC–COVID VACCINES, THERAUPEUTICS, AND TESTING
14.Access to COVID Vaccines for Children (HPFB)
15.Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy (PHAC)
16.Clinical Trials–Expedited Pathways (HPFB)
17.Paxlovid and Other Therapeutics (HPFB)
18.Proof of Vaccination Certification Fund (PHAC)
19.Status of Vaccine Approvals (HPFB)
20.Testing Capacity (Rapid Test, includes Bill C-8 & C-10 funding) (TS)
21.Vaccine Injury Support (PHAC)
22.Vaccine Supply for Booster (PHAC)
HEALTH SYSTEM
23.Abortion Access (SPB-CHAD)
24.Canada Health Act–Compliance Issues (SPB-CHAD)
25.Dental Care (SPB-Dental)
26.Digital Supports and Virtual Care (SPB-HCSD)
27.Harassment of Healthcare Workers (SPB-HCPPD)
28.Health System Capacity (SPB-HCSD)
29.Health Transfers (SPB-HCSD)
30.Home Care (SPB-HCPPD)
31.LTC Homes (SPB-HCPPD)
32.MAID (SPB-HCPPD)
33.Palliative Care (SPB-HCPPD)
34.Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (PHAC)
35.Primary Care (SPB-HCSD)
36.Sexual and Reproductive Health (SPB-HPSI)
DRUGS AND PHARMACARE
37.Bulk Imports (ROEB)
38.Critical Drug Reserve (ROEB)
39.Drug Shortages (ROEB)
40.Pharmacare (SPB-OPMS)
41.Drugs for Rare Diseases (SPB-OPMS)
42.Establishing a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) (SPB-OPMS)
43.PMPRB Amendments (SPB-OPMS)
CONDITIONS/DISEASES
44.Acute Hepatitis (PHAC)
45.Anti-Microbial Resistance (PHAC)
46.Autism (PHAC)
47.General Cancer Note (CIHR)
48.Dementia (PHAC)
(b) CIHR Dementia Material
49.Diabetes (PHAC)
50.Family Gender-Based Violence (FGBV) (PHAC)
51.HIV/AIDS Funding (PHAC)
52.Measles (PHAC)
53.Monkeypox (PHAC)
54.Pediatric Cancer (CIHR)
55.Seniors and Healthy Aging (PHAC)
56.Tuberculosis (PHAC)
OTHER ISSUES
57.Animal Testing (HECSB)
58.Cannabis Legislative Review (CSCB)
59.CEPA Reform (BillS-5) (HECSB)
60.CIHR-Funded Mental Health and Addictions Research (CIHR)
61.Food Safety (CFIA)
62.Glyphosates (PMRA)
63.Health Research (non-COVID) (CIHR)
64.Healthy Eating (HPFB)
65.Humane Use of Pesticides (PMRA)
66.Maximum Residue Levels of Pesticides (PMRA)
67.Mental Health in Children and Youth (SPB-MHD)
68.Mental Health Tools (SPB-MHD)
69.Canada Blood Services–MSM Blood Donation (SPB-HPSI)
70.Neonics (PMRA)
71.Opioid Overdose Crisis (CSCB)
72.Perinatal Mental Health (SPB-MHD)
73.Plasma Collection (SPB-HPSI)
74.PMRA Transformation Initiative (PMRA)
75.Psychedelics (ROEB)
76.s.56 Requests–Decriminalization of Simple Possession (CSCB)
77.Smoking and Tobacco (CSCB)
78.Suicide Prevention (PHAC)
79.Youth Vaping (CSCB)
Health Canada Overview
(In dollars)
- Previous Estimates to Date:
o Voted: 3,714,129,539
o Statutory: 163,872,352
o Total budgetary: 3,878,001,891
- Supplementary estimates A
o Transfers:
 Voted:-
 Statutory:-
 Total budgetary:-
o Adjustments:
 Voted:20,000,000
 Statutory:-
 Total budgetary:20,000,000
- Proposed authorities to Date
o Voted: 3,734,129,539
o Statutory: 163,872,352
o Total budgetary: 1,898,001,891
- % change in proposed authorities due to these estimates
o Voted: 0,5%
o Statutory:-
o Total budgetary: 0,5%
- % change in proposed authorities to date this year over last year
o Voted:-20.3%
o Statutory:-9.2%
o Total budgetary:-19.9%
Health Canada has proposed a net increase of $20.0M in the 2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (A),
bringing its proposed authoritiesto date to $3,898.0M. These Supplementary Estimates include:
Voted Appropriations of $20.0M:
$20M–Funding for the Safe Restart Agreement for federal investments in testing, contact tracing and
data management (reprofile of funds from 2021-22)
To reprofile $20M of contribution funding for the Safe Restart Agreement from 2021-22 to 2022-23 to
support evidence based approaches to COVID-19 testing screening and surveillance, data management
to enhance sharing of relevant public health data across all orders of government (including in northern
remote and isolated communities), and contact tracing.
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (A)
Public Health Agency of Canada
(In dollars)
- 2022-23 main estimates
o Voted: 8,415,625,733
o Statutory: 79,345,305
o Total budgetary: 8,494,971,038
- Supplementary estimates A
o Transfers:
 Voted:-
 Statutory:-
 Total budgetary:-
o Adjustments:
 Voted: 1,523,836,518
 Statutory:-
 Total budgetary: 1,523,836,518
o Total:
 Voted: 1,523,836,518
 Statutory:-
 Total budgetary: 1,523,836,518
- Proposedauthorities to date
o Voted: 9,939,462,251
o Statutory: 79,345,305
o Total budgetary: 10,018,807,556
Public Health Agency of Canada is seeking an increase of $1,523.8M to its reference levels based on:
Reprofiles from 2021-22
• Funding for the procurement ofCOVID-19 therapeutics ($1,406.9M)
• Funding for the Sero-Surveillance Consortium ($102.5M)
• Funding for the Pan-Canadian vaccine injury support program ($9.6M)
• Funding for medical countermeasures–vaccine deployment ($4.8M)
Vote Transfers
InternalTransfers (zero impact on reference levels):
• From operating to grants and contributions for vaccine deployment ($3.4M)
• From operating to grants and contributions for Innovations Solutions Canada ($450K)
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates (A) forHealth Canada (HC) and the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC)
Health Canada
- Funding for the Safe Restart Agreement for federal investments in testing, contact tracing
anddata management
 Total: $20,000,000
 Taskforce
o Key messages:
 As Canada transitionsfrom having in place strict public health measures to
the paradigm where individuals will be making their own choices and
decisions on how to safely “live with COVID-19” the federal government will
ensure populations with vulnerabilities have the tools and resources to self-
manage the pandemic.
 These re-profiled funds are to be combined with $22.5M in funds from the
Fall Economic Statement 2020, for a total of $42.5M in departmental
investments in testing and data management initiatives.
o Purpose/objectives
 The combined amount of $42.5M will provide critical Gs&Cs funding to
improve provincial, territorial and Indigenous health and public health data
collection and use, strengthen the country’s wastewater surveillance
capacities, and ensure that rapid antigen tests (RATs) are reaching
underserved populations through organizations such as the YMYWCA, food
banks, and Boys & Girls Clubs.
o Expected results:
 The Testing pillar investments in wastewater surveillance and RAT
distribution will advance testing and surveillance technology in Canada and
will continue complementary programs to provincial and territorial (PT)
initiatives in order to increase the use of testing in various sectors, including
SMEs and vulnerable groups.
 The data management pillar investmentsin PTs and Indigenous
Organizations will continue to close pressing COVID-19 data gaps,
modernize health information systems, and advance the adoption of more
common data and technical standards to streamline data collection, use and
sharing.
o Voted: 20,000,000
o Statutory:-
Public Health Agency of Canada
Reprofiles
- Funding for the procurement of therapeutics
o Key messages
 Reprofiling unspent funding of $1,406.9M from 2021-22 to 2022-23 to
address an immediate and critical requirement for the procurementof safe,
effective and equitable access to COVID-19 therapeutics for Canadians for
2022-23.
 The role of procuring therapeutics is typically that of provinces and
territories. However, early in the pandemic the Government of Canada took
on the critical role of procuring therapeutics so that Canadians' have
equitable access to safe and effective COVID-19 treatments essential to
saving lives, reducing suffering and alleviating strain on healthcare systems.
 PHAC has an existing funding profile of $1,050M for fiscal year 2022-23. This
includes $1B received through an Off-Cycle Budget request (Additional
COVID-19 Therapeutics Procurement) in FY 2021-2022, and $50M from the
reprofile of the Medical Countermeasures funding. However, this amount is
insufficient to meet the financial forecast for procurement of therapeutics
throughout FY 2022-23.
o Purpose/objectives
 To provide Canadians with equitable access to safe and effective
therapeutics for the treatment of COVID-19; to save patients’ lives, reduce
the severityof COVID-19 infections and reduce hospitalizations alleviating
burden on the healthcare system.
o Expected results
 The Government of Canada will procure safe and effective COVID-19
treatments for the equitable distribution to provinces and territories, as
soon as they become available and in need by provinces and territories
(P/Ts).
 The availability of new antiviral COVID-19 therapies will make outpatient
treatment much easier and are expected to be in high demand by
healthcare practitioners and their patients.
o Voted: 1,406,900,000
o Statutory: 0
- Funding for the sero-surveillance consortium
o Key messages:
 Reprofiling unspent funding from 2021-22 to 2022-23 to support existing
studies as well as new projects recommended by Canadian COVID-19
Immunity Task Force(CITF) in early 2022-2023, particularly with regards to
evolving pandemic dynamics and research priorities.
 Serological and vaccine surveillance studies are contributing valuable
information on the status of COVID-19 seroprevalence in Canada, providing
reliable estimates of potential immunity and vulnerabilities, producing
information on vaccine safety and efficacy, and offering insights on the
effects of different interventions on host immune response (e.g., vaccinated
vs. non-vaccinated, immunosuppression, oncology). This knowledge
contributes to evidence-based decision-making at all levels of government.
o Purpose/objectives
 The mandate of the CITF is to mobilize a series of serological and vaccine
surveillance studies to determine the extent of SARS-CoV-2infection and
immune response in the Canadian population. This knowledge then
contributes to evidence-based decision-making at all levels of government.
o Expected results:
 The COVID-19 sero-surveillance research program will enhance knowledge
of COVID-19 transmission dynamics, provide the status of COVID-19
immunity in Canada, generate information on vaccine safety and efficacy
and improve Canada’s capabilities to respond to the evolving COVID-19
pandemic.
o Voted: 102,535,000
o Statutory: 0
- Funding for the pan-canadian vaccine injury support program
o Key facts:
 Reprofiling unspent funding from 2021-22 to 2022-23 for the Vaccine Injury
Support Program (VISP) to support individuals who are seriously and
permanently injured as a result of receiving a Health Canada-authorized
vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after December 8, 2020.
 The pan-Canadian program launched on June 1st, 2021 and is being
administered independently by Raymond Chabot Grant Thornton Consulting
Inc. (RCGT). The province of Québec will receive federal funding to continue
to administer its existing provincial program for people vaccinated in
Québec. Individuals vaccinated in all other provinces and territories will
receive coverage under the pan-Canadian program.
 A total of $75 million in funding has been earmarked for the first five years
of the program, and $9 million on an ongoing basis. However, the overall
cost of the program is dependent on the volume of claims and
compensation awarded over time.
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of theVISP is to ensure that people in Canada who experience
a serious andpermanent injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada-
authorized vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after December 8, 2020
have access to a fair and timely financial support mechanism.
o Expected results
 Canadians who are seriously and permanently injured after receiving a
Health Canada-authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after
December 8, 2020, are fairly compensated in a timely manner.
o Voted: 9,619,156
o Statutory: 0
- Funding for medical countermeasures
o Key facts:
 Reprofiling unspent funding from 2021-22 into 2022-23 for Immunization
Partnership Fund (IPF) to support provincial and territorial governments in
developing or enhancing immunization registries.
 There have been delays in signing the contributions agreement due to
COVID restrictions and lockdowns, and slow down in the economic
landscape which is pushing activities to the next fiscal year 2022-23.
 This will allow the IPF grant and contribution program to continue
supporting these organizations to access the funds, and complete their
planned vaccine confidence and uptake promotion activities, which are
essential to PHAC's pandemic response.
o Purpose/objectives
 The IPF helps to combat COVID-19 vaccinehesitancy among priority
populations, fund community-led projects to raise awareness and
confidence in COVID-19 vaccines as well as provinces and territories in
improving their electronic vaccination registries to address gaps in vaccine
coverage rates.
o Expected results
 IPF’s recipients will have additional time to access the funds and complete
their planned activities aiming to increase confidence in and acceptance and
uptake of the COVID-19 vaccines, therefore addressing gaps in vaccine
coverage rates,in particular for boosters and pediatric vaccines. Supporting
IPF projects in completing activities for priority populations aligns with an
equity-based approach, in keeping a strong community and national
partnership presence to manage COVID-19 and mitigate harms in the
months ahead.
o Voted: 4,782,362
o Statutory: 0
- Total re-profiled funds
o Voted: 1,523,836,518
o Statutory: 0
Transfers
- Internal reallocation for vaccine deployment
o Key messages:
 This is a vote transfer from Operating funding to Grants funding for$3.4M.
 IPF has identified opportunities to fund both new and existing projects and
initiatives for an amount totalling $5.6M, which leads to a shortfall of $3.4M
in grant funding which will be covered by this vote transfer.
 PHAC is taking action to support increased COVID-19 booster uptake by
expanding and/or enhancing existing community-oriented Immunization
Partnership Fund (IPF)-funded projects, as well as funding new projects, as
part of a fall 2022 booster/vaccination campaign effort. The objective is to
expand reach in priority populations in order to provide enhanced
population protection in the months ahead including fall/winter respiratory
illness season. Protection via enhanced vaccination is an important part of
efforts to prevent or mitigate pressures that severe illness puts on health
systems.
o Purpose/objectives
 These funds will be used by the IPF for community-focused projects to
support vaccine confidence and uptake of COVID-19 boosters. This will
support PHAC’s efforts to help finish the fight against COVID-19 with
communities across Canada and within priority populations.
o Expected results
 The IPF will fund some new projects with priority populations, and provide
additional funding to existing projects, in support of a fall 2022 COVID-19
booster/vaccination effort. Funding will support vaccination stakeholders
and community partners by increasing their capacity to provide evidence-
based, equity-driven, and culturally-safe vaccination information and
supports. This funding will also increase vaccine confidence and ultimately
support residents of Canada in their choice to be vaccinated in order to
protect themselves and others from COVID-19.
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
- Internal reallocation for innovation solutions Canada
o Key facts:
 This is a votetransfer from Operating funding to Grants funding for
$450,000.
 PHAC centrally allocates $1.3M in O&M annually to Innovative Solutions
Canada (ISC).
 PHAC continually identifies needs that can be addressed by ISC challenges,
and has recently identified theneed for a solution that will provide
analytical basis for concussion recognition and to guide recovery.
 $450,000 will be required to support 3 ISC grants in Phase 1 of the challenge
for FY2022-2023; subsequently $500,000 for FY2023-2024, and $500,000 for
FY2024-2025 will be required for Phase 2.
o Purpose/objectives
 ISC issues challenges to small and medium Canadian enterprises to address
issues related to federal program and operational needs.
 PHAC seeks to sponsor the ISC concussion recognition challenge.
o Expected results
 The grant funding will support the concussion challenge, aimed at
development of an analytical solution for concussion recognition.
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
- Total transfers
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
BORDER MEASURES
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in response to
COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
Key Facts
• As of April 1, 2022, fully vaccinated travellers, arriving at land, air or marine ports of entry are no
longer required to complete a pre-entry test for entry to Canada but are still subject to mandatory
randomized testing on arrival.
• Unvaccinated travellers still have the option of using the results from a professionally observed
or administered COVID-19 rapid antigen test taken no more than 1 day prior to their scheduled flight or
arrival at the land border or marine port of entry, from a molecular test taken no more than 72 hours
before scheduled flight departure or before arrival at the land or marine port of entry, or proof of a
previous positive molecular test result taken between 10 and 180 days before arrival to meet the pre-
entry test requirements.
• For partially or unvaccinated travellers coming to Canada, pre-entry testing and quarantine
requirements are not changing.
• On April 25, 2022, partially and unvaccinated children aged 5-11 who are accompanied by a fully
vaccinated parent or guardian,will no longer be required to complete a pre-entry COVID-19 test for
entry to Canada, but will be subject to mandatory randomized testing on-arrival to Canada.
• Fully vaccinated travellers, children aged 5-11 (who are accompanied by a fully vaccinated
adult), and those with a medical contraindication to COVID-19 vaccination will no longer be required to
provide quarantine plans when travelling into Canada.
• For 14 days after arriving in Canada, fully vaccinated travellers will no longer be required to:
o monitor and report if they develop signs or symptoms;
o mask while in public spaces;
o quarantine if another traveller in the same travel group exhibits signs or symptoms or tests
positive; and,
o maintain a list of close contacts and locations.
KeyMessages
• Border measures are based on the available data, scientific evidence and monitoring of the
epidemiological situation both in Canada and internationally.
• On April 1, 2022, Canada removed the pre-entry test requirement for fully vaccinated travellers
and updated its travel requirements for travellers on cruise ships.
• The Government of Canada already adjusted its Travel Health Notice from a Level 3 to a Level 2.
This means that the Government no longer recommends that Canadians avoid all travel for non-
essential purposes.
• On April 25, 2022, Canada is easing additional border measures for fully vaccinated travellers,
unvaccinated or partially vaccinated children aged 5-11 who are accompanied by a fully vaccinated
parent or guardian, and travellers with a medical contraindication to COVID-19 vaccination.
• Travellers should understand the risks that are still associated with international travel and take
necessary precautions.
• Canada’s border measures will remain flexible and adaptable, for potential future scenarios.
• Our first and foremost priority remains the health and safety of all people in Canada.
If pressed–Special Measures for Ukrainian Nationals
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with partners across government,
including Global Affairs, Transport Canada and Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada to
prioritize any measures needed to facilitate entry of Ukrainian refugees.
• Given the ongoing situation in Ukraine, some Ukrainian nationals are permittedto enter Canada
even if they do not meet Canada’s definition of being fully vaccinated.
• All other testing and quarantine measures remain in place for travellers from Ukraine, including
the pre-departure test requirement.
If pressed–children less than12 years of age
• Children less than 12 years of age who are not fully vaccinated, but travelling with fully
vaccinated adults no longer need to provide a pre-entry test or wait 14 days before they can attend
school, daycare or camp.
• These children may be selected for mandatory random testing upon arrival; however, they are
not required to quarantine while awaiting their Day 1 test result.
• Children 4 years of age or younger, children aged 5-11 who aren’t fully vaccinated, partially or
unvaccinated children aged 12 and older, and fully vaccinated children can have different travel
requirements for entering Canada and following their arrival. Travelling families are strongly encouraged
to keep informed of the obligations of different family members prior to arrival in Canada. Final
determination is made by government officials at the border, based on information provided at the time
of entry.
If pressed–cruise ship travel
• Travel requirements for travellers on cruise ships came into effect on April 1,2022 to support
the cruise ship industry restart in Canada.
o Cruise lines and passengers will need to adhere to strict requirements for testing at key
checkpoints, and are required to report back to the Government of Canada.
o Subject to conditions, entry of positive and symptomatic fully vaccinated foreign nationals is
permitted so they can complete their quarantine/isolation at the end of the cruise.
o Time spent in isolation or quarantine on board the vessel will be considered when determining
quarantine/isolation at the end of the cruise.
o Travellers on a cruise will be exempt from mandatory randomized testing upon disembarkation
or if after disembarking when they arrive in Canada by land or air from a short cruise excursion (must be
returning to the ship).
Background
Fully vaccinated travellers
Canada allows entry of travellers from any country for discretionary reasons if they have been fully
vaccinated with Government of Canada accepted vaccines at least 14 days prior to entering Canada, and
if they also meet specific entry requirements.
As of April 25, 2022, fully vaccinated travellers must:
• submit all required COVID-19 information electronically into the free ArriveCAN app prior to
travelling to Canada;
• be asymptomatic upon arrival;
• have a paper or digital copy of their proof of vaccination in English or French (or certified
translation);
Fully vaccinated travellers and accompanied unvaccinated children will be subject to mandatory
randomized testing on arrival to Canada.
Foreign nationals who are travelling for non-essential/discretionary purposes must meet Canada’s
definition of fully vaccinated in the context of border and travel requirements in order to be eligible for
entry. Travellers who are not considered fully vaccinated may be denied boarding or entry.
Unvaccinated or partially vaccinated travellers
Unless otherwise exempt, all travellers 5 years of age or over who do not qualify as fully vaccinated must
continue to provide proof of an accepted type of pre-entry COVID-19test result:
• a valid negative antigen test, administered or observed by an accredited lab or testing provider,
taken outside of Canada no more than one day before their initially scheduled flight departure time or
their arrival at the land border or marine port of entry;
• a valid negative molecular test taken no more than 72 hours before their initially scheduled
flight departure time or their arrival at the land border or marine port of entry; or
• a previous positive molecular test taken at least 10 calendar days and no more than 180
calendar days before their initially scheduled flight departure time or their arrival at the land border or
marine port of entry.
All partially or unvaccinated travellers must have a quarantine plan, and unless otherwise exempted, will
be required to quarantine for 14 days. They must also have a pre-departure, on-arrival and post-arrival
test completed.
Partially or unvaccinated travellers will be allowed onward travel to their place of quarantine unless they
are symptomatic, a close contact of a positive case and/or they do not have a suitable place of
quarantine upon arrival. Partially or unvaccinated travellers who do not have a suitable place to
quarantine may be directed to a federal designated quarantine facility.
Travel advisories
Effective February 28, 2022, the Government of Canada eased its Travel Health Notice from level 3 to 2.
This change means that the Government no longer recommends that Canadians avoid non-essential
travel to all destinations. Travellers areadvised to understand the risks that are still associated with
international travel, and take necessary precautions.
All eligible travellers should complete a COVID-19 vaccine series along with any additional
recommended doses in Canada, at least 14 daysbefore travelling.
Anyone who has not completed a COVID-19 vaccine series should continue to avoid non-essential travel
to all destinations. Anyone who has not completed a vaccine series is at increased risk of becoming
infected with and spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 when travelling internationally and is at
greater risk for severe disease.
In considering whether to travel, travellers should consider the availability of medical services abroad,
and plan for the potential high costs associated with medical treatment and extending their trip if they
test positive for COVID-19 while abroad.
Travellers should also understand that there is also the risk that border and travel measures in other
countries, and in Canada, may change while travellers areabroad. Travellers should regularly review the
entry requirements and exemptions for their travel situation.
Enforcement
Compliance with border measures is subject to monitoring, verification and enforcement. If travellers do
not comply, they may be transferred to a quarantine facility, face fines and/or imprisonment. Maximum
penalties for failing to comply with an order under the Quarantine Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation
and Other Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the power to issue tickets, with fines of up to $5,000 for different offences, to people who
do not comply with the Quarantine Act (this does not apply in Alberta, Saskatchewan and the territories
as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the contraventions regime).
In addition to the Quarantine Act, individuals can also be subject to fines, under Transport Canada’s
Aeronautics Act, for non-compliance in relation to mandatory requirements prior to boarding a flight to
Canada.
COVID ALERT APP
ISSUE
• COVID Alert App currently continues to be maintained by Health Canada and uses strong
measures to protect the privacy and confidentiality of data. A process to decommission the app as of
June 10, 2022 is currently underway, although not yet public.
KEY FACTS
• On July 31, 2020, the Prime Minister announced that COVID Alert, a voluntary national exposure
notification app, was available for download. The app uses Bluetooth and mobile technology to notify
users that they have been in close contact with someone who later tested positive for COVID-19.
• Health Canada continues to maintain the COVID Alert App and update provincial dashboards on
a monthly basis and on an ad-hoc basis as requested.
• Since spring 2021, there have been no further investments in promotion or software
development.
• The government is committed to protecting the privacy of Canadians, while taking appropriate
steps to reduce the spread of COVID-19.
• Recent evaluations found the app’s impact on the pandemic was affected by low uptake.
Provinces and Territories (PTs) signaled they would not invest further in one-time keys (OTK) delivery as
their resources shifted to vaccinations, rapid testing, and vaccine passports.
• As of May 24, 2022, more than 6.9 million (6,948,717) users downloaded the app, and more
than 63K (63,696) one-time keys were claimed in order to inform others of a possible exposure.
• Reduced access to polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnostic tests however has an impact on
the volume of one-time keys distributed by provinces and territories.
• Manitoba and Saskatchewan discontinued the use of COVID Alert on March 15 and May 29
respectively.
• New Brunswick, Prince Edward Island and Nova Scotia no longer distribute one-time keys.
• A process is underway to decommission the app on June 10th 2022 (not yet public, responsive
line only).
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID Alert app is part of a suite of tools and guidance developed by the Government of
Canada to help slow the spread of COVID-19.
• Since its launch, more than 6.9million Canadians have downloaded the app and more than 63K
users who tested positive for COVID-19 have notified others of a possible exposure.
• The COVID Alert app has undergone a privacy assessment in line with the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner’s (OPC) Framework for the Government of Canada to Assess Privacy-Impactful Initiatives
in Response to COVID-19. The OPC was consulted on the app and published their review of the app on
their website.
• The Privacy Commissioner of Canada indicated that he supports the use of COVID Alert.
• The COVID Alert app does not disclose the identity of users, nor is location data or personally
identifiable information collected.
IF PRESSED
• The approach chosen was an exposure notification app as opposed to contact tracing as it
allows users to be notified of a possible exposure without using personally identifiable data or location
tracking.
• The app uses Bluetooth technology, does not record users’ locations and does not collect
identifiable information.
• The app has undergone a thorough privacy assessment, and all data provided to the app is
securely stored and protected.
• The Government of Canada committed to decommissioning the application once the pandemic
is over or when the application is deemed no longer useful.
BACKGROUND
On June 18, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced a national exposure notification app. On July
31, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced that the app, called COVID Alert, is available for
download by all Canadians.
The app, originally developed by the Government of Ontario, helps Canadians and public health officials
identify and isolate the spread of the virus more quickly. Use of the app isvoluntary. If someone tests
positive (using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test) for COVID-19, a health care provider will give that
person a one-time key that that person can enter into the app. One-time keys are not distributed for
positive rapid tests results. Other users who have downloaded the app and come in close contact with
that person are then notified, through the app, that they may have been exposed to the virus. The app
provides users with information on steps they can take to keep themselves and others safe. Health
Canada worked with the provinces and territories to customize public health information based on their
jurisdictions context.
COVID Alert is a collaboration between Health Canada, the Canadian Digital Service, Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada, and the Ontario Digital Service. It builds upon an exposure
notification solution developed by Shopify volunteers in coordination with the non-profit Linux
Foundation Public Health. It is also the work of a team of developers from across the country. The app
underwent a security review by BlackBerry and the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. It incorporates
Bluetooth technology provided by Apple and Google to log instances where users have come into close
contact without collecting personally identifiable information or tracking a user location. The Office of
the Privacy Commissioner has been engaged on the app and the Commissioner has indicated they
support the use of the app by Canadians.
While the app is national in scope, provincial and territorial health authorities are responsible for
providing the one-time keys to users who test positive for COVID-19. The one-time keys can then be
entered into the app to notify users of a possible exposure. Eight provinces and one territory have
onboarded and are able to issue one-time keys:
• Ontario on July 31, 2020;
• Newfoundland and Labrador on September 3, 2020;
• Saskatchewan between September 18, 2020 and May 29, 2022
• New Brunswick on September 18, 2020;
• Manitoba between October 1, 2020 and March 15, 2022;
• Quebec on October 5, 2020;
• Prince Edward Island on October 8, 2020;
• Nova Scotia on October 15, 2020; and,
• Northwest Territories on November 26, 2020.
.
GLOBAL EFFORTS
Issue
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the
Pan American Health Organization to help inform our domesticresponse and to contribute to global
efforts on fighting COVID-19.
Key Facts
• Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss
COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S.
• Canada looks forward to continuing our engagement under the 2022 G7 German Presidency and
the G20 Indonesian Presidency to end the acute phase of the pandemic and improve global
preparedness against future health threats.
• G7 Ministers met in Berlin, Germany on May 19-20, 2022 for the G7 Health Ministers Meeting.
The agenda included a pandemic simulation exercise and joint sessions with Development and Finance
Ministers, and included discussion on overcoming the COVID-19 pandemic and strengthening
preparedness for future pandemics; addressing antimicrobial resistance (AMR); and climate-resilient
health systems.
• On March 3, 2022, Canada participated in a COVID-19 Health Ministers’ “Virtual Dialogue”
convened by the U.S., and discussed expanding equitable access to diagnostics, therapeutics, and
vaccines; addressing mis-and disinformation in the response to COVID-19; and strengthening the global
public health architecture.
• On December 1, 2021, Canada and other WHO Member Statesagreed to launch a process to
develop a new convention, agreement, or other international instrument to enhance global pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response.
• Canada also participated in the 75th World Health Assembly (WHA) from May 22-28, with
Minister Duclos as head of the Canada delegation. At the WHA, Canada engaged with partners to
advance global efforts on a range of health issues, including COVID-19, AMR, immunization, and
strengthening preparedness and response for future pandemics.
KeyMessages
• Canada has committed more than $2.9 billion to the global fight against the virus.
• On May 12, 2022, during the Second Global COVID-19 Summit, the Prime Minister announced
new funding of $732 million for the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator, which will bring Canada’s
total contribution to the ACT-Accelerator to more than 2 billion since the start of the pandemic.
• The Prime Minister announced that Canada will donate the equivalent of at least 200 million
doses to the COVAX Facility bythe end of 2022.
• This includes both financial commitments to COVAX and surplus dose donations.
• As of April 6, 2022, 14.2 million surplus vaccine doses have been delivered through the COVAX
Facility and the equivalent of 87 million doses have been provided through financial support.
• Canada has provided $50 million to the Pan American Health Organization to support efforts to
introduce COVID-19 vaccines and ancillary supplies to reach those living in situations of vulnerability
across the Caribbean and Latin America. Portions of this grant are being used to procure vaccine doses
for countries through the Organization, which are in addition to Canada’s commitment to COVAX.
• Canada is also working with international partners to address barriers to equitable access of
vaccines by improving global capacity to manufacture them.
• Canadian messaging related to the importance of global collective efforts to complete the fight
against COVID-19 were highlighted at recent meetings in Washington D.C in April, 2022.
• Canada also highlighted its support for equitable access to vaccines through COVAX at the
recent 75th World Health Assembly in May 2022. It also highlighted its support for the development of a
new international instrument to improve multilateral cooperation on pandemic prevention,
preparedness and response. In addition, we noted that we also need to improve the tools we already
have by strengthening the World Health Organization and its existing core international legal instrument
for health emergencies, the International Health Regulations.
• The Prime Minister announced at the 2021 G20 Summit an investment of up to $15 million to
COVAX Manufacturing Task Force partners in support of establishing the South Africa Technology
Transfer Hub. This initiative will help build capacity to enable the development and production of mRNA
vaccines and technologies in the region.
If Pressed–Donation of Surplus Vaccines
• Canada’s commitment to donating the equivalent of at least 200 million doses to the COVAX
Facility by the end of 2022 includes doses procured by Canada that were determined by Health Canada
to be in excess of our domestic needs, financial support to COVAX for the procurement and delivery of
doses, as well as potential future contributions and donations.
• Canada has also shared 762,080 AstraZeneca doses through direct, bilateral arrangements with
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
If Pressed–Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and
Response
• Canada is pleased to see the important consensus reached at the Special Session of the World
Health Assembly in December to negotiate a new international instrument to improve multilateral
cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. This sends a critical message to the
global community on our collective will to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for the
next pandemic.
• Our work should provide a foundation for action across all levels and sectors and integrate a
One Health approach so that we can effectively and collectively prevent, detect, prepare and respond to
future infectious disease threats.
• We also need to improve the tools we already have by strengthening the WHO and its existing
core international legalinstrument for health emergencies, the International Health Regulations.
• Canada is ready to collaborate with other countries to design this new instrument, should it be
legally binding or otherwise, so that it will have a real impact on the health and safety of people around
the world.We look forward to these discussions.
If Pressed–Amendments to the International Health Regulations (2005)
• Canada participated in the 75th World Health Assembly which convened May 22-28, 2022, to
discuss numerous issues, including strengthening the International Health Regulations.
• The International Health Regulations are important, and they help keep Canadians healthy and
safe through commitments and obligations that require countries to work together in a global health
emergency, like COVID-19.
• Canada agrees that we need to take action to strengthen the International Health Regulations
based on lessons learned from COVID-19 and previous emergencies.
• At the 75th World Health Assembly, Member States, including Canada, agreed on a forward
process to consider possible amendments to the International Health Regulations.
• The process is expected to begin this fall, and Canada will be actively engaged.
If Pressed–Findings from the International Pandemic Preparedness and Response Panel
• The Government of Canada welcomes the frank assessment and bold recommendations from
the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response.
• We thank the Panel members for their efforts to understand how a localized outbreak became a
global pandemic, and to assess how the international system responded.
• One of the Panel’s important conclusions is that the world was not prepared for the pandemic
on a number of fronts. We know there are many lessons from this pandemic, which we are learning
from to adjust our approach.
• Canada is working with our international partners to improve global cooperation so that we
remain well-positioned and prepared to respond to future global health events.
Background
Canada has participated in various multilateral and bilateral discussions at the WHO, G7, G20, and other
tables on ways to finish the fight against COVID-19 and strengthen our collective capacities to prevent,
prepare and respond to future health emergencies.
Canadian messages related to the importance of global collective efforts to complete the fight against
COVID-19, including learning lessons from the pandemic, as well as sustainable financing for future
pandemic preparedness and response, were highlighted by the Minister in meetings in Washington D.C,
including with U.S. Secretary for Health and Human Services, senior officials at the World Bank, and the
Director of the Pan-American Health Organization, during the Minister’s first international visit.
Ministerial-level discussions have also contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key partners
such as the U.S. and the EU. Germany has assumed the Presidency of the G7 for 2022. Germany has
identified three key areas for the health track: 1) ending the COVID-19 pandemic and implementing the
lessons learned; 2) tackling the nexus of climate change and health; and 3) combatting antimicrobial
resistance. Under its Presidency, Germany will seek to ensure continuity of G7 work from previous
years, as well as the implementation of measures previously adopted by the group. Overcoming the
pandemic around the world is the most pressing objective, and the “G7 Pact for Pandemic Readiness”,
focused on preparing for future health threats. Ministers met in person on May 19-20, 2022, in Berlin for
the G7 Health Ministers’ Meeting.
Indonesia has assumed the G20 Presidency for 2022. This year’s theme is Recover Together, Stronger
Together. The agenda for the health track will focus on Reshaping the Global HealthArchitecture.
Canada looks forward to working with our G20 partners to support the objectives of the Presidency,
building resilience for the global health system, harmonizing global health protocol standards, and
expanding global manufacturing and knowledge hubs for pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response.
On September 22, 2021, Prime Minister Trudeau provided remarks at the Global COVID-19 Summit
convened by U.S. President Biden on the margins of the United Nations General Assembly. Following the
Summit, Canada has participated in a series of U.S.-convened COVID-19 international Ministerial
meetings, including most recently a Foreign Ministers’ meeting on February 14, 2022, and a COVID-19
Health Ministers’ “Virtual Dialogue” on March 3, 2022. TheU.S. co-hosted a second virtual Leader level
Global Summit on May 12, 2022, along with Germany, Indonesia, Belize and Senegal with the main
objectives being ambitious, timely and new commitments for 2022, along the themes of the summit,
which include financing for vaccine coverage; delivery of tests and treatments; and global health
security/pandemic prevention and preparedness.
On November 18, 2021, the Prime Minister attended the North American Leaders Summit in
Washington D.C. along with U.S. President Joseph Biden and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López
Obrador. The three leaders agreed to several commitments, including re-envisioning and updating the
North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza; shoring-up critical medical supply chains;
supporting the Global Health Security Agenda; and continuing trilateral engagement under the North
American Drug Dialogue to address the ongoing opioid overdose crisis. The Prime Minister also held his
first in-person bilateral meeting with President Biden,and reaffirmed the commitments in the February
2021 Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership. The Prime Minister and President agreed to
launch a Canada-U.S. Working Group on Supply Chains, tasked with producing a progress report in the
next 120 days; and to develop a renewed vision for joint management of the border, applying lessons
learned from the pandemic.
In addition, senior and technical staff of the Health Portfolio have engaged with their counterparts in a
variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally, World Health Organization (WHO), the Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), U.S. Centers for Disease, Global Health Security Initiative, the Global
Outbreak Alert and Response Network), to exchange information and best practices that have informed
and enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
On May 12, 2021, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR) published
their final report and recommendations. The report concludesthat the pandemic was a result of
“failures and gaps in international and national responses” at every juncture of preparedness for, and
response to, COVID-19. As a result, “February 2020 was a lost month when steps could have been taken
to curtail the epidemic and forestall the pandemic.”
The IPPPR suggests that the failure of countries to respond was a combination of two things: “they did
not sufficiently appreciate the threat and know how to respond”; and, “in the absence of certainty
about how seriousthe consequences of this new pathogen would be, “wait and see” seemed less costly
and consequential than concerted public health action.”
The IPPPR also notes that stronger leadership and better coordination at national, regional and
international levels were needed to more effectively respond, and recommends a more focused and
independent WHO, a pandemic treaty and a Senior Global Health Threats Council that would be led at
the Head of State and Government level. The Panel also recommends greater investment in
preparedness and stronger accountability mechanisms to spur action. They call for improved
surveillance and for the WHO to have authority to rapidly publish information and to dispatch expert
missions.
Canada has consistently supported a comprehensive evaluation and review process of the global
response to COVID-19. Efforts to strengthen WHO and Member States preparedness and response
capacities are being discussed in several international fora including the WHO, G7, G20, Global Health
Security Initiative, Global Health Security Agenda and North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic
Influenza. Canada recognizes the importance of continued bilateral and multilateral discussions on how
to enhance health security and to effectively address risks.
Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response
On November 29 to December 1, 2021, the World Health Assembly convened for a Special Session for
only the second time in the organization’s history. The Assembly adopted a milestone decision, “The
World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response”, which was co-sponsored by upwards of 120 Member States,
including Canada. The decision establishes an intergovernmental negotiating body (INB), open to all
Member States, to draft and negotiate a new WHO convention, agreement or other instrument, with
the expectation that this work will proceed with the intention of creating a binding instrument, while at
the same time keeping the door open to other forms of non-binding agreements should the INB decide.
In discussing a new instrument, Member States reiterated several themes, including:
• equity, particularly the importance of timely and equitable access to medical countermeasures;
• universal health coverage and primary health care in strengthening health systems to support
both prevention and response;
• the importance of a whole of government/whole of society approach; and the need for a One
Health approach
Member States have convened the first meetings of the INB to elect Member State co-chairs and vice-
chairs for the process, agree on working methods, and begin the development of the substantive
elements and a working draft of the new instrument. A second meeting will be held by August 1, 2022,
to start discussions on a zero draft and confirm whether the international instrument will be legally
binding.
75th World Health Assembly
The 75th World Health Assembly (WHA) was held May 22 to May 28, 2022. Minister Duclos was head of
Canada’s delegation and had a strong bilateral program with counterparts as well as meeting with the
Director General (DG) of the WHO, Dr. Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus, who was re-elected to a second
five-year term as DG.
Consistent with the theme of this WHA, “Health for peace, Peace for Health”, the ongoing Russian
invasion of Ukraine was a dominant theme. WHO sustainable financing, the ongoing pandemic, and
strengthening WHO preparedness and response have also emerged as key themes. This included
decisions to start a forward process to negotiate amendments to the International Health Regulations
(2005) and adopt an amendment to the regulations that reduces thetime, from 24 months to 12, for
these future amendments to enter into force. This will help make the instrument more agile, and ensure
that future amendments that we agree to are implemented without delay.
In Canada’s view, amendments should be limited in scope and should address specific issues, challenges
or gaps that are critical to supporting IHR implementation and compliance that cannot be effectively
addressed otherwise.
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
Issue
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health announced an independent review of the Public Health Agency
of Canada’s (PHAC’s) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). PHAC has planned its response
to the Final Report of the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) Independent Review and
the Auditor General’s Report 8—Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures.
There has been significant media and parliamentary interest in GPHIN since early 2020.
Key Facts
• GPHIN is an event-based surveillance system that relies on publicly available information and
provides early-warning for potential health threats worldwide.
• GPHIN analysts conduct a daily review of more than 3,500 articles in nine languages (Arabic,
Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese) and produce
a daily report.
• In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential
public health threat, GPHIN issueswhat is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article
about a health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers.
• GPHIN Alerts do not include a risk assessment or recommendations for specific actions or
responses.
• The 2021 Final Report of the GPHIN Independent Review proposed recommendations to
improve GPHIN, and to better integrate PHAC’s surveillance and risk assessment programs.
• In response to the Independent Review, PHAC is taking a number of actions to enhance the
systems, technical aspects and decision-making processes for GPHIN.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians, and we are
taking action to improve and strengthen Canada’s early warningsystem for potential emergencies,
including pandemics.
• These actions are focused on having the right systems, people, and partnerships in place to
detect and share information about potential public health threats.
If pressed for details on the finalreport
• The final report provides recommendations on the role and purpose of GPHIN, its organization
and flow of information, and technology considerations going forward.
• The recommendations relate to a range of topics, from international and domesticpartnerships
to advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems, and the future of surveillance
tools.
• The Independent Panel confirmed that GPHIN was never shut down. GPHIN provided early
warning of COVID-19 to Canadian public healthprofessionals, and continues to operate as Canada’s
event-based public health surveillance system.
Budget 2022 key messages
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $436.2 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, with $15.5
million in remaining amortization, to the Public Health Agency of Canada, to strengthen key surveillance
and risk assessment capacities within the Agency, including the GPHIN.
• This funding supports the real-time tracking of the evolution of viruses, the monitoring of the
longer-term health impacts of COVID-19, and will expand risk assessment capacity and research
networks for new strains of flu, emerging respiratory infections, and vaccine safety and effectiveness.
Background
About GPHIN
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open-source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public health agencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance. GPHIN’s products and services are freely available to
eligibleusers. GPHIN is an important contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic
Intelligence from Open Sources.
GPHIN consists of two critical components:
• an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing
to automatically collect and filter data from multiple open sources; and
• a professional multidisciplinary team of analysts that reviews and refines the filtered data, and
also monitors additional open sources to scan for signals of potential publichealth threats.
Every day, the GPHIN system automatically collects about 7,000 articles, half of which are filtered out
before the GPHIN analysts conduct their daily review of the remaining 3,500 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
Articles are collected from open sources and are validated and assessed for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report. This report goes directly from GPHIN to Canadian public health
practitioners at the federal, provincial, territorial and regional levels, including senior management at
PHAC and other government departments.
In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential public
health threat, the GPHIN team issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article
about a health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers. Such
Alerts do not include a risk assessmentor recommendations for specific actions or responses.
Independent Review of GPHIN
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health requested an independent review of GPHIN. This review
considered:
• the capabilities of the existing system;
• its role in detecting and informing PHAC’s response to COVID-19, and in global and domestic
public health surveillance;
• opportunities to improve the system; and
• the future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next generation
of intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of Canada is well
positioned to respond to future public health events.
The Review also looked beyond GPHIN and examined opportunities to improve how the Agency
synthesizes, shares,and leverages all of its key information sources for early detection of potential
public health threats.
The External Review Panel consisted of Margaret Bloodworth, Dr. Mylaine Breton, and Dr. Paul Gully,
who were selected based on their expertise in public health, governance, health security, and
intelligence. The panel interviewed more than 55 individuals, including former and current program
staff, provincial officials, international partners, and technical experts from the public and private sector.
The final report was published online on July 12, 2021, and the 36 recommendations therein relate to:
• the role and purpose of GPHIN, including better articulating its role and functions as part of
PHAC, the Government of Canada and the international community’s public health surveillance
activities;
• extending its partnerships and subscriber outreach and regularly evaluating its processes and
products;
• enhancing development, training, and recruitment of GPHIN staff;
• modernizing technology, such as additional social media and other new sources of data,
platform improvements, and advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems;
• improving the flow of information from all relevant surveillance systems across PHAC; and
• establishinga central risk assessment hub at PHAC.
To date, the Agency has undertaken the following actions to address the Panel’s recommendations:
• Improved decision-making process around Alerts and other communication products;
• Made significant improvements to the GPHIN online platform, including hiring a technical
advisor to oversee continued improvements;
• Increased staffing levels and provided improved professional training to GPHIN analysts and
epidemiologists; and
• Established a new Centre for Integrated Risk Assessment to lead integrated public health risk
assessments, working in partnership with surveillance and risk assessment experts Agency-wide.
Auditor General Report on Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
titled COVID-19 Pandemic: Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures. This included an audit of PHAC’s and the Canada Border Services Agency’s pandemic
response. The report notes that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC
quickly mobilized and adapted its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potential public health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed. GPHIN didinclude a signal about a “mystery pneumonia outbreak” in the Daily GPHIN report,
published before 8 am on December 31, 2019, and sent to Canadian partners including federal,
provincial, and territorial public health officials. GPHIN thus performed its keyfunction of providing early
warning within Canada. By the evening of December 31, 2019, the significance of this event was clear in
the public health surveillance community. Because the information was being disseminated widely
through a number of other mechanisms, and Canadian officials and international and domestic partners
were already aware (including through the GPHIN Daily Report), it was unnecessary to issue an alert to
further flag this event.
While the audit concluded it was problematic that PHAC did not issue an alert, it is clear that the lack of
issuing alert in no way impeded the actions and response of PHAC. The Interim report noted
“documents received by the Panel show that both PHAC’s former President and Chief Public Health
Officer (CPHO), took action upon receipt of the January 1 Special Report from GPHIN’s management
shortly after 9:00 am that day. The President shared information with the Minister of Health’s office, as
well as counterparts at the Privy Council Office (PCO), Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and Public Safety
Canada (PSC). The following day (January 2), the CPHO notified the Council of Chief Medical Officers of
Health (CCMOH), and PHAC alerted the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) Public Health Network
Communications Group and the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN). The first meeting
of CCMOH related to this viral pneumonia outbreak took place on January 14.”
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after whichthe
number of alerts decreased significantly.
• PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of, and response to,
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert reporting.
• In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure
was put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
PHAC has, and will continue to take actions to improve GPHIN policies, procedures, and operations in
response to the Auditor General’s recommendation and the recommendations from the GPHIN
Independent Review.
POST-COVID-19SYNDROME
Issue
• While the typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness ranges from two to six weeks, some
patients have described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months after their
initial infection.
Key Facts
• Whereas most people with COVID-19 recover fully from their illness, some, including those with
milder illness, may experience symptoms for weeks or months after their initial infection. These longer-
term symptoms are often referred to as “post COVID-19 condition”, “long COVID” and “post-acute
sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection”. The condition can affect both adults and children. Affected
individuals are commonly referred to as “COVID-19 long-haulers”.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that some of the Canadians who contracted COVID-19 are facing a
long recovery. While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building, there is
still much that is unknown about post COVID-19 condition.
• The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international experts to build
the evidence base on post COVID-19 condition to support Canadians experiencing longer-term effects.
• Budget 2022 proposes $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19
infections on Canadians, as well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care systems.
• Budget 2022 also includes a new investment of $17 million over 3 years through the Public
Health Agency of Canada to implement additional surveillance activities to examine post COVID-19
condition in Canada, and to provide guidelines and supports for health professionals and for Canadians
who are affected by post-COVID-19 condition.
• This will include funding for data and public health surveillance activities, including the
development of a follow-up population-based survey on post COVID-19 condition, as well as the
development and dissemination of evidence-based clinical guidelines on post COVID-19 condition that
are adapted to the Canadian context.
• This is in addition to previously announced federal investments in research, through the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research, of $328.8 million in COVID-19 research, of which $17.7 million
was to study post COVID-19 condition.
If pressed on the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition in Canada
• There are currently insufficient data available to determine the percentage of the Canadian
population experiencing post COVID-19 condition. In an effort to address this information gap, the
Federal government has recently funded and launched a population-based survey, the Canadian COVID-
19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS)-Cycle 2, which is aimed at estimating the prevalence of post
COVID-19 condition among adults in Canada, and will provide information on symptoms, risk factors and
impacts on daily functioning. Final results are expected in early 2023.
• Additional studies are underway that follow COVID-19 patients over time, from their initial
diagnosis. These studies will provide high quality evidence which can be utilized to make decisions for
Canadians.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with the provinces, territories and other
domestic and international partners to monitor and better understand the long-term effects of COVID-
19.
Background
The typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness ranges from two to six weeks.However, some patients
have described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months after their initial
infection. The World Health Organization (WHO) has developed the first version of a clinical case
definition of post COVID-19 condition in adults, which reads as follows:
“Post COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of probable or confirmed SARS CoV-2
infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19 with symptoms and that last for at least 2
months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis. Common symptoms include fatigue,
shortness of breath, cognitive dysfunction but alsoothers and generally have an impact on everyday
functioning. Symptoms may be new onset following initial recovery from an acute COVID-19 episode or
persist from the initial illness. Symptoms may also fluctuate or relapse over time.”
The WHO is in the process of developing a separate clinical case definition for children, which they
expect to complete in the coming months.
The range of symptoms reported is broad–they can vary from mild to severe, fluctuate in intensity and
can sometimes disappear and reappear over time. Post COVID-19 condition can affect both adults and
children, regardless of the presence and/or severity of their initial COVID-19 symptoms in the acute
stage, although studies in adults have reported that those who were hospitalized or needed intensive
care during recovery are at increased risk of experiencing longer-term effects
It is anticipated that post COVID-19 condition will have a long-term impact on public health in Canada.
The Government of Canada is actively monitoring the latestresearch and information related to the
long-term effects and symptoms of COVID-19, as well as engaging with academic experts and policy
makers from across the country, and internationally, to help inform public health action.
National Surveillance and Research
Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested approximately $328.8
million in more than 800 COVID-19 research projects, of which $17.7 million was for targeted research
studies on post COVID-19 condition. These projects span everything from diagnostics and potential
treatments to public health responses and communication strategies. This funding includes post COVID-
19 condition as an area of focus, for example, the Canadian COVID-19 Prospective Cohort Study
(CANCOV), which aims to examine recovery trajectories and the determinants of longer-term outcomes.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease
Preparedness, an alliance of research funding organizationson a global scale that facilitates rapid and
effective research responses to support new, urgent scientific priorities related to COVID-19.
In addition, Budget 2022 proposes $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the Canadian
Institutes ofHealth Research to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19
infections on Canadians, as well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care systems.
Based on early published reports in 2020, the World Health Organization estimates that at least 10-20%
of people who had a COVID-19 infection will later experience one or several symptoms past 12 weeks of
their initial illness. The Public Health Agency ofCanada (PHAC) is regularly updating a review of
worldwide studies on the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition, including the prevalence of the
various symptoms and sequelae, and the proportion of individuals reporting difficulties in being able to
carry out usual activities. Based on the global evidence reviewed by PHAC (peer-reviewed studies
published up to April 2021) and findings from a recent peer-reviewed study, it is estimated that the
proportion is 30-40% in individuals who were not hospitalized fortheir initial COVID-19 infection.
Current evidence suggests that the prevalence is higher among those who were hospitalized during the
acute phase compared to those who were not hospitalized. PHAC will continue to update this systematic
review to captureresults from high-quality studies currently underway. The studies reviewed by PHAC
so far predate the last wave of infections associated with the Omicron variant.
PHAC continues to monitor the latest scientific literature on post COVID-19 condition in children and is
working with the Canadian Paediatric Society to study post COVID-19 condition among children in
Canada. At this time, the prevalence of this condition in children is not yet well-established, with high
variability in estimates being observed from only a small number of studies. These estimates will
become more precise as more studies are conducted and new evidence emerges.
Despite growing evidence, the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition in Canada is unknown at this time.
In an effort to address this information gap, PHAC worked with Statistics Canada during fiscal year 2021-
2022 to launch a second cycle of the Canadian COVID-19 Antibody and Health Survey (CCAHS). The
survey, which is being administered to 100,000 Canadians aged 18 years and older across the ten
provinces, will be used to estimate the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition in Canada and provide
information on risk factors, symptoms (including severity and duration), and impacts on daily
functioning. The first and second waves ofsurvey invitations were mailed out in April and May 2022,
respectively, and the third wave is scheduled for release in June 2022. Preliminary results are expected
between August and October 2022, and the final results will be released in early 2023.
Whilethe CCAHS will provide some general prevalence estimates and information on symptoms and risk
factors, it will not address all the evidence gaps associated with post COVID-19 condition in the
Canadian context. Building on this initial survey, a follow-upsurvey will be conducted by PHAC, in
collaboration with Statistics Canada to obtain more detailed information from the respondents of the
initial survey. In addition, PHAC will collaborate with other organizations in order to investigate existing
sources of data that can be used to provide further evidence related to post COVID-19 condition in
Canada. An investment of $1 million over three years was approved to undertake this work (2023-
2024: $850,000; 2024-2025: $150,000).
PHAC continues to work with partners such as Statistics Canada, academic and professional
organizations and the provinces and territories to explore the development and implementation of
other public health surveillance activities to examine post COVID-19 condition. PHAC is also reviewing
the evidence from countries that have implemented large population-based studies with data collection
related to post COVID-19 condition.
Findings from the PHAC evidence brief on the efficacy of COVID-19 vaccines to lower the risk of post
COVID-19 condition suggest that COVID-19 vaccination, with two or more doses, may decrease the risk
of developing post COVID-19 condition if infected with SARS-CoV-2. However, the small number of
studies and the high risk of bias from retrospective studies lower our certainty in these conclusions.
These findings could change in the future as the evidence from additional studies becomes available.
The evidence from worldwide and Canadian studies will help to determine the burden and urgency of
this public health priority, as well as what mitigation measures are needed to support the recovery of
those experiencing post COVID-19 condition. It will also help with anticipating and planning for longer-
term burdens on healthcare systems, patients and their families, and society at large.
Support for Canadians with Post COVID-19 condition
It is clear that some of the symptoms reported by those with post COVID-19 condition affect their ability
to work. Based on limited evidence from reviews conducted by PHAC and UK the National Institute for
Health and Care Excellence (NICE), between 9%-22% of individuals were not working 3 months or more
after acute COVID infection. Additionally, between 10%-46% of individuals reported working reduced
hours approximately 7 months after acuteinfection. These results continue to undergo scientific
evaluation to assess their validity and improve the level of certainty associated with this evidence.
Canadians suffering from post COVID-19 condition who are unable to work because of their symptoms
may be eligible for support through Employment and Skills Development Canada’s Employment
Insurance program and the Canada Pension Plan Disability benefits.
The provinces and territories are responsible for the management and delivery of health care services
for their residents, including rehabilitation and treatment services for people with post COVID-19
condition. There are a number of public and private clinics that provide care to individuals with post
COVID-19 condition across Canada, with a clear focus on interdisciplinary care.
PHAC is also engaging with national and international experts involved in clinical and health services
research studies in order to inform public health decision-making and the development of evidence-
based clinical guidelines. PHAC is also regularly updating the web content on post COVID-19 condition
available onCanada.ca.
As part of Budget 2022, PHAC would receive $16 million over the next three years (2022-2023: $5.3
million; 2023-2024: $5.3 million; 2024-2025: $5.4 million) to develop and disseminate evidence-based
guidelines on post COVID-19 condition. Potential topics may include guidance for the identification,
prevention and management (including models of care) of post COVID-19 condition. PHAC is
collaborating with partners to:
• scope guidelines and evidence that are already available,
• prioritize guideline topics and focus,
• identify knowledge gaps and priority areas and
• establish a guideline panel of experts
These guidelines will consider the Canadian context, however, priority populations (e.g. Indigenous,
racialized, etc.) will also be taken into consideration.
LONG-TERM HEALTH IMPACTS OF COVID-19
BUDGET 2022 KEY MESSAGES:
• Mr. Speaker, our governmentrecognizes the emerging long-term impacts that COVID-19 has
had on the lives of many Canadians, including those with long-term complications due to the virus, and
that multi-year studies are now critical as this pandemic persists into its third year.
• That is why we are committing $20 million over five years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians,
as well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 onhealth and health care systems.
• By investing in research, our government will support Canada’s recovery from this pandemic,
leading to better healthcare and health outcomes for all Canadians.
ISSUE
• Budget 2022 proposes to invest $20 million over five years, startingin 2022-23, for the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19
infections on Canadians, as well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care systems.
KEY MESSAGES
• As the pandemic continues into its third year, the long-term health impacts of COVID-19,
including Long COVID, requires multi-year, interdisciplinary research to better addressthese emerging
health issues.
• The Government recognizes that there are some Canadians whowere infected with the COVID-
19 virus who face a long recovery. While scientific knowledge on the long-term effects of COVID-19
infection is growing, there are still many gaps and questionsthat require further research.
• The Government of Canada is actively working with the expert community, nationally and
internationally, to advance the evidence base on Long COVID to support Canadians experiencing longer
term effects.
IF PRESSED ONTHE PREVALENCE OF LONG COVID…
• There is limited data available to definitively determine how common Long COVID is in the
Canadian population.
• Based on results from a November 2021 systematic review funded by the Public Health Agency
of Canada, approximately 50% of individuals who have had COVID-19 have remaining symptoms 12
weeks after diagnosis. Studies in Canada are underway and will provide high quality evidence upon
which to make decisions.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with the provinces, territories and other
partners to better monitor and understand the long-term health impacts of COVID-19.
BACKGROUND
The Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter includes the following commitment:
“Investing in the study of the long-term health impacts of COVID-19, including the effects of Long COVID
on different groups, notably vulnerable populations and children.”
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the health and wellbeing of Canadians, on
healthcare and public health systems, on vulnerable communities, and on the economy. These impacts
are expected to persist in the medium and longer term as Canada moves through the next and future
phases of the pandemic.
As of January 2022, CIHR has rapidly invested $330 Million, with another $20M from partners, on over
800 grants since the pandemic’s onset. Though $17 Million in targeted funds has already targeted Long
COVID research, multi-year long-term study is an emerging need to better understand this complex
condition, the risk factors, and to identify health interventions to prevent and treat it.
Although the typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness is two to four weeks, some patients have
described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months after acute illness. These
prolongedsymptoms are commonly referred to as Long COVID or post COVID-19 condition.
Currently there is little understanding of the biological and clinical risk factors and mechanisms that
drive illness from COVID infections. Greater biomedical and clinical research is needed to answer these
questions and to identify and evaluate preventative strategies, prognostic markers, and treatment and
rehabilitation options for long-term COVID symptoms. In addition to causing severe and persistent
illness, the pandemic hashad significant impacts to the economy, to educational systems, and to
community wellbeing and social relationships. These impacts have been disproportionately felt by
children, youth, and communities historically marginalized by racism–reflected in higher rates of
infection and lower vaccination rates. These impacts are expected to continue into the future as Canada
moves into the next phases of the pandemic, with the risk of new COVID-19 variants and additional
waves of infection threatening Canada’s recovery from the pandemic.
This new investment will enable CIHR to invest in research to better understand the long-term health
impacts of COVID-19, including the effects of long COVID on different groups, notably vulnerable
populations and children.
Use and Privacy Protection of Public Health Mobility Data
Issue
Public concerns surrounding the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) use of mobility data have
emerged in response to a public posting of a mobility data Request for Proposal (RFP) on December 17,
2021, to access cell-tower/operator location data to assist in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and for other public health applications. This RFP has raised public concerns regarding individuals’ right
to privacy, and concern over thegovernment gathering information on individuals.
Key Facts
• Anonymous and population-level mobility data analysis was explored to evaluate the
effectiveness of public health directives during the pandemic. By analyzing population movement data,
the intent was to better understand the public’s responsiveness during lockdown measures.
• Analyses and findings from the mobility data were also regularly shared with provinces and
territories as a supplemental source of information to support policy decisions and evaluation in their
pandemic response.
• The mobility contract with Telus expired on October 8, 2021, and the mobility contract with
Bluedot expired on March 18, 2022. As such, PHAC is no longer receiving this data.
• The data received was focused atthe regional public health level and does not include any
individually identifiable or personal data.
• The Ethics Committee (ETHI) and the House of Commons voted to suspend the data gathering
program until the committee could release its report in mid-April.
• ETHI submitted its report on May, 2 2022.
• There is no option to suspend an RFP. PHAC allowed the RFP to close on February 18, 2022.
Currently, no contract has been awarded through the RFP process.
Key Messages
● Reliable, timely and relevant health and public health data are crucial to inform policy and
decision-making during this pandemic, and more broadly during public health emergencies and to
improve long-term public health outcomes for Canadians.
● The Public Health Agency of Canada takes the privacy of individuals seriously and has ensured
that no personal information was asked for, or received, and no individual or identifiable data is
contained in mobility data received by the agency.
● The Agency is aware that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner is investigating complaints on
the Agency’s use of mobility data. The Public Health Agency of Canada has proactively provided
information to the Office of the Privacy Commissioner over the past year and a half on its use of mobility
data and will continue to cooperate fully with the investigation.
● The Agency is currently reviewing the recommendations issued by ETHI on May 2nd 2022.
If asked about the ETHI report
● The ETHI report was in response to amotion to study the collection and use of mobility data by
the Government of Canada.
● There was consensus that PHAC did not violate any laws.
● Witnesses agreed that there was no suspicion of tracking individual Canadians nor any
indication that the mobility data was de-anonymized or disaggregated.
● Some witnesses advocated for legislative reform, which carried into the final recommendations.
● PHAC sees value in the recommendations made, but notes some recommendations go beyond
the scope of the study asproposed by the motion. Privacy Act reform (as well as PIPEDA reform) is the
purview of the Department of Justice. PHAC has been actively engaged with the Department of Justice
over the past three years.
● The report contains the dissenting opinion of theLiberal Party of Canada, which articulates
support for the efforts of the Committee but notes the original motion was based on misleading reports
around PHAC mobility data collection and use, and that the ETHI recommendations extended beyond
the scope setby the original motion.
If pressed on user privacy
● The Public Health Agency of Canada engaged internal privacy and ethics experts to ensure the
Government of Canada’s use of mobility data follows best practices. The Agency also met with the Office
of the Privacy Commissioner on this initiative in April 2020 and in January 2022.
● The Request for Proposal requires that the contractor protect user privacy by only providing
secure, de-identified and aggregated data. This means all personal identifiers areremoved before the
Agency receives it and the data represent a population of people and cannot identify or track individuals
using this data. The proposal also requires that individuals have the ability to easily opt out of their
mobility data sharing programs.
● The Agency only considers vendors who meet the Government of Canada’s strict security, legal,
privacy and transparency requirements.
If pressed on secrecy or transparency
● Previously, this work has been made publically available on the COVIDTrends website as a
means to provide Canadians with local information on COVID in their communities with explanations of
how this data is used, and privacy protections in place.
● Since both mobility contracts have now expired, the mobility indicator has beenremoved from
the COVIDTrends website as of March 31, 2022.
● Mobility insights were also shared with provinces and territories as part of joint efforts on
COVID-19.
suspend this data-gathering program
• De-identified and aggregated mobility data is an important tool to understand the impact of
public health measures on the pandemic. This data is used by other governments, both nationally and
internationally, to help make better public health decisions.
• We understand the concerns of Canadians. We understand that trust in government is key and
that preserving the privacy of people in Canada must be core to our service while we work to improve
and protect the health of the people in Canada.
• The Government has been criticized for not having the data neededto understand and inform
the pandemic response. Direction from the Auditor General and Canadians has been clear: Canada
needs a better health data system that can meet the needs of our country during the pandemic and
beyond.
• The RFP closed on February 18, 2022, no contract has been awarded. We are keenly interested
in the concerns and considerations of the Committee and this will allow the Public Health Agency of
Canada to take into account the findings of their report as we determine whether it is in the public
interest to award a contract as part of our work to ensure that Canada has the data it needs to protect
our people.
• We cannot speak to the details of the procurement process and any questions on procurement
should be directed to Public Servicesand Procurement Canada.
Background
Mobility data is a useful tool to inform public health analysis. To date, the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) has used two types of mobility data: crowdsourced mobility data and operator based
mobility data (which is complementary to and used to verify crowdsourced data).
Early in the COVID-19 response, operator-based mobility data was provided to PHAC through
Innovation, Science, and Economic Development’s Communication Research Centre (CRC) in partnership
with Telus Mobility.
PHAC established a sole-source contract, which expired on October 8, 2021, with Telus Mobility for this
data in March 2021. PHAC also entered into a contract with Bluedot Inc. for de-identified and
aggregated crowdsourced data. This contract expired on March 18 2022.
The datareceived from Telus was secure, de-identified, aggregated (i.e., not at the level of an
individual), and vetted for security, legal, privacy and transparency considerations by both Telus and
PHAC.
This data helps to contribute to generate public health insights including the ability to estimate the
impacts of public health interventions and risk factors. This includes using mobility data analysis to
contextualize the public health situation over time, examining possible links between population
movement within Canada and propagation of COVID-19, measuring the effectiveness of public health
measures, and empowering Canadians with information to improve and protect their health.
Since September 2020, COVIDTrends, PHAC’s COVID-19 public-facing dashboard, hasprovided
Canadians with a population movement indicator to raise awareness of mobility patterns in relation to
possible easement or tightening of public health measures within their health region. Mobility data is
used to support that indicator. Since thecontracts with Telus and Bluedot have now expired, the
mobility indicator has been removed from the COVIDTrends website as of March 31, 2022,
PHAC has been producing report summaries to look at how movement trends of the Canadian
population have changed over the course of the pandemic, including identifying new patterns to help
direct public health messaging, planning and policy development. These summaries have been regularly
shared with provinces and territories throughout the pandemic via the Special Advisory Committee.
In early fall 2021, PHAC launched an internal survey to mobility data users. Survey results indicated users
find this data valuable and informative for COVID-19 situational awareness. Users also perceived the
scalable potential of this data to inform other public health challenges.
PHAC launched a Request for Proposal (RFP) for its next partnership for operator-based mobility data in
order to increase transparency and align with the Government of Canada’s “Open Data” initiatives.
An RFP was posted on theBuyandsell.gc.casite in December 2021. In order to ensure identity
protection, this RFP requires that a vendor supply data that has been de-identified and aggregated (i.e.,
not individualized) in a secure format that is vetted for security, legal, privacy and ethical considerations.
Ethics and consultations
In response to an internal request for a privacy analysis for the planned uses of mobility data, PHAC’
Privacy Management Division (PMD) concluded in August 2020 that while the data is considered
sensitive, it does not contain personal information and therefore is not subject to the Privacy Act.
In January 2021, internal consultation with the Public Health Ethics Consultative Group (PHECG) for
advice related to consent and ways to mitigate potential public concerns surrounding perception of
state surveillance provided an ethical analysis that outlined the need for PHAC to be clear about public
health goals, transparent, and to engage the public. PHAC accepted all recommendations. Due to the
priority of the pandemic response, DMIA was not able to conduct a public consultation.
In addition, since April 2020, PHAC has also met regularly with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
(OPC). As part of the briefings, the Agency provided OPC a verydetailed presentation including data
types and pipelines, epidemiological uses, privacy and safeguards, as well as users opt-out options. In
addition, over the past 15 months, PHAC has also met with the OPC every two weeks to provide them
verbal updates on all our COVID files including mobility data. While the OPC was not asked formally for
written comments on the mobility data initiative, at no time did they raise any concerns with PHAC on
the numerous occasions when it was discussed with them and the information provided.
January 6, 2022 was the most recent meeting with OPC representatives to describe the mobility data
project, associated RFP currently out for tender, the types of analyses performed to date, and future
plans to support public health.
Foroperator data, a number of security measures—at a contractor-level, at PHAC, and through CRC—
exist to preserve the privacy and integrity of mobility data:
● Contractors must have a secure platform with clear security protocols (e.g. two-factor user
identification), data that is anonymized (e.g. scrambled SIM), and ensures that precise locations are not
included (e.g. location of nearest tower only)
● Analyses performed within the platform use standard codes and protocols to ensure data is de-
identified.
● Prior to data extraction, anonymized user IDs are removed, data are aggregated to at least 20
devices at no smaller than census subdivision level (i.e. municipality), and measurements must be
transformed into percentages. This pre-processing of mobilitydata prevents tracking movement
patterns of individual users, including at the cell tower level.
● Exported, aggregated data are stored securely in the AWS cloud, where automated reports are
created by CRC and sent to PHAC.
● Reports generated display population-level trends within health regions (with no fewer than 20
devices) and all measurements are in proportions.
PHAC employees attended the February 2, 2022 meeting of the ETHI committee and responded to
questions from the committee both directly and via remit.
On February 8, 2022, the House of Commons passed a motion calling on the government to suspend the
PHAC’s cellular data tender until the ETHI Committee reports to the House that it is satisfied that the
privacy of Canadians will not be affected.
As there is no option to suspend an RFP, PHAC allowed the RFP to close on February 18, 2022. Currently,
no contract has been awarded through the RFP process.
NACI RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE USE OF COVID-19 VACCINES
Issue
NACI may make recommendations that are broader or narrower than the conditions of use approved by
Health Canada (known as ‘off-label’ recommendations). As regulator, Health Canada rigorously
evaluates safety and efficacy data from clinical trials before authorizing vaccines, but does not dictate
practice of medicine or make recommendations on how the vaccines should be used for public health
impact.
Key Facts
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts that
provides recommendations to the Public Health Agency of Canada on the use of authorized COVID-19
vaccines to support provinces and territories in planning COVID-19 vaccine programs in Canada.
Key Messages
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) updates its recommendations
on COVID-19 vaccines based on the latest scientific evidence and its expert opinions.
• COVID-19 vaccines authorized for use in Canada have been essential in saving lives and
protecting the health of Canadians.
• Inaddition to high vaccination coverage, public health measures, like wearing a well-fitting
mask, hand hygiene and physical distancing, continue to be essential to reduce and control transmission
of the virus, especially variants.
If pressed on guidance on second booster doses
• NACI recommends that provinces and territories prepare to offer a second booster dose at least
6 months after the receipt of a first booster dose to certain populations in the coming weeks, due to
concerning COVID-19 trends.
• NACI strongly recommends the prioritization of adults 80 years of age and over living in the
community, and residents of long-term care homes or other congregate living settings for seniors.
• Jurisdictions may consider offering a second COVID-19 booster doseto adults 70-79 years of age
living in the community.
• Second booster doses may also be considered for adults younger than 70 years of age who are
living in or are from First Nations, Métis, or Inuit communities. These decisions should be made by
Indigenous Peoples with the support of healthcare and public health partners.
• While not recommended at this time, second booster doses may be needed for other high-risk
groups and the general population in the future.
If pressed on the use of mRNA COVID-19vaccines in children 5 to 11 years of age
• NACI strongly recommends that a complete series of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine should be
offered to children in the authorized age groups who do not have contraindications to the vaccine, with
a dosing interval of at least 8 weeks between the first and second dose.
• The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine is preferred to start or continue the primary
vaccine series in this age group due to its well-known safety profile.
• It is essential that children and their caregivers are supported and respected during the decision-
making process so they are able to make an informed decision about COVID-19 vaccination.
If pressed on myocarditis and pericarditis in adolescents and young adults
• Rare cases of myocarditis(inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of
the heart lining) following vaccination with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines have been reported in Canada and
internationally.
• Most cases have occurred in males 12 to 29 years of age and afterthe second dose of an mRNA
COVID-19 vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly.
• Recent US data suggests that the risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis following vaccination
with the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine may be much lower in children 5 to 11 years of
age compared to adolescents.
• The benefits of receiving an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine continue to outweigh any potential risks,
including the rare risk of experiencing myocarditis and/or pericarditis after vaccination. COVID-19can
cause severe illness, hospitalization and death, as well as severe health complications, including
myocarditis and pericarditis, due to infection.
• NACI continues to strongly recommend that individuals 5 years of age and older receive a
complete series of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
• The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine is preferred in adolescents and young adults
12 to 29 years of age to further reduce the already rare risk of myocarditis/pericarditis following mRNA
COVID-19 vaccination.
• The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine is also preferred in children due to its well-
known safety profile and our experience with the two mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in adolescents.
If pressed on guidance on booster doses
• NACI recommends that a booster dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be
offered to adults 18 years of age and older at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19
vaccine series.
• Some groups of people are at higher risk of severe illness and of waning protection offered by
COVID-19 vaccines. NACI therefore strongly recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine should be offered at least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to adults 50 years
of age and older; long-term care residentsand seniors living in other congregate settings; people who
received two doses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose of the Janssen
vaccine; adults in or from First Nations, Inuit or Métis communities; and all frontline healthcare workers
who have direct in-person contact with patients.
• NACI has made an off-label recommendation that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
may be offered at least 6 months after completion of a primary series to adolescents 12 to 17 years of
age who are at increased risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes due to underlying medical conditions or
other risk factors, such as living conditions or belonging to racialized or marginalized communities who
are disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
• The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine is preferred as a booster for adolescents and
young adults 12 to 29 years of age to further reduce the rare risk of myocarditis/pericarditis.
Background
To date, NACI has published recommendations on the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty (10 mcg
and 30 mcg), Moderna Spikevax (50 mcg and 100 mcg), AstraZeneca Vaxzevria, Johnson & Johnson,
Novavax Nuvaxovid, and Medicago Covifenz COVID-19 vaccines, as well as guidance on subjects such as
extended dose intervals, the interchangeability of vaccines, co-administration of COVID-19 vaccines with
other vaccines, additional doses for immunocompromised individuals, and the use of booster doses.
NACI continues to closely monitor the evolving evidence on COVID-19 and COVID-19 vaccines and
updates its recommendations as needed.
Primary series for people 12 years of age and over
NACI preferentially recommends that a complete primary series with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
(Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty [30 mcg] or Moderna Spikevax [100 mcg]) should be offered to individuals in
the authorized age group (12 years of age and over) without contraindications to the vaccine, with a
dosing interval of 8 weeks between first and second doses. This is due to the excellent protection they
provide against severe illness and hospitalization and their well-known safety profiles.
Adults and adolescents who are moderately to severely immunocompromised should receive three
doses of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine as their primary series with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks
between each dose.
For individuals 12 to 29 years of age, the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) is
preferred to start or continue the primary series due to a lower risk of myocarditis compared to the
Moderna SpikevaxCOVID-19 vaccine (100 mcg).
NACI recommends a complete series of a recombinant protein subunit COVID-19 vaccine (Novavax
Nuvaxovid) or a virus-like particle COVID-19 vaccine (Medicago Covifenz) may be offered to individuals
in the authorized age group (18years of age and over) without contraindications to the vaccine who are
unable or unwilling to receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
NACI recommends that a complete series of a viral vector COVID-19 vaccine (AstraZeneca Vaxzevria,
Janssen) may be offered toindividuals in the authorized age group without contraindications to the
vaccine only when all other authorized COVID-19 vaccines are contraindicated.
Primary series for children 5 to 11 years of age
There are two COVID-19 vaccines approved for use in children in Canada: the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) is authorized for children 5 to 11 years of age and the Moderna
Spikevax mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (50 mcg) is authorized for children 6 to 11 years of age.
NACI strongly recommends that a complete series of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine should be offered to
children in the authorized age groups without contraindications to the vaccine, with a dosing interval of
at least 8 weeks between first and second doses.
While NACI indicates thatthe Moderna Spikevax vaccine (50 mcg) may be offered to children 6 to 11
years of age, the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) is preferred over the Moderna
Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine (50 mcg) to start or continue a primary vaccine series in children 5 to 11
years of age due to its well-known safety profile and the currently unknown risk of
myocarditis/pericarditis following receipt of the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine in this age group
Children 5 to 11 years of age who are moderately to severely immunocompromised should receive three
doses of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine as their primary series with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks between
each dose.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccine (10 mcg) at least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precaution to help to
determine if a side effect that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may
be circumstances when a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given at the same
time–a healthcare provider can help with this decision.
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada and NACI continue to monitor the safety and
effectiveness of the mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in children 5 to 11 years of age and will provide updates if
needed.
Intervals between COVID-19 vaccine doses
When authorizing a vaccine, Health Canada reviews clinical trial data submitted by the manufacturer.
When developing its recommendations, NACI reviews clinical trial data and data from real-world use of
the vaccine. NACI recommends an interval of at least 8 weeks between doses for the primary series due
to emerging evidence in adults suggesting that, compared to shorter intervals, longer intervals between
the first and second dose of a primary series result in a stronger immune response, higher vaccine
effectiveness that is expected to last longer, and may be associated with a lower risk of myocarditis
and/or pericarditis in adolescents and young adults.
Recommendations related to myocarditis and/or pericarditis
Rare cases of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the heart
lining) following vaccination with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines have been reported in Canada and
internationally. Most cases have occurred in males 12 to 29 years of age after a second dose of an mRNA
COVID-19 vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly. Based on US data, the risk of
myocarditis/pericarditis may be much lower in children 5to 11 years of age than adolescents 12 to 17
years of age.
In order to further minimize the rare risk of adolescents and young adults experiencing myocarditis
and/or pericarditis, the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) is preferred for use in
adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age. Canadian and international data suggest the risk of
myocarditis following vaccination with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine is lower with the Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) compared tothe Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine (100 mcg),
particularly after a second dose in males 12 to 29 years of age. The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccine is also preferred to start or continue the primary vaccines series in children, given the currently
unknown risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis for the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine (50 mcg) in
children 6 to 11 years of age, and the known higher risk of myocarditis/pericarditis for the Moderna
Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine (100 mcg) compared tothe Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (30
mcg) among individuals 12 to 29 years of age when used for the primary series.
Based on clinical judgement, the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine (100 mcg) may be considered for
adolescents and adults 12to 29 years of age who are moderately to severely immunocompromised
given evidence that this vaccine may have a slightly higher vaccine effectiveness and may provide longer
protection against infection and severe COVID-19 outcomes compared to the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg).
Out of precaution, further doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines should be deferred among people who
experienced myocarditis (with or without pericarditis) within 6 weeks of receiving a previous dose of an
mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Some people who experienced myocarditis with or without pericarditis after a
first dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may choose to receive another dose of vaccine after discussing
the risks and benefits with their healthcare provider. If another dose of vaccine is offered, they should
be offered the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) due to the lower reported rate of
myocarditis and/or pericarditis following this vaccine compared to the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
vaccine (100 mcg).
Individuals who have a history of myocarditis unrelated to mRNA COVID-19 vaccination should consult
their clinical team for individual considerations and recommendations. People previously diagnosed
with myocarditis but who are no longer being followed by a medical professional for heart issues should
receive the vaccine.
First Booster doses for people 12 years of age and over
A booster dose can enhance protection from a primary series that may have decreased over time. Both
the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty mRNA COVID-19 vaccine (30 mcg) and the Moderna Spikevax mRNA
COVID-19 vaccine (50 mcg) are authorized for use as booster doses in Canada. The Moderna Spikevax
COVID-19 vaccine booster dose is half (50 mcg) the dose of the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine
used for the primary series (100 mcg).
NACI strongly recommends a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine should be offered at least 6
months after the completion of a primary series to:
• adults 50 years of age and older;
• adults living in long-term care for seniors and other congregate living settings that provide care
for seniors;
• people who received two doses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose
of the Janssen vaccine;
• adults in or from First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities*; and
• all frontline healthcare workers who have direct in-person contact with patients.
*Booster vaccine programs in Indigenous communities should be determined by Indigenous leaders and
communities with health care and public health partners.
NACI recommends that a booster doseof an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered to
adults 18 to 49 years of age at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19 vaccine series
with consideration of jurisdictional and individual risks.
NACI recommends that a booster doseof an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered at least 6 months
after the completion of a primary series to adolescents 12 to 17 years of age who are at higher risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes due to underlying medical conditions or living conditions, or whobelong to
racialized or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19. This is an off-label
recommendation as booster doses are currently only authorized for use in people 18 years of age and
over in Canada.
For people 12 to 29 years of age who are receiving a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, the
use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19 booster dose (30 mcg) may be preferred over the use of
the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 booster dose (50 mcg) due to lower reported rates ofmyocarditis and
pericarditis with the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID vaccine.
People who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who have received a three-dose primary
series and pregnant and breastfeeding adults are included in those who may receive a booster dose.
If offering the Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccine as a booster dose, the following doses may be
preferred, based on the discretion of healthcare providers:
• 100 mcg: Adults living in long-term care homes for seniors or other congregateliving settings
that provide care for seniors
• 100 mcg: Adults 70 years of age or older
• 50 mcg: Adults 30 to less than 70 years of age
The Novavax Nuvaxovid vaccine may be offered as a booster dose at least 6 months after completion of
a primary vaccine series to adults who are unable or unwilling to receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine for
a booster. This is considered off-label advice as Novavax Nuvaxovid is not currently authorized for use as
a booster in Canada.
Second booster doses
In the context of protection against severe disease potentially decreasing over time following the first
booster dose, and/or risk of immune evasion by highly transmissible variants of concern which can cause
severe disease:
1. NACI recommends that jurisdictions prepare forthe rapid deployment of a second COVID-19
vaccine booster dose program over the coming weeks prioritizing the following populations, as close
surveillance and assessment suggest concerning trends in the COVID-19 pandemic:
a. Adults 80 years of age and over living in the community; and
b. Residents of long-term care or other congregate living settings for seniors.
While the greatest benefit is expected in adults 80 years of age and older, jurisdictions may also
consider offering a second COVID-19 booster dose to adults 70-79 years of age living in the community.
A second booster dose for adults younger than 70 years of age in or from First Nations, Métis, or Inuit
communities may be considered. Decisions should be made by Indigenous Peoples with the support of
healthcare and public health partners.
In general, jurisdictions should aim to offer second booster doses 6 months after a first booster dose. A
6 month interval may need to be balanced with local epidemiology, which may indicate the need for
shorter intervals in order to prevent severe disease. Timing since COVID-19 infection should also be
considered for those who have been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus. NACI suggests individuals who
been infected with the SARS-CoV-2 virus receive a booster dose three months after testing positive or
having symptoms or at least 6 months after receiving a first booster dose, whichever duration is longer.
While not recommended at this time, the planning and deployment of a second COVID-19 booster dose
programfor other high-risk groups and the general population may be needed in the future if
surveillance and assessment suggest concerning trends in the COVID-19 pandemic. Planning should take
into account that vaccine deployment may be required for broader population groups in the fall of 2022
or earlier depending on the COVID-19 pandemic context.
Recommendations for second booster doses are off-label, as COVID-19 vaccines are not authorized for
use as second booster doses in Canada at this time.
COVID-19 vaccination following SARS-COV-2 infection
NACI continues to recommend that COVID-19 vaccines should be offered to individuals with previous
SARS-CoV-2 infection without contraindications to the vaccine. While infection alone provides some
protection, vaccination after infection is important to provide the best long-term protection from
infection including from current and future variants. Longer intervals between infection and a COVID-19
vaccine dose may help to ensure durable immune responses after vaccination and longer-lasting
protection against Omicron and future variants.
At this time, NACI suggests that individuals who experienced SARS-CoV-2 infection before starting or
completing their primary COVID-19 vaccine series may receive their next dose 8 weeksafter symptoms
started or after testing positive (if no symptoms were experienced).
Individuals who are recommended to receive a booster dose and who experienced SARS-CoV-2 infection
after completing their primary series may receive a booster dose 3 months after symptoms started or
after testing positive (if no symptoms were experienced) and provided it is at least 6 months after
completing a primary series.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) manages the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to
support provinces and territories during emergencies. To bolster the response to COVID-19 and address
the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care, PHAC works with federal
partners including Health Canada, National Research Council, Global Affairs Canada, the Department of
National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada, Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada.
Key Facts
• Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and
territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters, and other
public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items
such as personal protective equipment; vaccine ancillary supplies; medical equipment (e.g. ventilators,
biomedical equipment) and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and
blankets.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively distribute incoming medical supplies and
equipment, such as personal protective equipment and vaccine supplies, to provinces and territories to
support Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• Significant stockpiles of supplies are maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
(NESS) and are deployed in response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories.
Budget 2022 keymessages
• Budget 2022 proposes to invest $50 million in 2022-23 to support the operations of the National
Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
• This funding will be used to help maintain the critical medical supplies, including personal
protective equipment, so that Canada can continue to quickly respond to public health events and other
emergencies.
If pressed on how the government of Canada is working to secure a sufficient quantity of PPE in Canada
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work with provincial and territorial partners to
monitor the sufficiency of National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventories, and will take steps to
address emerging supply gaps if required.
If pressed on NESS Inventory
• As of May 3, 2022, key supplies withinthe National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventory
include:
o N95 respirators and equivalents: 24 million units
o Surgical masks: 216 million units
o Face shields: 26 million units
o Nitrile gloves: 824 million pairs
o Disposable and reusable gowns:137 million units
o Needles and syringes: 183 million units
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively replenish its inventory to secure sufficient
quantities of supplies, including through multi-year contracts.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has procured enough first aid supplies, including band
aids and swabs, to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines across the country.
.
If pressed on domestic PPE manufacturing
• The following percentages of commodities procured by the Public Health Agency of Canada are
domestically manufactured:
o Approximately 70% of N95 respirators. This percentage accounts for the 2 multi-year contracts
with AMD Medicom and 3M Canada.
o 50% of surgical masks. This percentage accounts for the multi-year contract with AMD
Medicom.
o 100% of face shields.
o 25% of disposable gowns.
If pressed on the disposal of PPE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada adheres to the Treasury Board Policy on Materiel
Management, which sets out a lifecycle management continuum forsound management of crown
assets.
.
If pressed on biomedical equipment
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, significant quantities of biomedical equipment have been
procured and deployed to jurisdictions or maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile in
case they are needed.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with provincial and territorial
governments to identify needs and allocate biomedical equipment, including oxygen concentrators.
If pressed on the development ofa comprehensive management plan for the future of the NESS
• The top priority for the Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting Canada’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Agency is committed to enhancing its preparedness for future public healthemergencies,
including working on improvements for the management of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada agreed with the recommendation of the Auditor General to
develop a comprehensive management plan for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to support
responses to future public health emergencies.
• This plan will focus on key areas, such as optimizing life-cycle materiel management, enhancing
infrastructure and systems, and working closely with provincesand territories and other key partners to
better define needs and roles and responsibilities.
Background
NESS Mandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to respond in a reasonable manner to the most common
emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement and management
of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• To provide surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient
• As the sole provider of certain assets, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes,
required for rare public health emergencies
NESS Footprint
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 2.5 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
NESS Funding
As of September 2021, the NESS budget for COVID-19 response is approximately $7.4 billion for the
procurementof PPE, vaccine ancillary supplies, medical equipment and supplies, and for logistics and
warehousing. An additional $65.5 million has been approved for ongoing funding for medical
countermeasures. Budget 2022 proposes to invest $50 million in 2022-23 to support the operations of
the NESS. This funding will be used to help maintain the critical medical supplies, including personal
protective equipment, so that Canada can continue to quickly respond to public health events and other
emergencies.
Life-cycleManagement
Taking into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC will develop a comprehensive
management plan for the NESS that will focus on capacity and readiness of the NESS to support
responses to future public health emergencies. Thiswill include a focus on key areas such as optimizing
operations, including logistics and life-cycle management; enhancing infrastructure and systems;
working closely with the provinces and territories and other key partners to strengthen Canada’s overall
preparedness; and conducting ongoing analysis on asset requirements.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for the treatment of COVID-19 patients. Canada has successfully secured an
adequate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet potential demand.
OAG Audit
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) undertook a performance audit on the Government of Canada’s
ability to meet the needs of provinces and territories, and the healthcare sector, for PPE and medical
devices to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The audit period covered January 2020 through to
August 31, 2020 and implicated the PHAC, PSPC and HC.
Overall, the OAG found that PHAC, PSPC and HC helped to meet the needs of provincial and territorial
governments for PPE and medical devices during the pandemic. The report does however highlight that
as a result of long-standing unaddressed problems withthe systems and practices in place to manage
the NESS, PHAC was not as prepared as it could have been to respond to the needs of provinces and
territories for PPE and medical devices.
PHAC and HC have both committed to addressing the recommendations fromthe OAG within one year
of the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
REVIEW OF THE PANDEMIC RESPONSE
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada conducted a performance audit focused on whether the
Public Health Agency of Canada was prepared to respond to a pandemic.
Key Facts
• The Auditor General tabled this audit report to Parliament and publicly released it on March 25,
2021. In response, PHAC prepared a Management Response and Action Plan.
Key Messages
• There are many lessons we have learned from COVID-19, in Canada and around the world.
• The Government of Canada’s response to COVID-19 evolvedthroughout the pandemic based on
the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert opinion.
• We will strengthen our pandemic preparedness in Canada, building on the lessons learned.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will incorporatelearnings from the pandemic into its plans
and test them as appropriate. The provinces and territories will be critical in this work.
If pressed on the Auditor General’s report on PHAC’s preparedness
• The Auditor General recognized that the Public HealthAgency of Canada rapidly mobilized,
adapted and responded to the evolving COVID-19 situation, and worked persistently to help Canadians
and respond to their needs.
• Areas for improvement were identified to help us become better prepared for future health
events, including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration of border and quarantine measures.
• Work is already underway to respond to the recommendations from this audit:
o The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorial partners to build
on the information sharing, management and technology improvements already underway.
o The Agency has also restructured its border and travel health program to better respond to the
changing pandemic and increase its focus on compliance.
• Regarding early warning processes, the Agency will work to make further improvements to the
Global Public Health Intelligence Network, or GPHIN.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is responsible for preparing for a wide variety of potential
health emergencies, including but not limited to pandemics. The Office of the Auditor General (OAG)
identified several key elements of preparedness for improvement including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration of border and quarantine measures.
On emergency plans, recognizing that existing plans provided a framework to guide the current
response and that improvements are always possible, PHAC will incorporate learnings from the current
pandemicinto its plans and future exercises to test and validate these plans, in collaboration with
provincial and territorial colleagues and key stakeholders.
PHAC has similarly committed to updating and testing the Health Portfolio Strategic Emergency
Management Plan and Health Portfolio Emergency Response Plan within two years after the end of the
pandemic, to enhance preparedness to respond to future public health threats and emergencies. In
updating and testing these plans, PHAC will work with provincial andterritorial partners to reflect
shared responsibilities for public health emergencies.
With respect to public health surveillance, monitoring and early warning processes, PHAC is taking
similar steps to respond to OAG recommendations and others. Specifically, the OAG report
recommended PHAC appropriately utilize its GPHIN monitoring capabilities to detect and provide early
warning of potential public health threats, and in particular, clarify decision making for issuing alerts.
PHAC has committed to a number of actions to address the recommendations for further improvements
to GPHIN, taking into account both the OAG audit report and the recommendations from the
Independent Review of GPHIN which include improving and streamlining the decision-making process
for the issuance of GPHIN alerts and other GPHIN products and processes.
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR COVID-19 RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
continue to develop and rollout safe vaccines and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and
return to a more normal life.
KEY FACTS
• As of January 2022, CIHR has invested nearly $330 million, with another $20M from partners, on
818 research projects through 31 competitions on COVID-19 research.
• Funds were provided through competitions such as the initial Rapid Research response (e.g.
testing and vaccines), the COVID & Mental Health Initiative, knowledge syntheses, and emerging
research gaps and priorities, and more recently expanding towards long-term health impacts.
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international efforts to address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partners to find solutions to this pandemic.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support additional research on the long-term effects of
COVID-19 infections on Canadians, aswell as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care
systems.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will contribute to the evidence we need to
help Canada address this public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THESE INVESTMENTS…
• Since March 2020, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest nearly $330 million
in more than 800 research projects, which focus not only on vaccines, but also on other therapeutics,
testing, and transmission dynamics, and other COVID-19 related priority areas as they emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Enabled by this investment, CIHR and partnersacross Canada collaborated to inform the
implementation of promising interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness
within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that CIHR’s investments towards COVID-19 research have committed to
supporting research that addresses the impact of the pandemic on the well-being of Indigenous Peoples,
enhancing Indigenous community-led research and knowledge mobilization
• Further, these investments support research that will increase our understanding of persistent
and emerging gaps and priority areas–including variants of concern and Long-COVID–that continue to
provide decision makers with rapid evidence from which guidance can be developed and evaluated.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid Research Response at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID-19 and
is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research funding agency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
This included support for research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and
clinical management, and research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health response
and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and transmission dynamics.
In April 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additionalcountermeasures against
COVID-19, which:
• enabled researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and
social countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on
people, communities, and health systems;
• supported CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative;
• secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials to increase the
understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines, therapeutics, mental health supports and
clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR–in partnershipwith PHAC-funds the Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi-disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short-and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
CIHR has also invested in research to better understand and address the impacts of the pandemic on the
opioid crisis in Canada. With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHR funded network) produced
national guidance documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines
related to prescribing, dispensing, and delivery ofopioids and other narcotics during the COVID-19
pandemic to support people who use drugs.
CIHR also invested $2.2 million to fund the Operating Grant for the Evaluation of Harm Reductions
Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the Context of COVID-19. This investment is funding five
research grants that would address harm reduction approaches to the opioid crisis and to better
understand its compounding intersection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHR and partners have invested
$3.4M to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with Healthcare Excellence Canada.
CIHR launched two Indigenous COVID-19 Rapid Research Funding Opportunities, with a total investment
of approximately $8 million, to support:
• bold, innovative, Indigenous community-led, strengths-based, solutions-focused research
projects that focus on a wide range of topics and use diverse methods, forming a strong base to study
and understand the experiences of First Nations, Inuit, Métis, and Urban Indigenous communities
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
• enable rapid and timely distinctions-based, and Indigenous community-led research and
knowledge mobilization that is responsive to the unique circumstances and the current phase of the
COVID-19 pandemic in First Nations, Inuit, Métis and Urban Indigenous communities in Canada.
Building on the priorities from CIHR’s COVID-19 investments, CIHR launched several additional rapid
response competitions to support emerging priorities. This includes investments:
• to support collaboration and rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge
and evidence across the full breadth of Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health
measures, clinical management, health-system arrangements, and economic and social impacts).
• to expand existing national and international clinical trial networks to coordinate research on
interventions to prevent, detect, manage, and/or treat COVID-19.
• to accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align
efforts in this field.
• in a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research to enable the rapid support of research
activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and population health threats of
emerging variants of concern.
• to address persistent evidence gaps such as variants of the virus, vaccine development and
uptake, testing, mental health, and the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic is having specific impacts
on women, racialized populations, and Métis, Inuit and First Nations Peoples.
CIHR also worked withpartners to fund research on vaccine confidence to improve public understanding
of vaccines and help Canadians to make evidence-based decisions, especially among populations that
are hesitant about vaccines, and to help improve vaccine uptake among populations experiencing
systemic inequities, conditions of marginalization, Indigenous (First Nations, Inuit, Métis and/or Urban
Indigenous) communities and/or among populations who are historically under-vaccinated.
CIHR also invested in 70 projects to improve our understanding of, response to, and recovery from the
co-occurring stressful and traumatic events that stem from the current COVID-19 pandemic, and/or
restricted conditions associated with public health measures in Canada in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, with respect to children, youth and families in Canada.
CIHR is also investing in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative way in consultation with
partners. These investments are targeting key emerging research priorities and gaps to contribute to
Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way. The first competition was
launched on March 3, 2021 and funded 69 projects for a total of $26.3 million the second competition
was launched on July 27, 2021. The total funding amount available for these competitions is
approximately $119M.
Further, the Government of Canada, under the leadership of CIHR, is establishing a Centre for Research
on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies. The Research Centre will allow CIHR to support
real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the research community and
decision-makers alike, as well as to invest $18.5 million per year to build capacity, fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness, and implement the Budget 2022 investment of $20M
over 5 years to study the long-term impacts of COVID-19.
ACCESS TO COVID-19 VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
ISSUE
• Vaccine use inchildren under 12 years of age.
KEY FACTS
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty is authorised in younger children, ages 5-11. Moderna SpikeVax is
also authorised in younger children, ages 6-11.
• The positive results in Pfizer’s clinical trials involves approximately 4,600 children ages 5 to 11
years of age in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The
90.7% efficacy was established in 1,968 vaccine recipients, and vaccine safety was evaluated in 3,300
vaccine recipients.
• The positive results in Moderna’s clinical trials involve approximately 4,000 children ages 6 to 11
years of age. The trial showed that the vaccine produced similar levels of antibodies in children 6 to 11
years of age compared to adolescents and young adults.
KEY MESSAGES
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® in
children aged 5 to 11.
• On March 17, 2022, Health Canada approved the use of Moderna’s Spikevax® vaccine in children
aged 6 to 11.
• On April 29, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19
vaccine in children 6 months to 5 years of age. The vaccine submission is under review.
• On May 27, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19 boosterfor
children aged 5 to 11. The vaccine submission is being reviewed on a priority basis.
• As with all COVID-19 submissions, the Department is prioritizing the review while maintaining
our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S REVIEW PROCESS
• In order to expand the use of an authorized COVID-19 vaccine to younger children, the
manufacturer must provide evidence of safety, efficacy and quality to Health Canada for review.
• Timing for the completion of a HealthCanada review depends on many factors, including but
not limited to, the need for additional data, discussions with the sponsor, and requirements for updates
to safety information. A decision will only be made once all of the required information has been
submitted by the manufacturer and thoroughly evaluated by Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SAFETY OF VACCINES IN CHILDREN
• The safety of vaccines for children is of the utmost priority for Health Canada. The Department
will not compromise on the evidence standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• The Department conducted a detailed review of the safety data from clinical trials of Comirnaty
and Spikevax to support the authorization of the vaccine in adults, adolescents and children.
• The risks andbenefits are evaluated for each age group in the context of COVID disease. This
requires consideration of vaccine side effects and benefits.
• During clinical trials, dose-finding studies were conducted to determine the correct dose for
vaccine effectiveness in children aged 6 months to less than 12 years. This resulted in the identification
of a lower dose for children, while still maintaining effectiveness.
• The Department continuously monitors the safety of the vaccines after approval in Canada and
internationally, and takes immediate action should any safety concerns arise.
IF PRESSED ON AVAILABILITY OF OTHER VACCINES
• On April 29, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19
vaccine in children 6 months to 5 years of age. The vaccine submission is under review.
• A study with the Comirnaty vaccine is underway in children under 5 and other manufacturers
are also testing their vaccines in children of different age groups. Health Canada expects to receive data
for review in thecoming weeks.
BACKGROUND
The risk of severe illness due to COVID-19 might be lower in children than in adults but this does not
mean that there is no risk:
• Children can still contract COVID-19 and get very sick.
• In Canada, more than 4,000 children (ages 0-19) have been hospitalized with COVID-19, 422
have been admitted to the ICU and 33 have died (as of February 25, 2022.
• In Canada, there have been 355,737 COVID cases in children aged 0-11 years (as of February 25,
2022).
• Some children go on todevelop a Multi Inflammatory Syndrome and become severely affected.
Although rare, this is not an insignificant risk.
• Emerging data suggest that children that survive COVID-19 despite of the severity, are at risk of
developing what is now called “long COVID”. This condition is yet poorly understood but it has been
observed in a percentage of adults and children that survive COVID-19.
• In addition, children like adults, can still spread the virus to others. In order to best protect
themselves and the whole community, adolescents and children who are eligible should be vaccinated if
there are no contraindications.
PFIZER Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Comirnaty
• On May 27, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19 booster for
children aged 5 to 11. The vaccine submission is under review.
• On May 5, 2021 Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®vaccine in
adolescents aged 12-15.This information was also submitted to the US FDA and the EuropeanMedicines
Agency. The expanded indication for 12-15 years old was approved by the US FDA on May 10, 2021 and
by the EMA on May 28, 2021.
• Pfizer has completed their clinical trials involving up to 4,600 children ages 5 to 11 years of age
in the UnitedStates, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The trials evaluated
the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine on a two-dose schedule (approximately 21 days apart).
• On November 19, 2021, Pfizer's pediatric vaccine (ages 5 to 11) was approved by Health Canada
and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) released their guidelines also
recommending the use in this age group.
• On October 26, 2021, the USFDA’s Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory
Committee voted to agree that the overall benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks for children 5-11
years of age. Many committee members stressed that this was based on considerations of access and
personal choice and should not be considered a recommendation to mandate vaccines in this age group.
Active safety monitoring for rare, but potentially serious, adverse events such as myocarditis will be
important.
• On October 29, 2021 the U.S. FDA authorized the emergency use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-
19 Vaccine for the prevention of COVID-19 to include children 5 through 11 years of age.
• On November 5, 2021, the US CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
issued an Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine in Children Aged 5-11
Years.
• In the United States, as of March 2, 2022 more than 9 million children between the ages of 5
and 11 have received their first dose of Pfizer’s vaccine, and no safety issues have been identified. The
safety profile of children 5 to 11 is generally comparable to what was observed for the 12 to 15 year
olds.
MODERNA Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Spikevax
• On August 27, 2021, Health Canada approved the use ofthe Moderna COVID 19 Vaccine in
adolescents aged 12 to 17.
• On March 17, 2022, Health Canada approved the use of the vaccine in ages 6 to 11 years. The
Moderna pediatric dose is half (50 micrograms) of the dose given to adolescents and adults.
• On April 29, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19 vaccine
in children 6 months to 5 years of age. The vaccine submission is under review.
• Health Canada reviewed clinical trial results from a placebo-controlled study designed to
evaluate the safety and efficacy of the vaccine in children 6 to 11 years of age. In total, 4,016 children 6
to 11 years of age were enrolled; 3,012 children received Spikevax and 1,004 children received a
placebo.
• The study used a two-dose vaccine regimen with the same formulation as the adult vaccine.
However, the dose used was smaller, at 50 micrograms rather than 100 micrograms.
• The clinical trial of Spikevax (50 mcg) in children 6 to 11 years of age studied the immune
response to vaccination based on antibody levels. The trial showed that the vaccine produced similar
levels of antibodies in children 6 to 11 years of age compared to adolescents and young adults.
• Provisionally approved in Australia for individuals 6 years and older. EMA’s human medicines
committee (CHMP) has recommended granting an extension of indication for the COVID-19 vaccine
Spikevax to include use in children aged 6 to 11.
Other Vaccines
• Clinical trials for the Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines in children werepaused in Spring 2021
due to concerns with blood clots reported with the use of these vaccines in adults. The Janssen &
AstraZeneca trials have restarted; Janssen has plans to continue recruitment of younger pediatric
patients.
• Other manufacturers suchas Novavax have also launched clinical trials to test their vaccine in
adolescents.
Boosters for Adolescents
• On June 1st, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer Comirnaty booster dose vaccine in
adolescents 16-17 years of age.
• On March 16, 2022, HealthCanada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19 booster
for individuals 12 to 17 years of age. On January 28, 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
released guidance from the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) on the off-label use of
booster COVID-19 vaccine doses in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age who are at high risk of severe
COVID-19 outcomes due underlying medical conditions or living conditions, or who belong to racialized
or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Issue
Safety is a central consideration for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system assesses vaccines for safety, efficacy and quality before they are authorized. However, no health
product is completely risk-free.
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Key Facts
• A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for protecting the health and safety of
Canadians, ensuring public confidence in the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting Canada-
wide immunization efforts.
• The Government of Canada continues to work closely with partners to monitor vaccine safety.
Key Messages
• The safety and effectiveness of vaccines used in Canada is a top priority for this government.
• Canada’s monitoring systems for adverse events following immunization rapidly detects possible
safety issues and investigates them.
• Like any medication, vaccines can cause side effects and reactions, also known as adverse
events. The benefits of vaccines authorized in Canada continue to outweigh their risks.
• As part of the Government’s continued commitment to opennessand transparency, Health
Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada provide Canadians with weekly updates on reported
adverse events following immunization (AEFI) onCanada.ca.
Background
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are
expected mild reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild
headache), although serious and rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction). However, as the World
Health Organization states: “The fact that a vaccine was administered within a reasonable time period of
the occurrence of an event does not automatically suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the
event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provinces and territories (P/T), the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatoryauthority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. Health
Canada reviews these reports and takes appropriate regulatory actions should new safety issues be
identified. In addition, PHAC receives and reviews reports of adverse events following immunization
from P/Ts through the Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS).
This system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness
and sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve vaccine safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to: the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC; and to the Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, a national web-
based platform that collects information about health events occurring after COVID-19 vaccinations, and
that provides weekly reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities.
It is notable that, as of late April 2022, more than 32 million people have received at least one dose of a
COVID-19 vaccine in Canada, with side effects reported for 0.043% of all doses administered, of which
0.011% were classified as seriousside effects (i.e. requiring hospitalization, life threatening, and/or
resulting in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or death).
PHAC and Health Canada continue to closely monitor the following safety signals:
• Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome following vaccination with the viral vector
vaccine AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccine. Health Canada has updated the product
monograph to include information about these very rare events of blood clots associated with low levels
of platelets following immunization.
• Myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the lining
around the heart) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. Data in Canada indicate a higher
number of reports inyounger people (i.e. less than 40 years of age) than would normally be expected in
this age group in the general population. Health Canada updated the product monographs for both
Moderna Spikevax and Pfizer-BioTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccines to include information around
these risks.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO CLINICAL TRIALS FOR VACCINES AND
TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID 19 clinical
trials for vaccines and treatments.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all clinical trials for treatments and vaccines for
COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed.
• Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes toexpedite the review and facilitate the
conduct of clinical trials for COVID-19 vaccines and treatments while maintaining its high standards for
safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada continues to expedite the review of clinical trial applications and issues a decision
in under 15 days, which is half the standard time.
• These measures have allowed us to rapidly authorize several clinical trials in Canada, including
for some vaccines being developed in Canada, without compromising on strict standardsfor the safety
of clinical trial participants.
IF PRESSED FURTHER ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new uses of drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection andretention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trial applications so that products can be
studied and made available to Canadians as quickly as possible.
• As of May 18, 2022, 116 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccineshave been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for clinical
trials or for sale in Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all clinical trials applications for treatments and vaccines for
COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed. Clinical trials are
conducted to determine whether new vaccines and treatments are both safe and effective in human
beings. Health Canada has also been facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada, using the
Interim Order (IO) respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs (including vaccines) related to
COVID-19, which was issued in May 2020 (IO no1) and extended in May 2021 (IO no2).
On February 27, 2022, the Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to COVID-19 Regulations
(the Regulations) came into force, replacing the second interim order (IO No. 2), which was repealed on
February 26, 2022.
The Regulations maintain the optional pathway introduced in the IOs as well as all the flexibilities set out
by them. They continue to facilitate the authorization and implementation of COVID-19 related clinical
trials by reducing administrative burden, all while upholding the health and safety requirements for trial
participants and validity of trial data.
The Regulations continue to offer regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical
trials to take place more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient and volunteer
participation across the country. The Regulations help to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means of obtainingpatient consent in light of public health measures;
• broaden the criteria for health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator duties at
remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical device clinicaltrial
authorization.
The Regulations include changes to reduce the records retention period for all clinical trials of drugs and
natural health products from 25 years to 15 years to improve alignment with international regulatory
partners. They also establish a records retention period of 15 years for all COVID clinical trials.
Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half the
normal time).
PAXLOVID AND OTHER THERAPEUTICS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s healthcare system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to
COVID-19.
• Health Canada has authorized several drugs to treat COVID-19, including antivirals (Veklury and
Paxlovid) and biologic treatments calledmonoclonal antibodies. These treatments are approved for
non-hospitalized patients with mild–to-moderate COVID-19 symptoms and who are at high risk of
developing severe disease. Veklury (remdesivir) is also approved for treating hospitalized patients with
severe COVID-19 and who require supplemental oxygen. Several other treatments for COVID-19 are
under review.
• On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid, an oral antiviral treatment of
adults diagnosed with COVID-19 with mild-to-moderate symptoms and who are at a high risk of
progressing to severe disease, including hospitalization or death. Paxlovid is a combination of the oral
antivirals nirmatrelvir and ritonavir, which can be taken at home in pre-packaged doses. As an oral drug
it is expected to ease the burden on the health care system.
• On December 3, The Government of Canada signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an
initial quantity of 1 million treatment courses of the oral antiviral Paxlovid.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada has now authorized several drugs to treat COVID-19, including antivirals (Veklury
and Paxlovid) as well as biologic treatments called monoclonal antibodies. These treatments offer more
tools in our toolkit against COVID-19.
• Several other treatments to help prevent or treat COVID-19, including oral antivirals, are under
review. While the interim results from clinical trials for oral antivirals can be promising, all drugs must be
subjected to rigorous regulatory review to ensure the product is safe, efficacious and of high quality
before being authorized for sale in Canada.
• The Government of Canada has procured many of these treatments and continues to engage
proactively with domestic and international companies to negotiate advance purchase agreements for
the procurement of treatments to ensure timely access.
IF PRESSED ON PAXLOVID (Pfizer)
• I am happy to share that on January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid. This
drug is the first oral treatment approved in Canada for non-hospitalized adult patients diagnosed with
COVID-19 who are at a high risk of progressing to severe disease.
• On December 3, 2021, our Government signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an initial
quantity of 1 million courses of this oral antiviral.
• Paxlovid provides a new tool in the toolkit against COVID-19 at a crucial time in the pandemic as
we are faced with new variants. Importantly, it is a more easily administered antiviral treatment for
those at high risk of progression to severe COVID-19.
• However, no drug is a substitute for vaccination. Vaccination and public health measures remain
the most important tools in preventing illness from COVID-19 infection, and we continue to strongly
recommend vaccination for all eligible Canadians.
• There have been media reports that some patients experience rebound symptoms shortly after
completing a course of Paxlovid. At this time, information available does not indicate a need to change
the recommendations for use of Paxlovid.
• Health Canada will continue to collect information domestically and internationally, and will
take the appropriate steps to protect the health and safety of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments, as well as on products under regulatory review.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of theomicron variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron variant, Health Canada will
prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while maintaining high
standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is closely monitoring the impact of variants of concern on the effectiveness of the
monoclonal antibody and antiviral treatments and will continue to inform healthcare professionals and
patients if any specific treatment is no longer recommended.
IF PRESSED ON MOLNUPIRAVIR
• Molnupiravir is an oral antiviral treatment that has been reported to show some promise in
treating non-hospitalized COVID-19 patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 and at high risk for
progression to severe disease.
• Health Canada is aware that the efficacy of molnupiravir is lower than previously reported.
• Similar to other regulators such as the European Medicines Agency and Swissmedic, Health
Canada is working with Merck to obtain further clinical data to furthercharacterize the safety and
efficacy of molnupiravir.
• Because this is a rolling submission, Merck is continuing to submit evidence to Health Canada to
support the product’s safety, efficacy and quality and Health Canada will conduct a full review of all the
evidence prior to making a decision.
IF PRESSEDON IVERMECTIN
• There is no evidence that ivermectin works to prevent or treat COVID-19, and it is not
authorized for this use. To date, Health Canada has not received any drug submission or applications for
clinical trials for ivermectin for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19.
• A veterinary version of this medication is available to treat parasitic infections in animals. People
should not use the veterinary version of this product to treat or prevent COVID-19 or for any other
reason. Canadians should never consume health products intended for animals because of the potential
serious health dangers posed by them.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS
• Health Canada put in place Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19 drugs and
vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized under the
Interim Order can continue to be sold andthat new COVID-19 products can be reviewed and authorized
using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food andDrug Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Moderna, Novavax and
Medicago have been authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as those from Sanofi and Vaccigen,are also
being reviewed under the new Regulations.
• Pfizer’s Paxlovid and AstraZeneca’s Evusheld were granted authorization under the new
Regulations.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, and the Access Consortium, amongst others, to share
information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based approaches for treatments.
The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay informed of any
potential treatments.
BACKGROUND
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a website for the health
product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for questions.
Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to COVID-19.
Treatments
Dexamethasone
Although not specifically authorized for the treatment of COVID-19, clinical trial results announced in
June 2020, showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to reduce inflammation, cut death rates
by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients admitted to hospital. As a result, the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) has updated its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19.
COVID-19 Authorized Treatments
Remdesivir
On 27 July 2020, Health Canada authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment
of patients (12 years of age or older, who weigh at least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen to help them breathe. Health Canada approved this drug with
conditions for themanufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality. On April 22, 2022,
Health Canada authorized the expansion of the indication to include non-hospitalized adults with
positive results of direct SARS-CoV-2 viral testing, and who are at highrisk for progression to severe
COVID-19, including hospitalization or death.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, 2020, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab, a monoclonal
antibody. Bamlanivimab was authorized under the Interim Order and is currently under review under
the amended Food and Drug Regulations. The updated clinical information is included in the submission
under review and will inform the regulatory decision.
Casirivimab and imdevimab combination
Casirivimab and imdevimab are monoclonal antibodies that are administered together by intravenous
infusion as a single dose, and this product has shown a clear benefit for patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of hospitalization and/or death. This combination drug treatment was
developed by U.S. company Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and is distributed in Canada by Hoffmann-
La Roche Ltd. A Health Product Risk Communication was posted on January 7, 2022, indicating
significantly reduced neutralization potency and a high risk of treatment failure with the casirivimab and
imdevimab combination against Omicron.
Sotrovimab
On July 30, 2021, Health Canada authorized Sotrovimab from GlaxoSmithKline. This monoclonal
antibody is approved for the treatment of mild to moderateCOVID-19 in adults and adolescents (12
years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) who are at high risk for progressing to hospitalization
and/or death.
Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination with ritonavir)
On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination with ritonavir) for
the treatment of COVID-19 in non-hospitalized adult patients at risk of progressing to serious disease
including hospitalization and death). Nirmatrelvir is an oral anti-viral drug developed byPfizer that is co-
administered with another drug, ritonavir, which acts as a booster to maintain the required
concentration of nirmatrelvir for antiviral effect. Previously, all existing COVID-19 treatments required IV
administration or injection in a hospital and clinical setting. Oral anti-virals, such as Paxlovid, can be
easily administered at home, thereby reducing the strain on the health care system. There have been
some media reports that some patients experience rebound symptoms (i.e., reoccurrenceof symptoms)
shortly after completing a course of Paxlovid; however, a direct link has not been established at this
time.
Evusheld
On April 13, 2022, Health Canada authorized AstraZeneca's Evusheld treatment, a monoclonal antibody
for the prophylaxis of COVID-19. Evusheld is a combination of two long-acting antibodies, tixagevimab
and cilgavimab, derived from B cells donated by patients recovering from infection with the SARS-CoV-2
virus. Evusheld is recommended for use in adults who are not currently infected with COVID-19 and who
are unlikely to mount an adequate response to vaccination against COVID-19, including those for whom
vaccination is not recommended.
Additional data is being requested on effectiveness against Omicron. On February 24, 2022, theFDA
authorized an increase in dose in response to Omicron subvariants BA.1 and BA.1.1. AstraZeneca noted
that they are not proposing a change in dose for their Canadian submission. Evusheld is expected to
have greater neutralizing activity against BA.2.
COVID-19 Treatment Submissions Under Review
Baricitinib is being investigated as a treatment that may reduce the complications related to the
cytokine storm as well as potentially inhibiting cell proteins that have a role in viral replication. On May
13,2021, Eli Lilly filed a drug submission for baricitinib with Health Canada and as of December 1, 2021,
this submission is under review. Health Canada is awaiting results from an ongoing clinical trial that
concluded in February 2022.
Molnupiravir is an anti-viral, in capsule form, for the treatment of adults with mild-to-moderate COVID-
19 and who are at risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 disease. Merck’s drug submission with Health
Canada is under review. The United Kingdom’s (UK) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA) authorized conditionally the use of molnupiravir on November 4. The EMA issued advice
on November 19, 2021, to support national decision-making on the possible use of these medicines
before a formal authorization is issued, for example in emergency use situations, while it continues its
on-going rolling review for market authorization. On December 23, 2021, the US FDA issued an
emergency use authorization for molnupiravir only in patients for whom alternative COVID-19
treatment options authorized by the FDA are not accessible or clinically appropriate. Australia’s
Therapeutic Goods Administration (TGA) granted provisional approval and Singapore’s HSA granted
interim authorization for molnupiravir on January 20 and April19, 2022, respectively. Swissmedic’s
(Switzerland) review for temporary approval is still on-going.
Health Canada has four other submissions for monoclonal antibody treatments (tixagevimab and
cilgavimab), Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination, Celltrion’s Regdanvimab and
Hoffman La Roche’s Actemra (tocilizumab). Monoclonal antibodies are being tested both as treatment
for mild/moderate COVID-19, and also as prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
Tocilizumab (Actemra) is a recombinant humanized anti-human interleukin 6 (IL-6) receptor monoclonal
antibody of the immunoglobulin (Ig) IgG1 subclass with a H2L2 polypeptide structure that is already
authorized in Canada for non-COVID use. On February 4, 2022, Health Canada received a submission for
a COVID-19 indication that is under review, and PHAC’s external advisory body (Clinical Pharmacology
Task Group) made recommendations for use. FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization on June 24.
On December 6, the EMA recommended approval for certain hospitalized adult COVID-19 patients.
COVID-19 Treatment Submissions Withdrawn
On June 7 2021, the submission to authorize colchicine as a treatment of COVID-19 was withdrawn by
the manufacturer. Colchicine remains authorized in Canada for the prophylaxisand treatment of gout
flares and Familial Mediterranean Fever. Although unproven at the time, Colchicine was used to treat
the Former President Trump and gained a lot of media attention.
The Sanoclear (Nitric Oxide) submission was withdrawn Sept. 01, 2021, with an expectation that it will
be refiled once additional clinical data is available, and the leronlimab submission was withdrawn
September 16, 2021.
On February 24, 2022, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories withdrew its submission for favipiravir.
COVID-19 PROOF OF VACCINATION SUPPORT TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
BUDGET 2022 KEY MESSAGES:
• Budget 2022 proposes $18 million in 2022-23 for the Public Health Agency of Canada to
continue to work with provincial and territorial governments and withinternational partners to ensure
that the Canadian proof of vaccination credential remains valid, secure, and accessible to all Canadians.
Issue
Consistent with the December 14, 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update, the Government is proposing to
launch a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund to support provinces and territories for costs to implement
a COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program.
Key Facts
• In its 2021 election platform, the Liberal Party of Canada committed to “launch a COVID-19
Proofof Vaccination Fund to support provinces and territories who implement a requirement for proof
of vaccine credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public spaces”.
• On October 21, 2021, the Prime Minister stated that “there willbe a standardized proof of
vaccination certificate that as we said, we will be picking up the tab for at the federal level”.
• All provinces and territories that had implemented widespread vaccination requirements within
their jurisdictions have since removed them, though requirements remain in place in some high-risk
settings. To date, all jurisdictions are continuing to issue the Canadian proof of vaccination credential.
Federal vaccination requirements (i.e., for domestic air and rail travel, for Government of Canada
employees, and at Canadian borders) remain in place. Most foreign countries also continue to require
proof of vaccination for entry by foreign travellers.
Key Messages
• Helping Canadians get safely back to the activities and interactions they value most is a priority
for the Government of Canada.
• As announced in the fall 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update, the Government is proposing to
launch a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund.
• The intent of the Fund is to support the costs provincesand territories incurred to implement a
COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program, including costs to issue proof of vaccination
credentials to their residents, and to maintain these credentials as long as needed.
• The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories to support
the continued issuance of a standardized pan-Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential,
providing a secure way to prove one’s vaccination status.
• The standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential helps Canadians demonstrate their
vaccination status in a secure and reliable way when travelling internationally where most of our largest
foreign partners require it.
• Budget 2022 proposes $18 million in 2022-23 to continue work with provincial and territorial
governments, and with international partners, to ensure that the Canadian proof of vaccination
credential remains valid, secure, and accessible to all Canadians. This will ensure Canadians can continue
to travel and meet proofof vaccination requirements both domestically and internationally.
Background
Up to March 31, 2022, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada led the proof of vaccination
credential initiative for the Government of Canada with respect to international travel. The Public Health
Agency of Canada has since taken over the leadership. The Agency has contributed to the initiative by
supporting proof of vaccination credential issuance by provinces and territories, including the
development of the standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential. Provinces and territories,
and in some cases, Indigenous communities and organizations, are the custodians of public health data
–including personal health information of residents.
Canada has developed and published a “pan-Canadian specification” that allows provinces and
territories to ensure their proof of vaccination credentials are digitally verifiable, follow a common look-
and-feel, have the same data fields, and are generally recognizable as proof of vaccination credentials
issued in Canada. This increases the likelihood that the credentials will be accepted as legitimate proof
of vaccination across Canada and at international borders, ensuring Canadians and others vaccinated in
Canada can access non-essential business, public spaces, and can resume travel internationally.
Since the end of November 2021, all provinces and territories have been issuing proof of vaccination
credentials consistent with the pan-Canadian specification.
Proof of vaccinationrequirements
Proof of vaccination credentials have been used to support the implementation of vaccination
mandates, which aim to protect those that visit public settings and to control the transmission of COVID-
19. Scientific evidence shows that COVID-19 vaccines are highly effective at preventing hospitalization
and death, and also effective at preventing severe infection.
Many provinces and territories have begun eliminating certain vaccination requirements within their
jurisdictions. As of May 20, 2022, all provinces and territories that had broad vaccination requirements
have since rolled them back. Some provinces and territories have retained vaccination requirements in
specific settings (e.g., long term care homes) and others are giving businesses the option to continue
asking for proof of vaccination at their discretion.
To date, all jurisdictions are continuing to issue the Canadian PVC and SK, MB, QC, NB, NU, NL, NT, and
YT have explicitly indicated they will continue to issue and maintain proofof vaccination credentials for
use by residents as needed (e.g. for travel).
Key international partners continue to require proof of vaccination to enter the country and/or access
certain facilities, including G7 countries with one exception: the UnitedKingdom lifted all remaining
COVID-19 travel measures on March 18, 2022.
COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund for provinces and territories
A 2021 Liberal Party of Canada (LPC) platform commitment proposed a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination
Fund to support provinces and territories who implement a requirement for proof of vaccination
credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public spaces.
The LPC platform commitment was for a $1 billion fund; however, the Government is proposing atotal
fund amount of $300 million. The $300 million amount reflects the Government of Canada’s estimate of
what provinces and territories have spent to issue proof of vaccination credentials, as well as anticipated
costs to maintain the credential programsas long as needed going forward (e.g., as long as proof of
vaccination is required for international travel or to support domestic public health measures).
Additional details will follow regarding the apportionment of the fund across provinces and territories,
and expectations associated with the receipt of funds.
Indigenous engagement
In addition to collaboration with provinces and territories, the Government has engaged with
Indigenous communities and organizations to ensure proof of vaccination credentials meet the needs of
Indigenous Peoples. Since May 2021, a series of engagement sessions have been held with First Nations,
Inuit and Métis partners, including communities that are close to the U.S. border, and those involved in
frequent cross-bordertravel for cultural, work or familial purposes. Engagement will continue as
required.
The objectives of this engagement were to ensure that Indigenous partners are part of the conversation
at an early stage, to provide informational updates, and hear considerations and potential issues that
may arise for these partners. Concerns expressed included: issues of equity, cross-border movement
(including Canada-U.S.), accessibility, data sovereignty / vaccination reporting gaps, and international
recognition ofCanada’s mixed-dose schedule and communications.
In order to ensure Indigenous community members can access the standardized COVID-19 proof of
vaccination credential, some Indigenous communities and organizations have done significant work to
incorporatedata on Indigenous vaccinations into provincial and territorial vaccination systems. We will
encourage provinces and territories to collaborate with Indigenous communities to determine how this
funding can effectively support costs related to proof of vaccination credentials.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Six COVID-19 vaccines are currently authorized by Health Canada and others are under review.
KEY FACTS
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and
the Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
• Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
KEY MESSAGES
• The availability of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines is of the utmost priority. Health Canada
has now authorized COVID-19 vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Novavax
and Medicago.
• In addition, there are two other vaccines currently under review by Health Canada from Sanofi
and Vaccigen (Covaxin).
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTechComirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine for children ages 5 to 11.
• On May, 27, 2022, Health Canada received a booster submission for Comirnaty vacine in
children ages 5 to 11. This submission is under review.
• On March 17, 2022 Health Canada authorized the use ofthe Moderna Spikevax COVID-19
vaccine for children ages 6 to 11.
• In November 2021, Health Canada also authorized the use of a booster shot of the Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty and Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccines, and, on May 11, 2022, Health Canada
authorized the Janssen (Johnson and Johnson) booster dose.
• On June 1st, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer Comirnaty booster dose vaccine in
adolescents 16-17 years of age. On March 16, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna
for a COVID-19booster for individuals 12 to 17 years of age. Public Health advice should be followed
regarding who would benefit from a booster shot.
• On February 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of the Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19
vaccine in adults 18 years of age and older.
• On February 24, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Medicago's Covifenz COVID-19
vaccine in adults 18 to 64 years of age. This is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a
Canadian-based company, and the first that usesa plant-based technology.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• Health Canada will continue to review safety data submittedby the manufacturer and adverse
event reports received in the Canada Vigilance Database. In addition, Health Canada will continue to
work closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada, Provinces and Territories, and international
regulators to monitor the safety of the vaccine. The Department will take appropriate action in a timely
manner if new safety concerns are identified and will ensure that relevant information is available to all
Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON MEDICAGO …
• Our Government recognizes the need for a strong and resilient domestic bio-manufacturing
industry, and that is why we have made a significant investment in Medicago.
• This isthe first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a Canadian-based company, and the
first that uses a plant-based technology.
• Canada has studied the matter of the Government of Canada’s investment in Medicago carefully
and considers that it is compliantwith its treaty obligations related to tobacco control under the WHO
Framework Convention on Tobacco.
• Health Canada takes its commitments under the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
seriously, and will continue to be transparent in its interactions with the tobacco industry.
IF PRESSED …
• Health Canada is prepared to work closely with regulatory authorities in other countries or
regions to share information on the Department’s review of Covifenz and support authorization in other
countries, as well as enable other countries’ access to Covifenz vaccine supplies that may become
available in the coming months.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON …
• Health Canada issued regulatory letters to manufacturers of authorized COVID-19 vaccines and
to those under review, requesting plans to evaluate and address the impact of the omicron variant on
their product and include any proposed studies, timelines for completion and risk minimization
measures. Canadians will be informed in a timely manner of any new key information about the impact
of omicron on vaccine effectiveness.
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of the omicron variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron or any other variant, Health
Canada will prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while
maintaining high standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON BOOSTER DOSE SUBMISSIONS …
• People who havereceived a complete vaccine series, including older adults, have good
protection against severe disease and death. This includes protection from variants of concern currently
circulating in Canada. However, a third dose would ensure further protection.
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) strongly recommends that Canadians
over the age of 50 and other vulnerable populations receive a third dose of an mRNA vaccine. Canadians
aged 18 to 49 can also receive a third dose at least six months after they have received their second.
• On June 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the booster dose of the Pfizer Comirnaty vaccine for
adolescents 16-17 years of age.
• On March 16, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19booster
for individuals 12 to 17 years of age. On January 28, 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
released guidance from the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) on the off-label use of
booster COVID-19 vaccine doses in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age who are at high risk of severe
COVID-19 outcomes due underlying medical conditions or living conditions, or who belong to racialized
or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OFAPPROVALS FOR VACCINES UNDER REVIEW …
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Food and Drug Regulations,
which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness and quality to Health Canada as it
becomes available. The Food and Drug Regulations were amended in March 2021 to provide the same
flexibilities as under the Interim Order that was used for the initial authorizations.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review.These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submissions depends on the outcomes of the
companies’ ongoing clinical trials and the review of the data submitted to Health Canada, as well as the
finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian supply.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS …
• Health Canada put in place Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19 drugs and
vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized under the
Interim Order can continue to be sold and that new COVID-19 products can bereviewed and authorized
using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food and Drug Regulations.
• To-date, thevaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Moderna, Novavax and
Medicago have been authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as those from Sanofi and Vaccigen, are also
being reviewed under thenew Regulations.
BACKGROUND
Medicago
On February 24, 2022, after a rigorous and independent scientific review of the evidence, Health Canada
authorized the use of Medicago’s Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine.
Medicago is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a Canadian-based company, and the
first that uses a plant-based protein technology to prevent COVID-19 infection.
Health Canada is prepared to work closely with regulatory authorities in other countries or regions to
share information onthe Department’s review of Covifenz and support authorization in other countries,
as well as enable other countries’ access to Covifenz vaccine supplies that may become available in the
coming months.
The Government of Canada has studied the matter of itsinvestment in Medicago carefully and considers
that it is compliant with its treaty obligations related to tobacco control under the WHO Framework
Convention on Tobacco (FCTC). The FCTC requires Parties to the Convention to specifically protect
“public health policies with respect to tobacco control” from “commercial and other vested interests of
the tobacco industry.” As such, the FCTC does not preclude the Government of Canada from working
with Medicago on vaccine development and procurement to ensure that a ready and effective supply of
vaccines is available for its population.
Article 5.3 of the Framework Convention on Tobacco Control requires Parties to the Convention to
specifically protect “public health policies with respect to tobacco control” from “commercial and other
vested interests of the tobacco industry.”
As such, the Convention does not preclude the Government of Canada from working with Medicago on
vaccine development and procurement to ensure that a ready and effective supply of vaccinesis
available for its population.
Health Canada’s interactions with the tobacco industry will continue to be transparent in accordance
with Health Canada’s openness and transparency requirements and in alignment with guidelines under
the WHO Framework Convention on Tobacco Control.
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
InSeptember 2020, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines
by allowing companies to submit safety and efficacy data as soon as they become available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Since the Interim Order was temporary (valid for 1 year, expired on September 16, 2021), in March 2021
Health Canada introduced amendments to the Food and Drugs Regulations (Regulations) to provide a
mechanism for COVID-19 products to gain permanent legal status and allow the vaccines to continue to
be sold in Canada. Companies were required to file a submission to Health Canada under the amended
Regulations. The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® and Moderna Spikevax®, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria® and
Janssen vaccines were authorized under the modified Regulations
Summary of approved vaccines, status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Original vaccine approvals
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® vaccine under the Interim Order on
December 9, 2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax® vaccine under the Interim Order on December 23,
2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine under the Interim Order on February 26,
2021, and authorized it under the Regulations on November 19, 2021. Health Canada worked closely
with the European Medicines Agency on the initial review.
Health Canada authorized the Janssen vaccine on March 5, 2021 under the Interim Order, and
authorized it under the Regulations on November 23, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine on February 17, 2022 under the
Regulations. Health Canada authorized the Medicago Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine on February 24, 2022
under the Regulations.
Pediatric and Adolescent approvals
• Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 5-11 on November 19,
2021 and aged 12-15 on May 5, 2021. The Moderna vaccine was authorized for use in children aged 6-11
on March 17, 2022 and individuals aged 12-17 on August 27,2021.
• On April 29, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a COVID-19
vaccine in children 6 months to 5 years of age. The vaccine submission is under review.
• On May 27, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for aCOVID-19 booster for
children aged 5 to 11. The vaccine submission is under review.
(Please see separate QP on COVID-19 vaccines for children).
Boosters
On November 9, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccine as a booster shot. On November 12, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Moderna
Spikevax vaccine as a booster shot and on May 11, 2022, Health Canada authorized the Janssen
(Johnson and Johnson) booster dose.
On June 1, 2022, Health Canada authorized the booster dose of the Pfizer Community vaccine for
adolescents 16-17 years of age. On March 16, Health Canada received a submission from Moderna for a
COVID-19 booster for individuals 12 to 17 years of age.
Ongoing reviews of other vaccines
Vaccine submissions from Sanofi and Vaccigen (vaccine Covaxin) are under review. Timelines for
decisions depend on the submission of outstanding data from the companies, discussions with the
sponsors, and completion of Health Canada’s review.
COVID-19 SCREENING AND TESTING
ISSUE
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories, federal organizations, as well as distribution channels in the private sector and non-
profitorganizations, such as the Canadian chambers of commerce, Canadian Red Cross and pharmacies,
to distribute rapid tests and self tests.
KEY FACTS
• On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of
the Safe Restart Agreement, to further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated
data management and information sharing systems.
• The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and
the Public Health Agencyof Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
• An additional off-cycle budget request of $2.5 billion was approved in January 2022. The
Minister obtained statutory authority through Bill C-10, which received Royal Assent on March 4,2022,
to access these funds.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over
603M rapid tests, at a total cost of $4B.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has shipped over
480M rapid tests to provinces and territories, over 7.3M tests to large businesses, over 5.3M tests to
pharmacies, and nearly 4M to the Canadian Red Cross.
• Since January 1, 2022, the federal government has shipped over 365M rapid tests to provinces
and territories
• As of June 7, 2022, the Government of Canada has approved 35 point-of-care rapid tests, as well
as 18 self-tests.
• Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around 200,000
tests per day. However, resulting from the rapid surge in cases driven by the Omicron variant, access to
PCR testing has been restricted for symptomatic high priority groups in all provinces and territories.
• The Government of Canada will continue to supply rapid tests to provinces and territories on a
per capita basis, gradually decreasing until December 2022.
• The Government of Canada will continue to take orders for rapid tests for direct distribution to
large organizations employing more than 200 people up until July:
• Organizations of 1000 employees or more must can place orders of rapid tests through the
CanadaBuys Service Portal until June 30, 2022.
• Organizations of 200-1000 employees will be provided additional time to transition with orders
place until July 29, 2022.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF RAPID ANTIGEN TEST KITS
• Health Canada is aware of calls made to poison centres in Canada related toaccidental exposure
to certain ingredients in rapid antigen test kits, which have resulted in minor health outcomes and no
lasting effects.
• Health Canada has advised Canadians about potential risks associated with the misuse or
accidental ingestion or spillage of COVID-19 rapid antigen test kit solutions.
• The kits are safe and effective when used as intended.
• Distribution and use of testing devices should be done in accordance with provincial or
territorial guidance.
IF PRESSED ON WHICH TESTS WEREORDERED AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION…
• As part of this work, the federal government ordered rapid and self-tests from various suppliers
–the Cepheid GeneXpert, Biomérieux Canada, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor, Quidel Sofia,
Quidel QuickVue, Lucira, Roche SD Biosensor, BTNX Rapid Response, Artron COVID-19 antigen test,
Switch Health SD Biosensor, Trimedic Assuretech, CanAM SD Biosensor, Precision Compounds–and
have worked with our provincial and territorial counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• In addition, the federal government continues to support multiple distribution channels to
achieve broad reach of rapid antigen tests and self-tests.
• To date, Health Canada distributed over 7.3 million to organizations of the private sector for
workplace testing.
• To improve access by small-medium sized organizations, Health Canada also developed
partnerships with pharmacies for test distribution to small-medium sized businesses. Over 5.3M tests
were provided to pharmacies for this initiative.
• Health Canada has also collaborated with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC) to distribute tests to
non-profit and charitable organizations for workplace screening of employees and volunteers.
Approximately 800K tests were provided to the CRC for this initiativeto date. Furthermore, with the
objective of ensuring that vulnerable people are able to access tests and masks, Health Canada has also
worked with the CRC to identify community partners who would provide tests and masks to their
clients. Up to now, over 3.9M tests were provided to the CRC for this initiative
• In support of the federal vaccination mandate, as well as voluntary testing of front-line public
servants at organizations including Correctional Service Canada, Health Canada has also provided over
5.8M rapid tests to federal departments, agencies and Crown corporations, as of May 24, 2022.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL DAILY CAPACITY…
• Under the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government funded the acceleration of the
development of testing capacityin the provinces and territories. The national capacity is about 200,000
per day.
• During the Omicron-driven wave of the pandemic, testing demand exceeded available
laboratory capacity in most jurisdictions. In response, most P/T jurisdictions limited the use of PCR
testing to diagnose COVID-19 to specific target groups, including the unvaccinated,
immunocompromised, or those working or living in high-risk settings, with public health testing
guidance varying between jurisdictions.
• We have also put intoplace surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING ITS TESTING CAPACITY…
• My department continues to work with their colleagues in Public Services and Procurement
Canada, Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to
identify and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• Thanks to the Government of Canada support, Artron, a rapid test developed and manufactured
in Canada has been approved by Health Canada and is now part of our procurement of rapid tests.
• As emerging testing and screening products such as self-tests, or platformsbecome available
and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public
health laboratories to acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON BILL C-8 AND BILL C-10…
• Bill C-10, An Act respecting certain measures related to COVID-19 received Royal Assent on
March 4, 2022. This bill authorizes the Minister of Health to make payments of up to $2.5 billion out of
the Consolidated Revenue Fund in relation to COVID rapid tests and also grants theMinister authority to
distribute COVID-19 rapid tests to provinces and territories, any organization and any person in Canada.
A report regarding the use of the funding will be tabled to Parliament in June, in accordance with
commitments made by the HealthMinister.
• Bill C-8, An Act to implement certain provisions of the economic and fiscal update tabled in
Parliament on December 14, 2021 and other measures, is currently with Parliament for consideration,
and would authorize Health Canada to make payments up to $1.72 billion out of the Consolidated
Revenue Fund in relation to COVID rapid tests. Health Canada received $700 million and PHAC received
$1.017 billion in 2021-2022 Supplementary Estimates C for Bill C-8.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS EDUCATINGPUBLIC ON PROPER USE OF RAPID TESTS…
• While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and
territorial jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts.
• In December 2021, Health Canada launched two nationalpublic health measures advertising
campaigns (The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practicing public
health measures, including the use of rapid tests.
• TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated to ensure Canadians have access to
the most updated information on testing, including use, distribution and procurement.
• The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge
sharing across provinces and territories.
BACKGROUND
OnJuly 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16, 2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, andthe associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resources and information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around 200,000
tests per day. However, resulting from the rapid surge in cases driven by the Omicron variant, access to
PCRtesting has been restricted for symptomatic high priority groups in all provinces and territories.
The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests. In total, since the
beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 603M rapid tests, at a total
cost of $4B.
Since September 3, 2020, an online table records progress by provinces and territories in increasing their
testing capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and territory
compared to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community.
Procurement and Distribution of Tests to Provinces and Territories
The Government of Canada has been a leader in funding, procuring and distributing rapid tests through
multiple channels across Canada, and has been providing rapid tests to provinces and territories since
October 2020.
In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 603M rapid
tests, at a total cost of$4B.
Initial test approval focused on point of care molecular tests. Point of care molecular tests are widely
recognized as sound options for diagnostic testing in instances where lab-based PCR testing is not
available. In consultations with provinces andterritories, the Government of Canada prioritized the
procurement and deployment of molecular tests to health and long-term care settings as well as for
northern, remote and isolated communities.
In recent months, the focus has been on the procurement and distribution of rapid antigen tests,
including self tests, and rapidly boosting supply to respond to the increasing demand due to Omicron.
This also marked a shift away from previous demand-led supply of tests to provinces and territories,
most of whichwere early adopters of general population access to rapid testing in December, towards a
per capita allocation of tests as of January 2022.
In total, the federal government has shipped over 480M rapid tests to provinces and territories. These
rapid antigentests have supported the broader testing strategies that provinces and territories have
implemented including for screening in hospitals and other health care settings, as well as for expanded
school based testing, workplace screening, as well as community and general population testing.
The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
An additional off-cycle budget requestof $2.5 billion was approved in January 2022. The Minister sought
a statutory authority through Bill C-10 to access these funds to ensure consistent supply and distribution
of tests into the Spring to PTs, organizations and any person in Canada.
A key priority of the Government of Canada is supporting domestic bio-manufacturing capacity for rapid
tests. The Government of Canada’s commitment to the bio-manufacturing sector is outlined in Budget
2021, which includes a $2.2 billion investment over the next seven years. Artron, a rapid test developed
and manufactured in Canada has been approved by Health Canada and is now part of Government of
Canada’s procurement of rapid tests. The Government of Canada has procured 27.7M tests from Artron
to date.
Public Education
While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts through multiple prongs.
In December 2021, Health Canada launched two national public health measures advertising campaigns
(The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practising public health
measures, including the use of rapid tests.
TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated on an ongoingbasis to ensure Canadians
have access to the most updated information around testing importance, distribution to provinces,
workplaces and procurement they need.
Health Canada published the Pan-Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance in October 2020, and
updated it in August 2021. The updates to the guidance were informed by a report on Testing for
COVID-19 in Vaccinated Populations, which included recommendations based on the latest scientific
literature.
Public Health Agency of Canada’s National Microbiology Lab published an interim guidance on antigen
testing in October 2020.
In addition, the Minister of Health established a Testing and Screening Expert Advisory Panel in
November 2020 that provided evidence-informed advice in five reports covering testing and screening,
long-term care, schools, borders and self-testing. The Panel has been on hiatus since August 2021.
The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge sharing across
provinces and territories.
Workplace Screening
The workplace screening initiative will wind down in the coming months. SMEs will be able to place an
order for rapid tests for workplace screening at select pharmacy locations in Ontario, Manitoba,
Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia until the end of September 2022. Alternatively, SMEs can
also pick up rapid tests for free at participating local chambers of commerce in British Columbia, Alberta,
Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Charities, Non-Profits and Indigenous Community
Organizations can acquire rapid tests through the Canadian Red Cross for free, in British Columbia,
Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia.
The Government of Canada will continue to take orders for rapid tests for direct distribution to large
organizations employing more than 200 people up until July:
• Organizations of 1000 employees or more can place final orders of rapid tests through the
CanadaBuys Service Portal until June 30, 2022.
• Organizations of fewer than 1000 employees will be provided additional time to transition with
orders until July 29, 2022.
Building on workplace screening initiatives, the Government of Canada is increasing access to COVID-19
rapid antigen tests for people in Canada’s North. The Government ofCanada is working with the
Governments of Northwest Territories and Nunavut to distribute COVID-19 rapid tests free of charge at
NorthMart and Northern stores across the two territories. Tests became available to local residents
starting February 25, 2022.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
VACCINE INJURY SUPPORT PROGRAM
Issue
The Governmentof Canada has established a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program
(VISP). The program ensures that all people in Canada who have experienced a serious and permanent
injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after
December 8, 2020, have access to fair and timely financial support. The new VISP brings Canada in line
with a growing number of countries that have such programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
Key Facts
• A total of$75 million in funding has been earmarked for the first five years of the program.
• The overall cost of the program will be dependent on the volume of claims and compensation
awarded over time. To date, $33.2 million over 5 years is allocated to RCGT Consulting for
administration and claim payments. Up to $7.75 million over 5 years has been allocated to the
Government of Quebec for the continued delivery of its provincial vaccine injury compensation
program.
• Remaining funds are available to adapt to the demand for financial support.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring that Canadians who support public health
by being vaccinated are supported in the rare event that they experience a serious and permanent
injury as a result of vaccination.
• The pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP) was launched on June 1, 2021,
and is being administered independently by RCGT Consulting, which oversees all aspects of claims
intake, assessment and reporting.
• The program ensures people in Canada who experience a serious and permanent injury as a
result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8,
2020, have access to fair and timely financial support.
• The province of Quebec is receiving federal funds to continue toadminister its existing
provincial program for people vaccinated in Quebec. Individuals vaccinated in all other provinces and
territories are eligible under the pan-Canadian program.
If pressedon timelines to process a claim
• To ensure impartiality in the claims processes, an independent third-party, RCGT Consulting,
serves as the administrator of the VISP and oversees all aspects of claims intake and assessment.
• Timelines for a determination of eligibility and support will depend on the nature and
complexity of the claim. To receive compensation through the VISP, a causal relationship between the
injury and the vaccination must be objectively determined.
• The causality assessment process requires the third-party administrator to retrieve all relevant
medical records from the province or territory or from the medical institution where the patient
received care. This process can take time and create delays outside of the third-party administrator’s
control.
• Payments for those who have a serious and permanent injury from a vaccine will be retroactive
to the date of the injury.
If pressed on number of claims received
• The program is administered independently by RCGT Consulting. As part of program reporting
requirements, RCGT has informed the Public Health Agency of Canada that it had received 650 claims
from the period of June 1, 2021 to March 31, 2022.
• RCGT is committed to providing public reporting and began publishing program statistics on
their website on December 15, 2021.The next public reporting update is expected on June 1, 2022.
If pressed on timing of program launch
• The need for a vaccine injury support program was identified as a gap in Canada’s immunization
system and recognized as an area of importance by the Government of Canada, the provinces and
territories.
• The pandemic further underscored this need, especially as Canada was preparing to launch the
national COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
• The new program brings Canada in line with a growing number of countries that have such
programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
If pressed on the type of support available
• Eligible individuals may receive income replacement indemnities; injury indemnities; death
benefits, including coverage for funeral expenses; and reimbursement of eligible costs, such as
otherwise uncovered medical expenses.
• Compensation is comparable to what is provided through Quebec’s vaccine injury compensation
program.
Background
On December 10, 2020, the Prime Minister announced the creation of a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine
Injury Support Program (VISP). The program launched on June 1, 2021, and provides financial support to
people in Canada in the rare event that they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of
receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020.
The program will also provide death benefits and support for funeral expenses in the rare case of death
as aresult of having received a Health Canada authorized vaccine.
Provinces and territories were given the option to create their own vaccine injury support programs
with federal funding. All, except Quebec, chose to participate in the national program. Quebec is
receiving federal funding to continue to deliver its existing program. A five-year contribution agreement
with the province of Quebec was signed on March 31, 2022. In order to ensure equity across the
country, the parameters of the pan-Canadian VISPhave been modelled on Quebec’s successful regime,
to the extent possible.
An open solicitation process took place in February 2021 to identify a third-party administrator for the
VISP. PHAC received four proposals. A six-member Review Committee comprisedof experts from inside
and outside government in the areas of privacy, compensation programs, procurement, and medical
expertise was established to review these proposals. After a comprehensive review, RCGT Consulting
Inc. was unanimously selected and isnow administering the VISP independently from PHAC. A five year
contribution agreement with RCGT Consulting Inc. was signed on June 1, 2021.
The process of establishing causality between a vaccine and an injury, as well as determining the
severity and permanency of an injury, is complex and can be lengthy. RCGT is continuously working to
improve its processes to ensure it is as responsive as possible to the needs of those affected by vaccine
injuries. PHAC will continue to raise timely processing of claims with RCGT and provide
recommendations on possible solutions for their consideration.
UPDATE ON mRNA VACCINE SUPPLY
Issue
What is the Public Health Agency of Canada doing to ensure there is sufficient mRNA vaccine supply to
complete current booster and pediatric campaigns for Canadians and to respond to COVID-19 variants
of concern?
Key Facts
• Canada’s vaccine acquisitionstrategy has evolved based on demand and scientific guidance and
will provide robust and flexible supply to meet a variety of potential needs over the coming years.
• Canada has sufficient supply of mRNA to meet the demand for 2022.
• Canada has agreements with Moderna and Pfizer for a combined supply of up to 100 million
mRNA doses for 2022 (55 million firm doses, plus 45 million doses in options) and up to 95 million mRNA
doses in 2023 (50 million firm doses, plus 45 million doses in options) with options to extend into 2024.
• In addition to providing booster vaccine doses, the agreements provide flexibility to procure
new second-generation COVID-19 vaccine formulations, such as those to protect against variants of
concern, and those developed for younger populations, if they become available.
Key Messages
• Canada is well-positioned to meet the needs of Canadians with ample vaccine supply in 2022
and beyond.
• In 2020, Canada established advance purchase agreements with seven manufacturers to ensure
access to the best possible vaccine supply. This strategy has served Canada well in terms of access to
significant supply of Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccine.
• With the combination of vaccines already on-soil and upcoming deliveries, Canada has sufficient
supply to ensure all eligible Canadians are protected for primary series, boosters, and pediatrics.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient firm mRNA doses to meet all
potential domestic needs until the end of 2023, including extra options in both 2022 and 2023, and an
optional year in 2024.
• In 2022 alone, up to 100 million doses of mRNA vaccine will be available to us.
• We have built flexibility into these agreements to ensure that we can access new products and
formulations, which positions us well to act quickly to implement pediatrics, boosters and respond with
variant-specific formulations if they become available.
• Novavax is the first protein subunit vaccine available in Canada, and an initial shipment was
delivered inMarch 2022. Canada also expects two additional non-mRNA vaccines to become available
(Medicago and Sanofi) providing millions of additional doses.
If pressed on the growing demand for vaccines in the face of variants of concerns like Omicron
• With thecombination of doses already on-soil and upcoming deliveries, Canada has sufficient
supply to ensure all eligible Canadians are protected for primary series, boosters, and pediatrics.
• In the face of Omicron, Canada was able to on-board sufficient supplyof both pediatrics and
boosters for the provinces and territories to expedite simultaneous vaccine campaigns.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada continue to work closely with provinces
and territories and Indigenous partners on challenges they are facing in their COVID-19 responses,
including vaccine rollout.
If pressed on access to variant specific formulations of vaccines
• We continue to closely monitor progress made by vaccine manufacturers as they investigate the
effectiveness oftheir vaccines against Omicron and move forward to develop potential Omicron-specific
formulations.
• Current agreements already provide access to new formulations, including variant specific
formulations that may be developed by vaccine manufacturers inthe future.
• Future decision-making will be tied to scientific evidence and product availability while
leveraging our existing agreements, where possible.
If pressed on pediatric vaccine supply
• The Government of Canada and Pfizer agreed to acceleratethe delivery of 5.8 million doses of
pediatric vaccine in December 2021 and January 2022 to provide first and second doses to all eligible
children in Canada aged 5 to 11 years old.
• Additionally, in March 2022, Health Canada authorized Moderna’s vaccinefor use in children
aged 6 to 11 years old.
• All provinces and territories have now received their shipments and begun administering the
vaccines to children.
• Current contracts will also ensure access to pediatric vaccines for the youngest children (6
months–4 years) if they become available.
If pressed on supply to provide a 3rd dose booster to all eligible Canadians and possibly a 4th dose
• Canada has sufficient mRNA doses on soil for all eligible Canadians who want a 3rd or 4th dose.
• A 4th booster dose is currently recommended for individuals 80 years of age and older, and
residents of long-term care or other congregate living settings for seniors.
• It is too soon to know if a 4th dose will be required broadly in 2022. We are just beginning to
receive data on the impact and durability of the 3rd/booster doses, which the Public Health Agency of
Canada and provinces and territories will continue to monitor closely and advise accordingly.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient doses of mRNA to provide 4th
doses in 2022.
If pressed on boostersupply for the 12-17 age group
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization recommends that a 3rd dose should be
offered to adolescents 12 to 17 years old who have an underlying medical condition that puts them at
high risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19, are residents of congregate living settings, or who belong
to racialized and/or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
• Canada’s contracts provide sufficient doses of mRNA to provide boosters for Canadians aged 12
to 17 in 2022.
If pressed on supply of non-mRNA vaccine
• The Government of Canada has worked with provinces and territories and manufacturers to
ensure non-mRNA options are availablefor those who cannot or will not take an mRNA vaccine.
• Novavax is the first protein subunit vaccine available in Canada, and an initial shipment of 3.2
million doses was delivered in March 2022.
• Canada currently has 162,000 doses of Janssen in storage.
• Medicago has also received regulatory approval and deliveries are expected to begin in the
coming months.
If pressed on vaccine donations
• The Prime Minister announced that Canada will donate the equivalent of at least 200 million
doses to the COVAXFacility by the end of 2022.
• This includes both financial commitments to COVAX and surplus dose donations.
• As of April 6, 2022, 14.2 million surplus vaccine doses have been delivered through the COVAX
Facility and the equivalent of 87 million doseshave been provided through financial support.
If pressed on Canadian manufacturing supply
• While our agreements have provided access to an abundance of supply, Canada has also
developed a Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy to address, in part, the security of future
vaccine supply.
• Three of Canada's existing suppliers, Novavax, Medicago, and Moderna, have also expressed
interest in expanding or developing domestic production capacity.
Background
Canada has publicly announced the following agreements:
- Pfizer firm (option)
o 2022: 35M (30M option)
o 2023: 30M (30M option)
o 20224: (60M option)
- Moderna firm (option)
o 2022: 20M (15M option)
o 2023: 20M (15M option)
o 2024: (35M option)
- Total firm mRNA (options)
o 2022: 55M (45M options)
o 2023: 50M (45Moptions)
o 2024 (95M options)
- Novavax firm and options
o 2022-2024: up to 76M
- Medicago firm and options
o 2022-2024: up to 76M
• The agreements provide flexibility to procure new second-generation COVID-19 vaccine
adaptations, such as those to protect against mutations or variants of concern, and vaccines developed
for younger populations.
• Sanofi’s APA (if a vaccine is approved) is also expected to provide millions of additional non-
mRNA doses.
ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
• In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service–two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at
Clinic 554 in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act. This regulation also
poses concernsunder the comprehensiveness and accessibility criteria of the Canada Health Act.
Evidence indicates that some abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) are also charging patients to access insured
services.
KEY FACTS
• Not Applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• OurGovernment believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where
the services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act and raise
concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Deductions to NB’s Canada
Health Transfer occurred in March 2020, in the amount of $140,216 (for patient charges in 2017-2018),
March 2021, in the amount of $64,850 (for patient charges in 2018-2019) and March 2022, in the
amount of $64,850 (for patient chargesin 2019-2020). The lack of coverage for abortions performed in
private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive regulation 84-20. The Association was
granted standing in the case by the NB Court of Queen’s bench on June 2, 2021. The group argues that
the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had
previously advised the province it would take legal action ifthe regulation was not amended to permit
coverage for abortion services received outside hospitals. The province filed their Statement of Defence
on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does
not violate the Canada Health Act. A trial date has not yet been established.
In December 2020, the NB Legislative Assembly passed a motion instructing the province’s two Regional
Health Authorities to determine if access to abortion services in NB satisfies therequirements of the
CHA and, if not, how the Act’s requirements could be met while respecting NB legislation (i.e., without
providing coverage for clinic abortions).
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge to access insured surgical
abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related
to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion
clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has advised ON that patient
charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges
reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $6,560 was levied against theprovince’s CHT payment
in March 2022.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. It is also specified that the federal
government is committed to collaboration with the PTs to strengthen the health care system and ensure
access to a full suite of reproductive and health services in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer
discussions. The Budget proposed $45 million over three years to fund community-based organizations
that help make sexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for
vulnerable populations.
During an interview on the alleged leak of a decision from the Supreme Court of the United States,
which is purported to overturn Roe v. Wade, the Minister for Families, said that American women would
be allowed to come to Canada to receive abortion services, if the decision were indeed overturned. She
later clarified that patients would be billed for services received in Canada.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
• Not Applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes its responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not their ability or willingness to pay.
• Our universal healthcare system has supported Canadians throughout the pandemic and
provided the care to both prevent and treat COVID-19.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessingmedically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICESIN NEW BRUNSWICK AND ONTARIO …
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face patient charges when seeking these insured services regardless of
where the services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services (NB and ON)
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. NB is the only province with a private abortion clinic
where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act (CHA), and raise
concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Deductions to NB’s Canada
Health Transfer occurred in March 2020, in the amount of $140,216 (for patient charges in 2017-2018),
March 2021, in the amount of $64,850 (for patient charges in 2018-2019) and March 2022, in the
amount of$64,850 (for patient charges in 2019-2020). The lack of coverage for abortions performed in
private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) are charging patients to access
insured surgical abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Planprovides coverage for
physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in
the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has
advised ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are considered user charges under the
CHA. Based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied
against the province’s CHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and ON are working together to
ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, including a deduction
of $4521.29 in March 2021, all deducted amounts have been reimbursed as the province has
successfully eliminated the charges.
Charter Challenge in British Columbia (BC)
On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of BC released its decision in Cambie Surgeries Corp v. BC
(Attorney General). The Court dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of BC’s Medicare
Protection Act, and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private insurance
for publicly insured health care services. An appeal of the decision was heard by the BC Court of Appeal
in June 2021. A decision from the Courtof Appeal is expected shortly.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
While the elimination of patient charges in BC has been hindered by an injunction related to the Charter
challenge, the province has continued to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address these
charges. Since March 2018, BC’s CHT payments have been deducted $62,742,889 in respect of patient
charges at private surgical clinics. To date, Health Canada has reimbursed $40,528,957 of these
deductions in recognition of the province's efforts to eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy, which came into effect on April 1, 2020, is aimed at eliminating patient
charges for medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the
long-standing federal position that all medically necessary services, including diagnostic services, are
insured services, regardless of the venue where the services are delivered. Seven provinces currently
allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the
practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
Provinces and territories were given nearly two years’ notice that the Diagnostic Services Policy was
cominginto effect, to give them time to align their health care systems with its requirements. Under the
Policy, provinces and territories will be expected to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Provinces and territories have an opportunity to receive an immediate
reimbursement of any deduction if they eliminate these patient charges before March 2023.
DENTAL CARE
ISSUE
• Budget 2022 provides funding to Health Canada to provide dental care for some Canadians.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2022 confirmed the Government’s commitment to expanding dental care with funding
of $5.3 billion over five years, starting this fiscal year with $1.7 billion per year ongoing, so that more
Canadians can access dental care when they need it.
• This plan will start with under 12-year-olds in 2022,and then expand to under 18-year-olds,
seniors, and persons with disabilities in 2023, with full implementation by 2025. The program would be
restricted to families with an income of less than $90,000 annually, with no co-pays for those under
$70,000 annually in income.
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental
services in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was
publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans but there are an estimated 10 million Canadians without access to
insurance that meets their dental needs.
KEYMESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage throughtheir employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• Budget 2022 sets out the Government’s commitment to expanding dental care with funding of
$5.3 billion over five years, starting this fiscal year with $1.7 billion per year ongoing, so that more
Canadians can access dental care when they need it.
• We are committed to working with provinces and territories and with experts as we design our
approach. Children under 12 who do not have dental coverage will be the first to have access to the
program, starting in 2022.
BACKGROUND
The Liberal Party of Canada and NDP’s supply and confidence agreement committed to launching a
national dental care program. The agreement identified “launching a new dental care program for low-
income Canadians” as the first priority action under the health care stream of the agreement. The
program is restricted to families with an income of less than $90,000 annually, with no co-pays for
anyone earning under $70,000 annually. The program is to start with those under 12 in this year, expand
to those under18, seniors, and persons with disabilities in 2023, then full implementation by 2025.
This commitment to a national dental care program is reminiscent of the NDP’s Motion M-62: Federal
Dental Care Plan in 2021 and the NDP’s “denticare” platform commitment from the 2019 federal
election campaign.
The 2019 Speech from the Throne and the 2019 Minister of Health Mandate Letter committed the
Government to “work with Parliament to study and analyze the possibility of national dental care.” In
February 2020, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health (HESA) agreed to undertake a
study on the development of a national dental care program, although the study did not begin before
Parliament was prorogued in August 2020 and HESA has not pursued the idea since.
In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental care
program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated that this
program would cost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3 billion to
clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually through 2024-
25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 million Canadians in the first year, and decrease
to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
Budget 2022
Budget 2022 proposes to provide funding of $5.3 billion over five years and $1.7 billion ongoing. The
$5.3 billion over 5 years is broken out as: $300 million in 2022-23, $600 million in 2023-24, $1.2 billion in
2024-25, $1.5 billion in 2025-26, and $1.7 billion in 2026-27.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dentalservices in
2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was publicly
funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based private
health insurance plans.
Provinces and territories(PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care for all
residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select services for
groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
Federal support for dental care includes:
• The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for
services not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental services to
Canadian Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries, and some veterans and refugee
claimants.
• Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of Canada’s
employee benefits program.
• The Canada Health Transferis providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in 2020-21,
which is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
• The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not including the
value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income tax system
provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical
expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
According to the Canadian Dental Association, an estimated 2.26 million school days are missed each
year due to dental-related illness, and tooth decay accounts for one-third of all day surgeries performed
on children between the ages of one and five in Canada. As well, much of the burden of dental disease is
concentrated in disadvantaged children: those from low-incomefamilies; Indigenous children; new
immigrants; and children with special health care needs.
HEALTH DATA AND DIGITAL HEALTH
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada recognizes the potential for Canada to leverage digital healthtools
and data to improve health care and outcomes for Canadians.
• While there are some pockets of success across the country, the pandemic reinforced our
country’s long-standing challenges in being able to access and share timely data across the health
system, due in part to lack of consistent standards and approaches for sharing data.
• Building on what we learned during the pandemic, the Government is committed to
collaborating with provincial and territorial governments to build the foundations neededto better use,
access and share health data.
KEY FACTS
• Canada lags behind when it comes to enabling citizens’ access and control of their own
electronic health information.
- Today, only 32% of surveyed Canadians report ever electronically accessing their personal
health information, despite 79% of the same Canadians reporting that they want access to be provided.
- On top of that, with only 34% of Canadian primary care physicians able to electronically
exchange patient information outside of their practice, health care providers are left with incomplete
information about their patients’ medical history, creating risks of discontinuous care and risks to
patient safety.
• The pandemic revealed just how critical timely data is, with crucial public health decisions being
made on uncoordinated and incomplete COVID-19 case information.
• The 2021 Mandate letter included a clear commitment to expedite work in consultation with
provinces and territories and a broad range of partners to create a world-class health data system that is
timely, usable, open-by-default, connected and comprehensive.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government has heard loud and clear that the time has long arrived to transform Canadian
health care through digitally enabled and world-class healthdata systems.
• Change is needed to ensure that Canadians can access their health information in a meaningful
digital format.
• A world-class health data and digital health system would support equitable access to health
services, while driving innovationand helping to address health care challenges across the entire health
system.
• Going forward, we will continue to work with provinces and territories to improve data
collection across health systems to inform future decisions and get the best possibleresults, while
engaging Canadians to inform our approaches.
IF PRESSED ON DATA PRIVACY AND SECURITY …
• Canadians expect that their personal health information will be adequately protected when
used and exchanged.
- Privacy protection remains key considerations in advancing digital health and health data
initiatives.
• The federal government is considering optimal approaches for engaging directly with Canadians
on their views and preferences for advancing digital health and health data.
IF PRESSED ON EQUITABLE ACCESS TO CARE …
• The Government of Canada is committed to promoting effective and appropriate ways to use
digital health services and health data to meet the needs of marginalized populations in Canada.
• Through public engagement and other targeted mechanisms, Indigenous leaders and
organizations will be consulted to ensure their specific viewpoints, cultural sensitivities, autonomy, and
rights of their communities, are respected and upheld.
• The federal government recognizes the importance of ensuring both the public and the health
workforce have the necessary digital and data literacy needed to effectively use digital tools.
• The federal government will collaborate with the provinces and territories onapproaches to
data and digital literacy to ensure all Canadians stand to benefit from digital health.
BACKGROUND
Since the onset of the pandemic there has been ongoing federal, provincial, and territorial (FPT)
collaboration in digital health that has been supported by notable virtual care investments by the
Government of Canada in May 2020. On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to
support virtual care and digital tools for Canadians.
Of this, funding of $150M is flowing to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements for
enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure
videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end
supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems. In addition, Canada Health Infoway
(Infoway) received $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on secure messaging and
videoconferencing and support Provinces and Territories as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements. To date, Infoway has led consultations on standards with all jurisdictions, with
a view of identifying key priorities and informing the standards development process. Health Canada is
also working with provinces and territories to identify where support is needed most on virtual care and
supporting infrastructure. As part of this work, Health Canada is supporting key organizations (Infoway,
the Canadian Institute of Health Information (CIHI), Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technology in Health
(CADTH), Centre for Digital Health Evaluation) to provide insight on the implementation of virtual care.
Building on these efforts, FPT governments have continued to build on the initial momentum of digital
health and virtual care during the pandemic, consistently promoting the spread and adoption of pan-
Canadian virtual care and digital health approaches that can support the Canadian health systems. In
June 2021, a FPT Virtual Care and Digital Health Table hosted a multi-stakeholder Virtual Care Summit to
discuss the policy enablers underpinning virtual care and digital health, and identify key considerations
for a pan-Canadian action plan to maintain the unprecedented momentum spurred by the pandemic in
the delivery of virtual care services. This helped inform an FPT forward path for sustainable virtual care
delivery and digital health, including a focus on interoperability and data access and sharing across
health systems.
In addition, FPT collaboration specifically focused on enhancing health data has also taken place. In July
2020, responding to the challenges of the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government announced the
Safe Restart Act (SRA), which among many other things, articulated the need for better health data
management inCanada. In this regard, a time-limited federal, provincial, and territorial table was
formed to guide the development of a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy, which is being informed by
the reports and targeted recommendations of an Expert Advisory Group (EAG). The third and final EAG
report was released in May 2022, building on the first and second reports to provide both aspirational
and pragmatic advice for developing a world-class, person-centered health data system. The final report
reaches several conclusions that highlight a need for a collaborative culture, public trust, and significant
FPT investment to support needed improvements in health data policies, interoperability, and literacy.
Going forward, Budget 2022 commits to working with provinces and territories on strategies to better
use health data to support health care system improvements and Canadians’ access to their personal
health records. It also speaks to the importance of increasing virtual care for all Canadians. Further,
Budget 2022 provided funding for initiatives that have the potential to spur innovation in the digital
health sector, such as the $30 million investment over four years, starting in 2022-23, to build upon the
success of the Coordinated Accessible National (CAN) Health Network and expand it nationally to
Quebec, the territories, and Indigenous communities.The CAN Health Network brings together hospital
networks and health authorities in nine provinces to procure innovative health care solutions, including
investing in made-in Canada technologies.
PROTECTION OF HEALTHCARE WORKERS
ISSUE
• What the government is doing to protect healthcare workers against harassment, particularly in
light of the pandemic?
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government ofCanada recognizes the incredible contribution that health care workers have
made and continue to make in Canada’s response to the pandemic.
• Yet, we have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have
been threatened and intimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely unacceptable, and
adds another heavy burden on health care workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and
healthy.
• Our government recently took action to protect health care workers, through amendments to
the Criminal Code (under the former Bill C-3), in order to ensure health care workers are safe and free
from threats, violence and harassment.
• All Canadians, and especially healthcare workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe
working environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
On December 17, 2021, Bill C-3, which amends the Criminal Code to enhance protections for health care
workers, those who assist them, and those accessing health care services, received Royal Assent.
Health care workers have long faced difficult working conditions, including violence and threats of
violence in the workplace. This situation has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. High profile
public demonstrations have interfered withheath care workers and with the public accessing health
care facilities.
Taken together, the amendments affirm the federal government’s recognition of the importance of
protecting health care workers and those who assist them, and of ensuring safe accessto health
facilities. At the same time, these changes respect Canadians’ freedom to voice their concerns and
protest in a safe and peaceful manner, and ensure workers’ freedom to take labour action, consistent
with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Intimidation and obstructing access offences
These amendments have created a specific intimidation offence to further protect health care workers,
those who assist them, and persons seeking health services. The new intimidation offence will address
circumstances where a health care worker, or person seeking health services, is subject to any
intimidating conduct. This could include threats, or other forms of violence, that are intended to
provoke fear, to interfere with the duties of a health care worker, orto impede a person from receiving
health care services.
The specific obstructing access offence prohibits obstructing any person from accessing health facilities.
This offence does not apply where a person is peacefully protesting or communicating information, such
as on a picket line outside a health facility, even if that has a minor impact on the ability of others to
access the facility.
These offences are both punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment on indictment.
Depending on the degree of seriousness and circumstances of the alleged offence, the prosecutor will
have the option to proceed by indictment for more serious cases or by summary conviction for less
serious cases. The maximum penalty on summary conviction is two years less aday.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
ISSUE
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impacts on the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about thehealth care
system’s capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
KEY FACTS
• On March 25, 2022 the Government introduced Bill C-17 in the House of Commons, which
would provide an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transferto address
backlogs, distributed equally per capita to provinces and territories.
• Bill C-17 supplements the significant investments made by the Government of Canada to
provinces and territories since the start of the pandemic to bolster health care systems, address surge
capacity needs, and alleviate backlogs, through the Safe Restart Agreements, the Fall Economic
Statement 2020, Budget 2021 and the Economic and Fiscal Update 2021.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the incredible contribution that health care providers
have made and continue to make in Canada’s response to the pandemic.
• The Government of Canada has made significant investments that are helping provincial and
territorial health systems respond to the pandemic, and address backlogs.
• It is also working closely with provinces and territories to help address shortages among key
health care providers.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH HUMAN RESOURCES CRISIS…
• We know that the people that deliver health care to Canadians are exhausted, and as a result,
we are seeing staffing shortages in the health care system.
• The Government of Canada understands the need to sustainably increase the supply of health
care workers and create healthier workplaces to support retention and the mental health of health care
workers.
• Health Canada, along with other federal departments, has taken an active role in working with
provincial and territorial governments and key health system stakeholders, such as health care
educators, to identify both immediate and longer-term solutions to address significant health human
resources challenges, such as access to health care services in rural and remote communities.
• This is why Budget 2022 is proposing to increase the number of doctors and nurses in
communities that need them most and by helping internationally trained health care professionals get
their credentials recognized and find work in the health care system.
• In an effort to address supply shortages in rural communities where staffing challenges exist,
Budget 2022 announced $26.2 million in funding to increase the forgivable amount of student loans for
doctors, nurses and other eligible practitioners who practice in rural and remote communities. In
addition, the current list of professionals eligible to the program will be expanded.
• Budget 2022 also proposes to provide $115 million over five years, with $30 million ongoing, to
expand the Foreign Credential Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally trained health
careprofessionals per year get their credentials recognized and find work in their field. It will support
initiatives aimed at reducing barriers to foreign credential recognition for health care professionals.
• On March 25, 2022 the Government introduced BillC-17 in the House of Commons, which will
provide an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to provinces and territories, distributed equally per
capita. This amount—in addition to the $4.5 billion Canada Health Transfer top-up provided since the
start of the pandemic—will further help provinces and territories to address immediate pandemic-
related health care system pressures, as well as address longstanding HHR challenges.
• Health Canada will continue to collaborate closely with other federal departments,provinces
and territories and health care system stakeholders to address these pressing health workforce
challenges.
IF PRESSED ON HOW MODELLING IS HELPING TO INFORM DECISIONSABOUT HEALTH SYSTEM
CAPACITY…
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and
territories to track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital beds and
medical equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
• Governments continueto work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under
different modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support from the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
• Governments are also tracking healthcare system backlogs, which have worsened over the
course of the pandemic, and are assessing capacity needs, including health workforce, equipment, and
beds.
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase systemcapacity and
meet projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically
reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments. This can help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is also
complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also runningtraining
exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
Federal investments
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing
to mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support for Canadians
experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians–includingthose in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care–who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some
of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’
gradual return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential services
to reduce the spread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
• a temporary income support program that willprovide workers who do not have paid sick leave
with access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
2020 Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemicand to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testing supplies
and supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE
and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as maintaining the
readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing anew Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces
and territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and control to
protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
• Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
• Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work with provinces and territories to set new,
national standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions;
• Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
• Continuing to respond to Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19
context; and
• Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond to COVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-19
outbreaks and other large-scale emergencies.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 confirmed the Government’s continued support for provinces and territories, including
addressing urgent health care needs, with an additional $5 billion in direct support to provinces and
territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
• The funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system
pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing the backlog of
medical procedures, patient care, and access to primary care put on hold due to the pandemic.
• A one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, is also being provided to the
provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
2021 Economic and Fiscal Update
On December 14, 2021 the Government of Canada tabled its Economic and Fiscal Update outlining
measures to finish the fight against COVID-19 and support Canadians through a robust recovery. The
Economic and Fiscal Update sets out a range of measures to support Canadians through the pandemic
including:
• $1.7 billion to increase access to rapid testing supplies across Canada;
• $2 billion to procure lifesaving COVID-19 therapeutics and treatments;
• $409 million to continue the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic response, including strengthened
surveillance, laboratory research, and emergency management operations;
• $599 million to support and maintain ongoing COVID-19 border testing capacity and operations;
and
• Up to $4.5 billion to respond to the Omicron variant, including border measures, and income
and business supports.
The update provides proposed funding for safer travel. It also provides funding to provinces and
territories through the Safe Return to Class Fund, and to First Nations for on-reserve schools, to improve
ventilation. It also commits additional investments to support ventilation projects in public and
community buildings such as hospitals, libraries, and community centres.
Additional investment to clear backlogs
On March 25, 2022 the Government introduced Bill C-17 in the House of Commons, which would
provide an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to provinces and territories, distributed equally per
capita. This amount—in addition to the $4.5 billion Canada Health Transfer top-up provided since the
start of the pandemic—would further help provinces and territories to address immediate pandemic-
related health care system pressures, particularly the backlogs of surgeries, medical procedures and
diagnostics.
Federal action to respond to the Health Human Resource Crisis
To help bring more workers in the health system, Budget 2022 proposes to provide support for
internationally trained health care professionals to fill these gaps and for doctors working in
underserved rural or remote communities to ensure that Canadians receive the health care they deserve
where they live. This includes:
• $26.2 million over four years, starting in 2023-24, and $7 million ongoing, to increase the
maximum amount of forgivable CanadaStudent Loans by 50 per cent. This will mean up to $30,000 in
loan forgiveness for nurses and up to $60,000 in loan forgiveness for doctors working in underserved
rural or remote communities. In addition, the current list of eligible professionals under the program will
be expanded.
• $115 million over five years, with $30 million ongoing, to expand the Foreign Credential
Recognition Program and help up to 11,000 internationally trained health care professionals per year get
their credentials recognized and find work in their field. It will also support projects—including
standardized national exams, easier access to information, faster timelines, and less red tape—that will
reduce barriers to foreign credential recognition for health care professionals.
All Canadians, and especially health care workers, deserve a safe working environment, free from
violence and threats. To this end, the Government took action to protect health care workers, through
amendments to the Criminal Code (under the former Bill C-3), in order to ensure health care workers are
safe and free from threats, violence and harassment.
The Wellness Together Portal, a digital tool to support Canadians’ health and well-being during COVID-
19, features a dedicated text line for frontline workers that provides immediate access to supports.
Budget 2022 proposes to provide $140 million over two years, starting in 2022-23 so it can continue to
provide Canadians, including health workers with tools and services to support their mental health and
well-being.
Health Canada is providing $4 million over four years to the National Consortium on Indigenous Medical
Education to provide leadership and implement Indigenous-led projects that create tools and resources
to support culturally safe health caredelivery, as well as the recruitment and retention of Indigenous
physicians.
A Health Human Resources Symposium of national stakeholders and partners was held on May 10 and
11, 2022 and provided an opportunity to hear from experts, practitioners, health care educators and PT
officials on challenges, vision and areas for action to tackle the HHR Crisis from a pan-Canadian
perspective.
On February 1st, 2022, Health Canada announced a recruitment process for a federal Chief Nursing
Officer (CNO) for Canada.This individual will have the opportunity to bring nursing issues in focus
federally, while working closely with provinces and territories, stakeholders and regulatory bodies. An
announcement is expected in the spring of 2022.
Health Canada is working closely with federal departments, as well as PT partners through the FPT
Committee on Health Workforce to share best practices and identify opportunities to scale and spread
promising practices across the country.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The government continues to work collaboratively with provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Medicare and provide funding through transfers and bilateral agreements to improve health
care. In addition to the Canada Health Transfer, the Government provided over $19 billion to provinces
and territories last fiscal year to help them manage the pandemic, and directly invested another $19
billion in health to support the fight against COVID, including public health support and the purchase of
vaccines and tests. This is in addition to targeted funding provided to the PTs to support specific health
care priorities, such as home care, mental health, substance use, long term care and virtual care.
• As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing PTs with additional
pandemic support including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as support for primary care,
virtual care, long-term care, palliative care, mental health, and problematic substance use.
KEY FACTS
• On March 25, 2022, the Government introduced Bill C-17 in the House of Commons, which
would provide an additional $2 billion one-time Canada Health Transfer top-up to provinces and
territories, to further help them to address pandemic-related health system pressures, particularly the
backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
• This is in addition to the $5 billion health care funding our Government provided to provinces
and territories in July 2021, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer to
support PTs to clear the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billion to support
vaccine roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19
billion Safe RestartAgreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
• Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and territories
improve the standardof care in their long-term care facilities
• For more information on Federal spending, please see funding charts in the Background.
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports and to strengthen Medicare.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED (GENERAL) …
• From the beginning, the Government of Canada has been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight COVID-19
and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2020-21, the Government of Canada provided $41.9 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $43.1 billion in 2021-22 and $45.2
billion in 2022-23. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to another $19.1 billion in pandemic
support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 (e.g. $4 B to help address health
system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government made $19
billion in direct health investments in 2020-21 to support the fight against COVID, including public health
support and the purchase of vaccines and tests.
• Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-
19 spending will total $72.4 billion. This includes a total of $23.2 billon in transfer to provinces and
territories and $49.2 billion in direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON Bill C-237–BQ PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL INTRODUCED BY MR. PLAMONDON
(Bécancour—Nicolet—Saurel) …
• The government of Canada is committed to protecting our publicly funded health care system
and supporting provinces and territories in the delivery of care to their residents. The Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) remains the key federal funding mechanism for supporting Canada’s health care system,
providing long-term, predictable funding to provinces and territories.
• The CanadaHealth Act (CHA) establishes principles that provinces and territories must fulfill in
order to receive their full Canada Health Transfer (CHT) cash contribution. The five principles of the CHA
are designed to ensure that all Canadians, regardless of whichprovince or territory they reside in or
travel to, have universal access to comprehensive, publicly administered care. Beyond the link to these
basic principles, the CHT is unconditional and gives provinces and territories the autonomy to decide
how bestto allocate these funds in order to address the health care needs of their residents and
communities.
• However, our system is in need of improvement. Past experience tells us that improvements will
not be easily achieved by merely adding more federal money. Canada is among the world’s top tier of
spenders on health care and yet we are not achieving the kind of results that Canadians need. Canadians
expect new funds to be invested in a way that achieves tangible improvements in health care. The
federal government understands that targeted investments are needed to accelerate change and
improve the responsiveness and sustainability of the health system.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA MENTAL HEALTH TRANSFER–PLATFORM COMMITMENT …
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring Canadians have access to mental health
and substance use supports when and where they need them. That is why it is so important to assist
jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health and substance use
services.
• The Government of Canada has already made significant investments in this area, including $5B
to support mental health and substance use services through its bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories. The Government of Canada iscommitted to make significant additional investments,
with accountability and data to demonstrate results for Canadians. We want to ensure that Canadians
get the services and supports they need and that our investments have a positive impact on their mental
health.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC …
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories to strengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home
and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to theCanada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec will also receive $450 million and $902.4 million as part of its share of the $2 and $4
billion, one-time top-ups to the CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19
immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS …
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend those agreements to flow funding
for the $1 billion Safe Long-term Care Fund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23, and these agreements will also flow Budget 2021 commitment of $3 billion
over five years to ensure that standards for long-term care are upheld across thecountry and that
seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion,an increase of $28 billion from $42 billion in 2020-21, or from its
current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called for the CHT to grow by an annual
escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand in December 2021.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health
care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of
procedures caused by waves one and two ofthe pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to
support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to address
infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that
also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable
funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are:
universality; comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs
will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23.
BILL C-237-An Act to amend the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act and the Canada Health Act
This BQ Private Member's Bill was introduced by Mr. Plamondon (Bécancour—Nicolet—Saurel) on 7
February 2022. It was also tabled in the previous parliamentary session (43-2) but did not proceed past
First Reading on 27 May 2021. The Bill seeks to amend the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act in
order to allow a province with a program whose objectives are comparable to those of a federal
program in an area under provincial legislative authority (e.g., health care) to withdraw from the federal
program, with full compensation.
The Bill also seeks to amend the Canada Health Act in order to exempt Quebec (and other provinces)
from the national criteria and conditions that are required for a province to receive its full allocation of
the Canada Health Transfer. The Bill would also exempt Quebec from other federal standards including
planned long-term care standards.
Pandemic Funding:
In 2020-21, the federal government provided $19.1 billion, beyond the Canada Health Transfer, in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 to support the fight
against COVID, including public health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests and other funding
(e.g. $4 B to help address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing additional pandemic support
including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as, support for primary care, virtual care, long-term
care, palliative care, mental health, and problematic substance use.
Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-19
spending will total $76.7 billion. This includes a total of $25.6 billon in transfer to provinces and
territories and $51.1 billion in direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to anasymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provideNunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate the renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-
23 to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territoriesprotect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping upwages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government willwork collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light onsystemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniorsin long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
Federal Health Related COVID-19 Spending ($ Millions)
Transfers to Provinces & Territories
- Safe Restart Agreement (SRA)–Health Components
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 13,814
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 13,814
- SRA PPE and Medical Equipment (includes $4.55B in-kind to PTs)
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 7,550
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 7,550
- SRA Testing & Tracing, Data Management (includes 1.2B in-kind to PTs)
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 4,280
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 4,280
- SRA System Capacity, Vulnerable Populations & Small Jurisdictions
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 1,984
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 1,984
- Covid Response Fund ($500M CHT Top up for PTs in 2019-20)
o 2019-20: 500
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 500
- Emergency health funding to territories
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 73
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 73
- Additional support to territories
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 65
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 65
- CHT Top up for Surgical Backlogs
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 4000
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 4000
- Canada’s COVID-19 immunization Plan
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 1000
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 1000
- Additional Funding to Clear Backlogs
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 2000
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 2000
- Virtual Care
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 150
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 150
- Safe Long-Term Care (LTC) Fund
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 1000
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 1000
- $3 billion for Long-Term Care over 5 years
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 2
o 2022-23: 609
o 2023-24: 608
o 2024-25: 609
o 2025-26: 607
o 2026-27: 565
o Total: 3000
- Total Transfers
o 2019-20: 500
o 2020-21: 19,101
o 2021-22: 3,002
o 2022-23: 609
o 2023-24: 608
o 2024-25: 609
o 2025-26: 607
o 2026-27: 565
o Total: 25,601
Direct Federal Spending
- Direct Long-Term Care Funding
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 824
o 2021-22: 516
o 2022-23: 1
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 1,341
- Covid Response Fund (direct federal spending)
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 512
o 2021-22: 37
o 2022-23: 37
o 2023-24: 37
o 2024-25: 37
o 2025-26:37
o 2026-27:
o Total: 697
- PPE and Medical Equipment
o 2019-20: 200
o 2020-21: 3,331
o 2021-22: 1,821
o 2022-23: 170
o 2023-24: 113
o 2024-25: 4
o 2025-26: 4
o 2026-27:
o Total: 5,643
- Vaccines and Therapeutics
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21: 7,520
o 2021-22: 6,530
o 2022-23: 340
o 2023-24: 236
o 2024-25: 131
o 2025-26: 119
o 2026-27:
o Total: 14,876
- Other Public Health Support
o 2019-20: 382
o 2020-21: 6,830
o 2021-22: 5,272
o 2022-23: 145
o 2023-24: 145
o 2024-25: 145
o 2025-26: 145
o 2026-27:
o Total: 13,062
- Supporting Mental Health
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 140
o 2022-23: 82
o 2023-24: 35
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 257
- Vaccine Procurement and Pandemic Preparedness Since Budget 2021**
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 80
o 2022-23: 2,966
o 2023-24: 2,754
o 2024-25: 492
o 2025-26: 490
o 2026-27: 490
o Total: 7,272
- Vaccine Mandates–Making Travel Safer **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 5
o 2022-23: 23
o 2023-24: 9
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 37
- Vaccine Mandates–Core Public Administration and the RCMP **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 86
o 2022-23: 113
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 199
- Support for Proof of Vaccination **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23: 300
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 300
- Rapid tests **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 3,500
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 3,500
- Additional COVID-19 Therapeutics Procurement **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 1000
o 2022-23: 1000
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 2000
- Funding to improve ventilation and accessibility **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 125
o 2022-23: 225
o 2023-24: 95
o 2024-25: 7
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 452
- Supporting the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Operations **
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22:
o 2022-23: 405
o 2023-24: 1
o 2024-25: 1
o 2025-26: 1
o 2026-27: 1
o Total: 409
- Essential ServicesContingency Reserve
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 1000
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 1000
- Canada Health Infoway
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 50
o 2022-23:
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 50
- Funding for InnovativeTesting Partnerships
o 2019-20:
o 2020-21:
o 2021-22: 22,5
o 2022-23: 22,5
o 2023-24:
o 2024-25:
o 2025-26:
o 2026-27:
o Total: 45
- Total Direct Spending
o 2019-20: 582
o 2020-21: 19,017
o 2021-22: 20,485
o 2022-23: 5,529
o 2023-24: 3,425
o 2024-25: 817
o 2025-26: 796
o 2026-27: 491
o Total: 51,140
- Total Federal Health Related COVID-19 Funding
o 2019-20: 1,082
o 2020-21: 38,118
o 2021-22: 23,487
o 2022-23: 6,138
o 2023-24: 4,033
o 2024-25: 1,426
o 2025-26: 1,403
o 2026-27: 1,056
o Total: 76,741
Sources: Budget 2022, Economic and Fiscal Update 2021, Budget 2021, Fall Economic statement 2020,
Economic and Fiscal Snapshot 2020 and the Safe Restart Agreement, Virtual Care & Shared Health
Priorities and Safe Long-Term Care Fund Websites
* Amounts on these years are preliminary, additional funding is likely tobe provided as the years to go
on
** Items from EFU 2021 are net of previously committed/existing departmental funds
Note: allocation of funds to specific fiscal years may not be final. Some portions a particular funding
announcement may be re-profiled tofuture fiscal years.
Federal Health Related COVID-19 Spending ($ Millions)
Transfers to Provinces and Territories
- Safe Restart Agreement (SRA)–Health Components
o 2020-21: 13,813.7
o NL:
o PE:
o NS:
o NB:
o QC:
o ON:
o MB:
o SK:
o AL:
o BC:
o YT:
o NT:
o NU:
- SRA PPE andMedical Equipment ($3B cash)
o 2020-21: 3,000
o NL: 41.1
o PE: 12.5
o NS: 77.3
o NB: 61.7
o QC: 675.7
o ON: 1,165
o MB: 109
o SK: 93.4
o AL: 349.9
o BC: 404.5
o YT: 3.3
o NT: 3.6
o NU: 3.1
- SRA PPE and Medical Equipment ($4.5 in-kind to PTs)*
o 2020-21: 4,550
o NL: unknown
o PE: unknown
o NS: unknown
o NB: unknown
o QC: unknown
o ON: unknown
o MB: unknown
o SK: unknown
o AL: unknown
o BC: unknown
o YT: unknown
o NT: unknown
o NU: unknown
- SRA Testing & Tracing, Data Management ($3B cash)
o 2020-21: 3,000
o NL: 41.1
o PE: 12.5
o NS: 77.3
o NB: 61.7
o QC: 675.7
o ON: 1,165
o MB:109
o SK: 93.4
o AL: 349.9
o BC: 404.5
o YT: 3.3
o NT: 3.6
o NU: 3.1
- SRA Testing & Tracing, Data Management ($1.3B in-kind to PTs)*
o 2020-21: 1,280
o NL: unknown
o PE: unknown
o NS: unknown
o NB: unknown
o QC: unknown
o ON: unknown
o MB: unknown
o SK: unknown
o AL: unknown
o BC: unknown
o YT: unknown
o NT: unknown
o NU: unknown
- SRA System Capacity, Vulnerable Populations & Small Jurisdictions
o 2020-21: 1,983.7
o NL: 26.6
o PE: 14.5
o NS: 50
o NB: 39.3
o QC: 437
o ON: 753.3
o MB: 70.5
o SK: 60.4
o AL: 226.2
o BC: 261.6
o YT: 14.5
o NT: 14.6
o NU: 14.5
- Emergency healthfunding to territories
o 2020-21: 72.6
o NL: 0
o PE: 0
o NS: 0
o NB: 0
o QC: 0
o ON: 0
o MB: 0
o SK: 0
o AL: 0
o BC: 0
o YT: 18.4
o NT: 23.4
o NU: 30.8
- Additional support to territories
o 2020-21: 64.7
o NL: 0
o PE: 0
o NS: 0
o NB: 0
o QC: 0
o ON: 0
o MB: 0
o SK: 0
o AL: 0
o BC: 0
o YT: 4
o NT: 30.7
o NU: 30
- CHT Top-up for Surgical Backlogs
o 2020-21: 4000
o NL: 55
o PE: 16.8
o NS: 103
o NB: 82.2
o QC: 902.4
o ON:1,550.8
o MB: 145.2
o SK: 124.1
o AL: 465.3
o BC: 541.8
o YT: 4.4
o NT: 4.8
o NU: 4.1
- Canada’s COVID-19 Immunization Plan
o 2020-21: 1,000
o NL: 13.8
o PE: 4.2
o NS: 25.8
o NB: 20.5
o QC:225.6
o ON: 387.7
o MB: 36.3
o SK: 31
o AL: 116.3
o BC: 135.4
o YT: 1.1
o NT: 1.2
o NU: 1
- Virtual Care
o 2020-21: 150
o NL: 4.5
o PE: 3.5
o NS: 5.9
o NB: 5.3
o QC: 28.1
o ON:46
o MB: 7
o SK: 6.5
o AL: 15.9
o BC: 18
o YT: 3.1
o NT: 3.1
o NU: 3.1
- Total transfers
o 2020-21: 19,101
o NL: 182.1
o PE: 64.1
o NS:339.2
o NB: 271.3
o QC: 2,944.5
o ON: 5,067.8
o MB: 476.9
o SK: 408.8
o AL: 1,523.5
o BC: 1,765.9
o YT: 52.1
o NT: 84.8
o NU: 89.8
Sources: Budget 2021, Fall Economic Statement 2020, Economic and Fiscal Snapshot 2020 and the Safe
Restart Agreement, Virtual Care & Shared Health Priorities Websites
Total my not add due to rounding
*The value of in-kind transfers for individual PT is unknown, therefore PT totals do not include these
amounts and for this reason the funding from 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update is not included.
- Canada Health Transfer (in millions) (2021-2022)
o NFL: 585
o NS: 1,109
o NB: 881
o PEI: 182
o QC: 9,705
o ON: 16,758
o MB: 1,560
o SK: 1,330
o AB: 5,030
o BC: 5,843
o YK: 48
o NWT: 51
o NU: 45
o Total: 43,127
- Substance Use and Addictions Program (in millions) (estimate is for aseven-year period)
o NFL: 2.4
o NS: 2.5
o NB: 5.3
o PEI: .9
o QC: 53.2
o ON: 135.4
o MB: 8.2
o SK: 6.4
o AB: 11.9
o BC: 62.6
o YK: .7
o NWT:2.4
o NU:-
o Total: 291.9
- Emergency Treatment Fund (in millions)
o NFL: 1.5
o NS: 3.2
o NB: 2.8
o PEI: .52
o QC: 22
o ON: 51
o MB: 4.1
o SK: 5
o AB: 24
o BC: 34
o YK: .5
o NWT:.5
o NU: .5
o Total: 150
- Virtual Care Bilateral Agreement (in millions)
o NFL: 4.5
o NS: 5.9
o NB: 5.3
o PEI: 3.5
o QC: 28
o ON: 46
o MB: 4.2
o SK: 6.4
o AB: 16
o BC: 18
o YK: 3.1
o NWT: 3.1
o NU: 3.1
o Total: 150
- Bilateral Agreement for Home and Community Care and AddictionServices (in millions)
(estimate is for a ten year period)
o NFL: 151
o NS: 285
o NB: 227
o PEI: 47
o QC: 2,479
o ON: 4,262
o MB: 399
o SK: 341
o AB: 1,279
o BC: 1,494
o YK: 12.3
o NWT: 13.1
o NU: 11.3
o Total: 11,000
Totals may not add due to rounding
HOME CARE
ISSUE
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost tothe client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is evidence that COVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care. This situation
increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
KEY FACTS
• Health MinisterMandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can get
the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to
ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as
well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care.
• Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Work with the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provinces and territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages.
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting theMinister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges that vulnerable
populations face in accessing the health care services they need, including access to home care services.
• Our government increased funding to provinces and territories to help protect these
populations as part of our pandemic response, which included providing $740 million through the Safe
Restart Agreement. In the case of home care specifically, that additional funding built on the $6 billion
we are already providing over ten years to support better home and community care, including
palliative care.
• Budget 2021 recognisedthe need to support people at home, with a $90 million investment
over three years to launch the Age Well at Home initiative led by Employment and Social Development
Canada. This will assist community-based organizations in providing practical support to help low-
income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• Most recently, Budget 2022 proposed the creation of an expert panel to study the idea of an
Aging at Home Benefit. The panel will report to the Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we committed to strengthen our healthcare system and public
health supports for all Canadians, especially seniors, veterans, persons with disabilities, and vulnerable
members of our communities. This care can include care at or close to home, to help them live longer
where they want to be.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19infections among workers and individuals in home care.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding was provided in 2020 to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home
care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
Home Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financialsupport to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these
services, including home care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• Home care is not publicly insured under the Canada Health Act.
• While not mandatory, every PT offers home care programs and services, with variations across
each PT.
COVID Impacts on Home Care
In July 2021, the Canadian Institute for Health Information highlighted the following impacts COVID-19
has had on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• In April 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• InApril 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
The 6th wave of COVID-19 will likely continue to impact seniors’ services in a similar way to previous
waves. Many provinces and territories are experiencing health care staffing issues due to workers being
exposed to or testing positive for COVID-19.
Budget 2022
Budget 2022 proposes the creation of an expert panel to study the idea of an Aging at Home Benefit.
The panel will report to the Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health.
Other Relevant Budget 2021 Commitments
Budget2021 committed to:
• supporting retirement savings for personal support workers, through funding of $27.6 million
over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-Free Savings Account offered by the Service Employees
International Union Healthcare. The funding will support incentives for worker participation;
• increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022; and,
• establishing a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program ($960 million over three years, led by
ESDC). The purpose of the programis to help employment sectors design and deliver relevant training,
and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this
program will help to address the need for more skilled personal support workers who provide care for
Canadians at home.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health and addiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement.
Shared Health Priorities Indicators for access tohome and community care (Canadian Institute for
Health Information)
• Hospital Stay Extended Until Home Care Services or Supports Ready
• Caregiver Distress
• New Long-Term Care Residents Who Potentially Could Have Been Cared for at Home
• Wait Times forHome Care Services
• Home Care Services Helped the Recipient Stay at Home
• Death at Home/Not in Hospital
PT Action Plans for the Home and Community care bilateral agreements
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, which are all posted publicly,
and lay out the initiatives that each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s
population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams to shift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS areimplementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NL is expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoringtools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services and training
specific to First Nationscontinuing care needs
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
ISSUE
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to support
residents and staff.
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-termcare facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, 41% of COVID-19 deaths in Canada have
occurred in long-term care facilities and seniors’ residences (with a proportion varying from 0% in the
territories, to 38% in Ontario, 53% in Québec, and 70% in Prince Edward Island. Nearly eighty percent of
the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (49%) and Ontario (29%). Even residents of
facilities not affected directly by the disease have faced social isolation and reduced services.
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can get
the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to
ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as
well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includesworking with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Work with the Minister ofEmployment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provinces and territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges in long-term care,
including gaps in infection prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, and visitation policies.
• Our Government has made significant investments in long-term care since the pandemic began,
includingup to $4 billion dollars to help provinces and territories improve the standard of care in those
facilities.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we have reiterated our commitment to strengthen health care
for everyone including seniors and persons with disabilities; we know there is work to be done to better
meet long-term care needs.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to improve access to quality long-
term care and to support training and better wages for personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The past two years have been devastating for Canadians in long-term care, their families, and
for the hardworking people who care for them. Canadians deserve to feel confident in the care seniors
receive.
• We welcome the news that the Health Standards Organization and the CSA Group have
conducted extensive public consultations, completed the 60-day public review of their draft LTC
standards, and expect to release the final LTC standards by December 2022.
• This is an important step to improving care for seniors that will set the bar higher for safe and
respectful care in these facilities.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to use the standards to drive lasting
change.
IF PRESSED ON WORKON THE SAFE LONG-TERM CARE ACT…
• As long-term care falls under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, any legislation will be
designed in a manner that reflects jurisdictional responsibilities.
• The federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while
respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-47…
• I would like to thank my colleague, the honourable Member for Avalon, for raising this motion
about a criticalpart of our health care system.
• The federal government has made significant investments to support vulnerable Canadians and
the workforce that supports them.
• We will continue to work in partnership with provinces and territories to strengthen our long-
term care system so that all Canadians can get the high quality care they need, no matter where they
live.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility formatters related to the administration and delivery of these
services, including long-term care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• While the Canada Health Act (CHA) covers physician and hospital services, long-term care is not
publiclyinsured under the CHA.
• While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
Situation in LTC homes throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in long-term care have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19
pandemic. This includes issues related to infection prevention and control; HHR; compliance with
standards and regulations; infrastructure; and PPE. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered major COVID-
19 outbreaks and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in LTC and
seniors’ homes accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many stakeholders have released reports and
recommendations on addressing issues faced in LTC facilities.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilities across all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a number oforganizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improving LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
Several provinces have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities, including Alberta,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of the ongoing
investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results. Several provinces have already announced
initiatives to address gaps in LTC.
Government of Canada initiatives to support PT actions in Long-term Care
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with provinces andterritories throughout the
COVID-19 pandemic to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has
responded to COVID-19 through a number of initiatives.
Budget 2022
Budget 2022 proposes the creation of an expert panel to study theidea of an Aging at Home Benefit.
The panel will report to the Minister of Seniors and the Minister of Health.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 builds upon previous COVID measures taken by the Government of Canada to support
seniors and vulnerable populations across the country. Commitments included:
• $3 billion over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based
organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age
in place.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement
saving for personal support workers.
• $960 million over three years for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC. The
purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and connect Canadians
with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would include the need for
more skilled personal support workers.
Fall Economic Statement 2020
To address significant challenges revealed during COVID-19, in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the
federal government announced the creation of a new Safe Long-Term Care Fund. This fund will transfer
$1 billion to the provinces and territoriesto protect people living and working in long-term care.
Provinces and territories can use this money to improve infection prevention and control in facilities,
including to assess infection prevention and control readiness, improve infrastructure such as
ventilation, and address workforce gaps, including hiring more staff or raising wages. As of March 31,
2022, we had reached agreements with all provinces and territories. In addition to the $1billion in
funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilities across Canada. The
goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks.
Participating teams receive seed funding tosupport needed improvements, access to training sessions
and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personalsupport worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
In addition, the Government of Canada:
• Invested billions of dollarsto procure personal protective equipment (PPE) and continued to
work with the provinces and territories to ensure LTC facilities have access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least two doses.
• Created volunteer inventories tosupport public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federal funding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low-income essential workers, which included front line workers in hospitals and LTC facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories,
including to address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick-start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO and CSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care andservices. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care (HSO), and the health infrastructure and environmental
design of long-term care facilities (CSA Group). The process is being undertaken by expert standards
development organizations with broad engagement, and is taking place at arms-length from the
Government of Canada.
The Health Standards Organization and the CSA Group have completed the 60-day public review period
of their draft LTC standards. Both organizations expect to release their final LTC standards by December
2022.
The Government has reiterated the commitment to national LTC standards in the Minister of Health’s
most recent mandate letter: “This includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection
prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe
Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve”. We will continue to work with
provinces and territories to monitor progresson improvements in LTC, including using federal funding,
and consider how these new standards might inform federal legislation.
Private Member’s Motion M-47, Improvements to Long-Term Care
Private Member’s Motion M-47 was placed on notice by the LiberalMember for Avalon, Ken McDonald,
on February 7, 2022. It calls upon the House to recognize the long-standing issues affecting LTC that
have been exposed by the COVID-19 pandemic, the need to ensure conditions of work reflect care
standards seniors deserve, and for the government to work with PTs to improve LTC. These
improvements are as follows:
“[...] the government should work with PTs to (i) improve the quality and availability of LTC homes and
beds; (ii) implement strict infection prevention and control measures, including through more provincial
and territorial facility inspections for LTC homes; and (iii) develop a safe LTC act collaboratively to ensure
that seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.”
The motion repeatsthe commitments made in the Liberal Party of Canada’s 2021 electoral platform and
aligns with the Minister of Health’s 2021 Mandate Letter and the Liberal Party of Canada’s and New
Democratic Party’s new Supply and Confidence Agreement. The first hour ofdebate on this motion took
place on April 25, 2022 and the second hour of debate is expected to take place in mid-June.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, includingfederal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)–SAFE IMPLEMENTATION OF RECENT LEGISLATIVE
AMENDMENTS
ISSUE
• Recentmedia stories allege that MAID applicants are being forced to choose MAID in the
absence of adequate housing and other supports. Opposition MPs also claim that there are numerous
cases of non-compliance with MAID requirements.
• One member of the Special Joint Committee conducting the statutory review of MAID has
proposed that Special Joint Committee study the alleged non-compliance concerns.
• Tabling of the report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness may trigger more claims
that Canada’s MAID framework puts vulnerable people at risk.
KEY FACTS
• The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness was established by the Ministers of Health and
Justice to provide recommendations on protocols, guidance, and safeguards for MAID requests from
persons who have a mental illness. On May 13, 2022, their report was tabled in Parliament.
• The Panel’s recommendations focus on providing detailed guidance to MAID assessors who are
responsible for decisions on complex MAID cases. The Panel’s view is that the existingregime of
eligibility criteria and safeguards is robust and that additional legislated safeguards are not needed.
• The Special Joint Committee on MAID responsible for the statutory review of the Criminal Code
provisions relating to MAID and other issuesreconvened in April 2022. The Committee is required to
submit an interim report on MAID and Mental Illness no later than June 23rd. Committee proceedings
have been polarized among those who support broader access to MAID as set out through former Bill C-
7,and those who oppose autonomy and choice for requesters who meet the eligibility criteria and
safeguards. The Committee’s final report is due no later than October 17, 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
Concerns raised about MAID death investigations:
• Our governmentis aware of the concerns expressed by some about the safe delivery of MAID in
this country arising from the accounts of family members.
• We cannot comment on individual cases, nor should we as only the individuals and their
clinicians involved in these cases truly know the full circumstances.
• We can, and will however, continue to do what this government has done from the day of the
Supreme Court’s decision in 2015. We will listen to the experts, including those at the front lines of our
health care system, respect fundamental freedoms of individuals to make their own life choices, and put
the safety and security of our most vulnerable people at the forefront of our actions.
We have confidence in the very dedicated and compassionate MAID assessors in Canada to make
decisions that fully comply with the law and the wishes of individuals who request MAID.
Expert Panel report on MAID and Mental Illness:
• Our government has just tabled the final report of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness.
This report focuses on the concerns that arise in cases where a mental illness is the sole underlying
condition of a person requesting MAID.
• Notably, the Panel does not call for more changes to the legislative framework, but instead
indicates the current systemof safeguards, when interpreted and applied as the Panel recommends,
provides sufficient protections for vulnerable individuals.
• Our government, as well as the medical community and others who are concerned about safe
and compassionate access to MAID, will carefully review this report. We thank the Expert Panel
members for their time and expertise.
IF PRESSED ON THE PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS…
• The Government of Canada recognizes that other important issues related to MAID remain to be
explored and that Canadians have strong views about them.
• That is why the law requires a review of the Criminal Code provisions on MAID and its
application including specific issues such as: requests for MAID by mature minors, advance requests,
requests by persons with mental illness as a sole underlying condition, palliative care and the protection
of Canadians living with disabilities.
• The Special Joint Committee on MAID has an important job ahead of it, listening to experts and
considering the evidence in order to have a deeper understanding of how MAID is being implemented in
Canada. This review will help the government decide where further action and morerobust guidance is
required.
BACKGROUND
An Act to amend the Criminal Code (medical assistance in dying) received Royal Assent on March 17,
2021.
The new MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligible for MAID;
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable;
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible personswhose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable;
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable.
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illnessfor 24 months,
and requires the Ministers of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness;
• allows eligiblepersons whose natural death is reasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim;
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more complete and inclusive picture of MAID in Canada.
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The new legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be undertaken to address (but not
necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of
palliative care in Canada, and the protection of Canadians with disabilities.
Members of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying were named in April 2021 in
accordance with thedistribution among parties in the House and Senate as stipulated in the Act. The
Committee held three meetings before dissolution. In early April 2022, the Committee was
reconstituted and resumed its review. The Committee is expected to provide an interimupdate on its
work on MAID and mental illness in June 2022, and submit its final report and recommendations in the
fall of 2022.
MENTAL ILLNESS: SUNSET CLAUSE AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW
The new legislation included a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusionof MAID requests from
individuals where mental illness is the sole underlying condition. The exclusion clause in the legislation
sunsets in mid-March 2023, after which time individuals with a mental illness as their sole condition will
be able to requestand receive MAID, providing they meet all other eligibility criteria including those that
define a grievous andirremediable medical condition.
The sunset clause is accompanied by a legislative requirement that an independent review be initiated
to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests by persons who have a
mental illness as their sole condition. The legislation stipulates that a report containing the conclusions
and recommendations of the Expert Panel be provided to Ministers and tabled in Parliament.
The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness was launched in August 2021 to undertake this work. It
includes experts from a range of disciplines and perspectives, including clinical psychiatry, MAID
assessment and provision, law, ethics, health professionaltraining and regulation, mental health care
services, as well as lived experience with mental illness.
The Expert Panel’s final report was tabled in Parliament on May 13, 2022. The report makes 19
recommendations for establishing a MAID regime that addresses situations regarding incurability,
irreversibility, individual capacity, suicidality and the effect of structural vulnerabilities (structural
vulnerabilities being the effects of interactions between a person’s sex, gender, socioeconomic status,
race/ethnicity, sexuality, or institutional location, with one’s position in society). The recommendations
address these concerns in a manner that respects individual autonomy while at the same time
supporting safety and equity.
The Expert Panel also concluded that many of these concerns are neither unique to requests for MAID
from persons with a mental disorder, nor applicable to every requestor who has a mental disorder. In
the view of the Expert Panel, their recommendations should apply to any case where similar concerns
may arise, regardless of the requester’s diagnosis. However, in keeping with their mandate, the Expert
Panel did pay particular attention to the concerns in the context of mental disorders.
While some of the Expert Panel’s recommendations are directed at federal, provincial and territorial
governments, the Panel believes that the current framework for MAID found in Canada’s Criminal Code
is sufficient and that further legislative amendments are not required.
The Government is reviewing theserecommendations as it shapes future direction in this area. The
report will be forwarded to Parliament’s Special Joint Committee on MAID. The work of the Expert Panel
will assist the Committee as it continues its hearings and deliberations in the lead upto its own interim
report and recommendations on MAID and mental illness later in June 2022.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
Under MAID legislation, the federal Minister of Health is obligated to develop regulations for the
collection of data and annual public reporting on MAID in Canada. The first report was released in July
2020. The second annual report was released in July 2021 summarizing data collected for the 2020
calendar year.
The second annual report indicates that, in 2020, there were 7,595 reported cases of MAID, accounting
for 2.5% of all deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This
represents an increase of 34.2% over 2019 when there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID. All provinces
have experienced a steady year over year growth in the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all
data sources are considered, the total number of medically assisted deaths reported in Canada from the
enactment of federal legislation in 2016 to December 31, 2020 was21,589.
Though not yet published, Health Canada provided preliminary data for 2021 and anecdotal sources for
a meeting of the Special Joint Committee on MAID, which indicate the following:
• The number of MAID cases continues to increase (approaching 10,000 in 2021)-approximately
a 30% increase from 2020 (7,595);
• Around 2%, or just over 200 cases, involved persons whose natural deaths were not reasonably
foreseeable; and,
• As expected, these individuals were slightly younger than the average MAID recipient was and
their predominant medical conditions was much more likely to be neurological in nature such as,
Parkinson’s and MS, or chronic pain.
FUNDING TO SUPPORT MAID IMPLEMENTATION
Expanded access to MAID (as codified in the new legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility
assessments and requires the administration of stronger safeguards to protect individuals who may by
more vulnerable due to their specific circumstances. Budget 2021 provided $13.2 million to Health
Canada over five years,beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the
development of training and guidance materials for practitioners, as well as a policy driven research
agenda. This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to supportsafe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
PALLIATIVE CARE
ISSUE
• Federal Action to improve access to palliative care in Canada
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has strained resources and exposed gaps and systemic vulnerabilities in
palliative care delivery across all settings.
• The federal government invested $24 million between 2019-2021 and is investing a further
$29.8 million over six years as part of Budget 2021 to provide Canadians, including those living in long-
term care and their families, with better palliative and end-of-life care, including culturally sensitive
care.
• The government, through Health Canada, is using these investments to advance the Action Plan
on PalliativeCare and lay a better foundation for coordinated action on long-term and supportive care
needs, improving access to quality palliative care.
• Funding under the Action Plan complements federal financial support of more than $6 billion
over 10 years to provinces and territories for home and community care, including palliative care, under
the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians approaching the end of their lives deserve to receive care in the setting of their
choice and live out their days in comfort and dignity.
• That is why our Government has worked collaboratively with partners, such as the provinces
and territories, health care providers and stakeholders to develop a Framework and a targeted Action
Planon Palliative Care.
• To support the Action Plan, our Government has invested $24 million from 2019 to 2021.
Moreover, as part of Budget 2021, the federal government committed an additional $29.8 million over
six years to provide Canadians, including those living in long-term care and their families, with better
palliative and end-of-life care, including culturally sensitive care.
• Funding under the Action Plan complements federal financial support of more than $6 billion
over 10 years to provinces andterritories for home and community care, including palliative care, under
the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
IF PRESSED ABOUT WHY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT DOES NOT COMPEL PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
TOPROVIDE MORE PALLIATIVE CARE…
• In order to support improvements to palliative care in Canada, our Government is continuing its
commitment of $6 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care, as well as palliative care.
• This investment complements the Framework for Palliative Care and the Action Plan, as well as
ongoing work by the provinces and territories.
• Our government will continue to work with provinces, territories and health partners to improve
access to home, community and palliative care.
IF PRESSED ABOUT THE ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE …
• The Action Plan lays out Health Canada’s multi-year plan to tackle issues identified in the
Framework. Actions include raising awareness of the importance of palliative care; providing public
education on grief; improving palliative care skills and supports for health care providers, families,
caregivers, and communities; enhancing data collection and research; and improving access to culturally
sensitive palliative and end-of-life care.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT HAS DONE TO SUPPORT PALLIATIVE CARE DELIVERY
DURING THE PANDEMIC …
• While continuing to work with health partners to implement the Action Plan on Palliative Care,
Health Canada has invested $10.3 million in funding for Action Plan initiatives that respond to urgent
needs created by the pandemic. These projects will leverage virtual tools and caring communities to
improve palliative care delivery across all settings, including at home and in the community.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
o While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access to palliative
home care services.
o Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home, and are less
likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care unit.
COMPLEMENTARY MECHANISMS
The Framework on Palliative Care sets out anapproach under which all governments, communities, and
Canadians play a role in improving end-of-life care. The Framework was built through participation and
direction-setting with key organizations, provinces and territories (P/Ts), other federal government
departments and individuals, including people living with a life-limiting illness, caregivers, health care
providers, and researchers. The penultimate version of the Framework was shared with PTs,
stakeholders, and other participants in the developmentprocess, and their feedback incorporated.
Although formal endorsement was not sought, other jurisdictions and key stakeholders were
comfortable in sharing their approaches to palliative care to be included in the Framework and being
named as contributors in the final document. A list of the main groups and individuals that contributed
to the development of the Framework is contained in the document.
The Action Plan on Palliative Care focuses on the federal role in implementing the Framework. The
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, as described below, outlines the way that
the federal government and provincial and territorial government work together to improve palliative
care, and complements the Framework and Action Plan.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, FPT Ministers of Health (except Quebec) agreed to the Common Statement of Principles
on Shared Health Priorities (CSoP) which set out a shared agenda for improving access to home and
community careand mental health and addiction services supported by federal investments (see
sidebar). Based on the asymmetrical agreements of 2004, the Government of Canada and the
Government of Québec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from the CSoP.
Following the endorsement of the CSoP, the Government of Canada negotiated and finalized bilateral
agreements with each jurisdiction, which are posted publicly online. These agreements detail how each
province or territory will use federal investments to increase access to services in the two priority areas.
Each jurisdiction developed its own action plan, annexed to the bilateral agreement, which identifies the
new or expanded programs in home and community care and mental health and addiction services to
besupported by the federal investments.
The funding is allocated to each province and territory on a per capita basis. While bilateral agreements
recently expired (March 31, 2022), federal, provincial and territorial governments will work together to
renewor extend agreements in fiscal year 2022-23 so that provinces and territories can use the $6
billion that remains available over the next five years to support home and community care and mental
health and addiction services.
RESPONDING TO NEEDS CREATED OR EXPOSED BY COVID-19
In addition to the initiatives identified in the Action Plan, Health Canada and its partners are also
working on initiatives that will contribute to the delivery of palliative care in the new environment
created by the pandemic. They will respond to current priorities including symptom control, information
sharing, virtual care, advance care planning, and isolation. Current activities include:
o Funding projects in support of palliative care delivery:
• In addition to the $2.5 million investment over the past five years, the Canadian Hospice
Palliative Care Association received an additional $612,829 to develop advance care planning tools and
resources for long-term care residents and family, as well as tools and resources for healthcare
providers and workers in long-term care facilities.
• The Canadian Virtual Hospice has received $586,534, in addition to the $2.5 million already
committed to develop resources for underserved populations (francophones, LGBTQ2S, children, MAID),
todevelop a series of online learning modules for caregivers and palliative care patients; host discussion
forums for healthcare professionals; raise public awareness; and to develop modules to provide grief
support to care providers.
• William Osler’s RELIEF Project received $1.4 million to facilitate palliative care delivery to
vulnerable populations through the use of technology to enable Remote Self-Reporting of Symptoms by
Patients with Palliative Care Needs.
• University of British Columbia received $2.25 million for its Volunteer Navigation in Palliative
Care: Adapting and Expanding the Nav-CARE program-a program in which trained volunteers provide
navigation services to persons living at home with life-limiting illness using a palliative and
compassionate community approach.
• Pallium Canada received $450,000 to provide webinars, training and other resources to
clinicians responding to the pandemic. In addition, Pallium is receiving new funding of $5 million for
Project ECHO. This project is buildinglocal palliative care capacity among health care providers through
the regular and ongoing provision of information, resources, and ongoing supports, such as how to
effectively deliver virtual palliative care services.
• Bruyère Research Institute received$2.5 million to expand the work of the Pan-Canadian
Palliative Care Research Collaborative in conducting 14 research studies to improve patient and
caregiver outcomes, palliative care health system performance, and people’s experience of palliative
care,and by building knowledge translation capacity to share the results of this research;
• McMaster University received $1.5 million to expand its Strengthening a Palliative Approach in
Long-Term Care Program, which aims to improve the access and use of knowledge, tools, and resources
to improve the quality of living and dying for residents and their family members within all long-term
care homes in Canada, by curating, adapting, and disseminating resources for direct care, program
development and staff training, and consolidating these resources in an accessible national repository.
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years to improve home
and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. During the development of the Framework
and Action Plan, National Indigenous Organizations (NIOs) indicated their interest in discussing
Indigenous-led engagement processes toward the development of a separate distinctions-based
framework on palliative care. This engagement is planned in collaboration with ISC. Engagement with
Indigenous groups will be a complex and multi-faceted process. ISC has begun the engagement process
with First Nations and Inuit peoples on long-term care, including palliative care. Plans for other streams
of engagement by Health Canada (e.g., Indigenous health providers, Métis peoples, urban Indigenous
populations) are also underway.
Responding to advice from Elders, Knowledge Carriers, community health professionals and researchers,
the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer is launching a multi-year pan-Canadian initiative that will make
tools, resources and education available to improve home and community-based palliative care for First
Nations, Inuit and Metis communities. Leveraging our ongoing partnership with CPAC, Health Canada is
partnering with CPAC to provide additional funding ($1 million over 2 years) to allow the initiative to
reach more Indigenous communities wishing to improve their end-of-life care.
OTHER FEDERALINVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along with the Natural
Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC), supported the Canadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centers of
Excellence Program, with an investment of $47.8 million between 2012 and 2022. This network aims to
improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through thedevelopment, evaluation, and
implementation of health care technologies.
In 2020-21 alone, CIHR, though its Institute of Aging, invested $2 million in palliative care research. More
broadly, between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested more than $464 million in research on aging. This
includes research to promote healthy aging and to address causes, prevention, treatment and palliation
for a wide range of conditions associated with aging.
PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Budget 2022:
Budget 2022proposes to provide $436.2 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, to the Public Health
Agency of Canada to strengthen key surveillance and risk assessment capacities within the Agency.
Approximately $7 million of this funding will be used over 3 years to support the implementation of the
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (PCHDS). The activities funded through this investment will be used
to create two essential governance structures, including their policy, engagement and secretariat
capacities, for a Federal Digital Health and Data Council and an FPT Digital Health and Data Council.
Funding will also be used for the creation a Health Data Assembly for ongoing consultation with
Canadians on the collection, use, and sharing of their health data. Inaddition, the federal government
has committed to work with provinces and territories to ensure that the health care system is
underpinned by health data that supports system improvements and Canadians’ access to their own
personal health records.
Issue
COVID-19 has highlighted new and existing issues that make it a challenge to collect, access, share, and
use health data for the benefit of Canadians. 'Health data' includes public health, health system and
population health data. In the May 2021 Office ofthe Auditor General report Pandemic Preparedness,
Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada create a Pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy (PCHDS) to address foundational issues related to the collection, access, sharing
and use of health data in Canada. In his mandate letter released December 16, 2021, the Minister of
Health was tasked with working with the provinces and territories to create a world-class health data
system for Canada. In Budget 2022, ensuring access to reliable, comparable health data was identified as
a key element to strengthen our health care system.To achieve this, the Government of Canada is
following the advice of the Auditor General and creating a PCHDS through federal, provincial and
territorial partnership with advice from an Expert Advisory Group. The EAG published its third and final
report for the Government of Canada on May 3, 2022.
Key Facts
• There are persistent and important gaps in data collection, access, sharing and use that cost
lives and negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making.
• These gaps impair public health responses, reduce health outcomes for Canadians, and
contribute to health inequities.
Key Messages
• Reliable, timely and relevant health data are crucial to inform decision-making during public
health events and to improve health outcomes for Canadians in the longer term.
• The Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces, territories and Indigenous groups,
is developing a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy to improve Canada’s collection, access, sharing and
use of health data and lay the foundation for a world-class healthdata system.
• This work is being informed by expert advice and will assist Canada’s public health response to
COVID-19, equip Canada to deal more effectively with future public health events, and achieve better
health outcomes for Canadians through the better use of health data.
If pressed on recommendations in the final report of the Expert Advisory Group
• In its final report, the EAG recommended governments work together to expedite the creation
of a person-centred, world-class health data system.
• The advice contained in the latest report of the EAG will be considered by the Government of
Canada, provinces and territories and our health data partners as the co-development of the Pan-
Canadian Health Data Strategy continues.
If pressed on public engagement
• Canadians should have a say in how their health data is used, so consultation and engagement
are key for this work.
• Our Government will be engaging broadly on the strategy to hear Canadians’ views on how
health data can serve them better, both during and between public health events.
If pressed on privacy
• Our government knows that Canadians value the privacy of their health information and want it
to be appropriately safeguarded.
• Canadians also expect that their data would be used to informpublic health measures, stimulate
research on new treatments and improve our health care systems.
• Our government’s approach to strengthening health data collection, access, sharing and use
recognizes Canadians’ rights to have their personal information protected while benefiting from the
insights that can be generated by sharing it.
If pressed on Budget 2022 commitments
• Our government recognizes how important it is to be able to effectively
anticipate and respond to public health risks that threaten the health and safety
of Canadians. It is crucial to take immediate steps to improve our
surveillance and data capabilities so we are better able to detect and respond to public health events
and emergencies in the future.
• That is why our government has commited to supporting the Public Health Agency of Canada to
strengthen key surveillance and risk assessment capacities, including through the implementation of the
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy.
• In addition, the federal government has committed to work with provinces and territories to
ensure that the health care system is underpinned by health data that supports system improvements
and Canadians’ access to their own personal health records.
Background
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
Healthdata (which encompasses public health, health system and population health data)are collected
by numerous organizations and governments. However, as SARS and COVID-19 have demonstrated,
there are persistent and important gaps in data collection, access,sharing and use that cost lives and
negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making. Overall, these
impacts reduce health outcomes for Canadians.
In December 2020, the Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces and territories, began
developing a Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report,
Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada
create a Pan-Canadian HealthData Strategy (PCHDS) to address foundational issues related to health
data in Canada. The November 2021 Speech from the Throne underlined the importance of improving
data collection across health systems to inform future decisions and ensure the best possible health
results for Canadians. In the December 2021 Office of the Chief Public Health Officer report, A Vision to
Transform Canada’s Public Health System, it was recommended that Canada create a world-class public
health system and noted that the PCHDSis an actionable idea to improve public health tools. The
December 2021 Mandate Letter for the Minister of Health acknowledged the need for a health data
system that is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected, and comprehensive. Most recently, the
Minister of Health was tasked through the mandate letter and the Federal Budget 2022 to establish the
foundation of a world-class health data system so that all Canadians have meaningful, timely access to
their own health information.
The goal of the Strategyis to identify commonly-supported, implementable solutions to address
persistent barriers to the use of critical health data. Once identified, and when supported by provinces
and territories, Canadians will be better served by their own health data, accelerating the
transformation towards person-centred health care systems and strengthening public health decision-
making during and between health emergencies.
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Engagement
Canadians should have a say on how their health datais used, therefore engagement is key for this
work. PHAC has engaged with stakeholders and will be reaching out to First Nations, Inuit and Métis
(FNIM) groups and the public to inform them of the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) process of co-
developing a PCHDS and to seek their input on how health data can serve them better, both during and
between public health events.
Informed stakeholder consultations started in summer 2021 and continued into fall 2021. Engagement
sessions focused on overcomingthe identified root causes impeding the better use of data.
The second phase of public engagement will focus on the public’s needs and perspectives on health
data, literacy and trust. Findings will provide insights necessary to build and improve policiesand
recommendations outlined in the PCHDS.Preparations are also underway for targeted, distinctions-
based, regional FNIM engagement activities, with an anticipated launch date of summer 2022.
Expert Advisory Group
A PCHDS Expert Advisory Group (EAG) wasestablished in fall 2020 to provide advice and guidance to
inform F/P/T co-development work. Specifically, the EAG provides advice on:
• strategic direction for the use of health systems, population, and public health data to improve
the health of Canadians;
• principles to guide the creation, collection, storage, and use of data; and
• a practical and phased roadmap for the implementation of measures to sustainably address
areas of greatest opportunity and impact.
The EAG published two reports in 2021.The first report described the systemic barriers to effective
health data management while the second report contained recommendations on how to overcome
these barriers to optimize the use of data for better health outcomes and more effective public health
event management.
The EAG published their third, and final report on May 3, 2022. The third report builds on the
recommendations cited in the second report and presents a roadmap of actions for achieving a world-
class health data system. In the report, the EAG recommends adopting a person-centric approach to
health data that gives patients, and their health care providers, access to health information in an
integrated system–leading to better comprehensive care and an integrated health data system that
supports robust public health responses. This recommendation is in line with the vision of the PCHDS
and the imperative to achieve equitable health outcomes for Canadians.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) Health Data Investments
PHAC is working directly with ISC to find alignment and synergies with Indigenous health data initiatives
announced in Budget 2021. Access to reliable and culturally relevant data on Indigenous peoples is
critical to building a complete portrait of Indigenous lived experiences,unmasking inequalities, and
ensuring delivery of effective policies and programs. Engagement on the Pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy will enable alignment with Indigenous-led data strategies, which can further self-determination
by providing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation governments and organizations with the data they
need to support their communities.
PRIMARY CARE
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that primary care plays a critical role in the delivery of
health care servicesfor Canadians and is the backbone to high-performing health care systems.
• The Government of Canada is committed to improving access to high-quality primary care and
continues to work with provinces and territories in this regard.
KEY FACTS
o InElection 2021, our Government committed to continuing work to support primary and virtual
care, including through:
o Support to PTs for hiring doctors, nurses, and nurse practitioners;
o Continued work to expand access to virtual care; and
o Expanding access to family doctors and primary health teams in rural areas.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance of high-quality primary care and
acknowledges that many Canadians are still struggling to access the care they need in a timely manner.
• Going forward, as outlined in Budget 2022, the Government of Canada will remain focused on
advancing the priorities of Canadians in health, including access to the readily available, high-quality
primary care services we all deserve.
This includes increasing the maximum amount of forgivable Canada Student Loans for doctors and
nurses who work in underserved rural and remote areas by 50%, to help bring more health care
providers to the communities that need them most.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORT TO PROVINCES ANDTERRITORIES FOR PRIMARY CARE …
• Over the last two years, our Government has worked with provinces and territories to
accelerate uptake and use of virtual care, supported by over $240M in funding.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual carein Canada provides Canadians with new ways to access
the primary care services on which they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health services
during the pandemic.
• This was just one of the many ways in which we have supported provincial and territorial health
systems over the last two years, with roughly eight out of every ten dollars invested in Canada’s
pandemic response coming from the federal government.
• Now, thanks to Canada’s strong economic recovery, the Canada Health Transfer is projected to
provide provinces and territories with $12 billion more in over the next 5 years, as compared to what
was expected prior to the pandemic.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR ACCESS TO CARE IN UNDERSERVED/REMOTE COMMUNITIES …
• Our government is making targeted investments to increase the number of doctors and nurses
in underserved rural and remote communities, in response to disparities in access to primary care faced
in these areas.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $26.2 million over four years, and $7 million per year
thereafter, to increase the maximum amount of forgivable Canada Student Loans for doctors and nurses
who work in underserved rural and remote communities, including the North, by 50%.
• This will mean up to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses and up to $60,000 for doctors
working in these communities.
BACKGROUND
Primary care is the backbone of high-performing health care systems. It serves a dual function in the
health care system as the direct provision of first-contact services and acoordination function to ensure
continuity across health care settings. However, Canadians continue to struggle to access primary care.
In 2020, 14.2% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care provider1.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories having distinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance primary care
priorities.
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to primary care, particularly in northern, rural and remotecommunities. The adoption of
virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to sustain
access to primary care and specialist health services. On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced
$240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for Canadians. $150M of this funding is being provided
to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual services. Concurrently,
Health Canada has been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify ways in
which virtual care can be leveraged to support access to and delivery of high-quality care, including
within the context of primary care.
Budget 2022 signalled a continued need to strengthen the health care system and ensure it delivers the
care that Canadians deserve by increasing the number of doctors and nurses. To help bring more health
care workers to the communities that need them most, Budget 2022 proposes to provide $26.2 million
over four years, starting in 2023-24, and $7million ongoing, to increase the maximum amount of
forgivable Canada Student Loans by 50% for doctors and nurses who work in underserved rural or
remote communities, including in the North. This will mean up to $30,000 in loan forgiveness for nurses
and up to $60,000 in loan forgiveness for doctors working in underserved rural or remote communities.
In addition, the federal government will expand the current list of eligible professionals under the
program, with details to be announced in the coming year.The government is also undertaking a review
to ensure that the definition of rural communities under the program does not leave out certain
communities in need,
Budget 2022 also confirmed federal interest in continuing to expand virtual care and improvingaccess to
high-quality primary care. Health Canada will continue to work with provinces, territories and other
partners in this regard.
1Statistics Canada. Table 13-10-0096-16 Has a regular health care provider, by age group
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1310009616
ACCESS TO SEXUAL AND REPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
ISSUE
• Currently, women, youth, LGBTQ2 people, racialized Canadians, and Indigenous populations
face the highestsexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support,
information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the same quality of care, particularly if they are
from marginalized communities.
KEY FACTS
• Investment of $45Mover three years to help make sexual and reproductive health care
information and services more accessible to Canadians.
• Investment of $7.6M over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill existing
information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We will fund community-based organizations to produce inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, work with providers to develop and implement best practices,
carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to accessabortion care.
• Budget 2021 committed $45M to advancing sexual and reproductive health. To date, nine
contribution agreements have been signed, for a dollar value of $15.5 million. Of the nine projects, two
address access to abortion, five address 2SLGBTQI communities, and two address youth. Two of the nine
projects include components focusing on Indigenous peoples. In addition, per capita funding of $9.7M
will be provided to the Province of Québec to support community-based organizations located in
Québec.
IF PRESSED ON DATA…
• We are also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill
existing information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for
Canadians.
IF PRESSEDON ABORTION SERVICES…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of wherethe
services are provided.
• The Canada Health Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory
deduction to federal health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• Our Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
• The Government of Canada has invested $3.6M to date to support two projects aimed at
improving access to abortion for those who face the greatest barriersto care.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING
ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY) …
• One element of this initiative will provide funding to support travel and logistical costs for
individuals who would not otherwise be able to access abortions. Other elements of the funds will
support initiatives to help improve access and improve professional skills and competencies in a broad
range of sexual and reproductive health issues.
• This fundwill not support initiatives that discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or
attempt to override the individual’s right to make decisions about their own body.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist lens, and
realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive health
services remain. Women, members of LGBTQ2 communities, youth, racialized Canadians and Indigenous
peoples face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing
support, information, and services.
An initial targeted call for proposals inviting select organizations to submitapplications for funding was
launched on July 29th, 2021 and closed October 4, 2021. Nine contribution agreements have been
signed. A subsequent solicitation will follow to address any remaining gaps and ensure the priorities of
the initiative are adequately addressed.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range of
indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based decision-
making to address a full range ofkey indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including prevalence
of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual knowledge and
behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services
Patient charges for abortionservices received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user
charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness
criteria of the Act. In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service–two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at
the private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. The most recent deduction to New
Brunswick was taken in March 2022, in the amount of $64,850, for the province’s refusal to cover
surgical abortion services provided outside the hospital setting, which results in patient charges for
these medically necessary services. Similarly, Ontario’s March 2022 federal health transfer was reduced
by $6,560, with respect to patient charges for abortion services provided at certain independent health
facilities. These deductions will be outlined in the 2021-2022 Canada Health Act Annual Report, which
will be published in February 2023.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge to access insured surgical
abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related
to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion
clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has advised ON that patient
charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges
reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied against the province’s CHT
payment in March 2021.
BULK IMPORT OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
ISSUE
• Drug shortages are a global issue that directly affectthe health and safety of Canadians. Canada
is particularly vulnerable to shortages because of our small market share and heavy reliance on imports.
• On November 30, 2020, a rule came into effect in the U.S. allowing state-sponsored programs to
import drugs intended for the Canadian market in bulk as a means to reduce the price of drugs for
American consumers.
• The Canadian market is too small to supply the U.S. and Canadian markets. The rule has the
potential to create supply disruptions.
KEY FACTS
• The U.S. is seeking to reduce domestic drug prices by allowing for the bulk importation of lower
priced drugs intended for the Canadian market.
• A rule facilitating bulk importation of drugs from Canada was established by the Trump
administration and endorsed by President Biden through an Executive Order made on July 9, 2021.
• With Canada representing 2% of global drug sales, this is not a viable solution as the U.S.
captures 44% of global drug sales.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue tohave access to the medicines they need is a top priority for
our Government.
• Amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations to permanently establish measures
prohibiting certain drugs intended for the Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of
Canada, if that sale could cause or exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FORCANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increased drug prices for Canadians. The
Government of Canada is committed to improving Canadians’ access to, and the affordability of,
necessary prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with
key partners to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• The regulations respect international trade rules, and are not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributesto
millions of jobs in both countries and to increased North American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
IF PRESSED ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE U.S. IMPORTATION PROGRAMS
• We are aware that two proposals for State importation programs have been submitted to the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA). However, these proposals have not yet been approved
and there are no bulk importation programs running at this time.
• We are aware that the U.S. pharmaceutical industry is challenging the U.S. rule in court. We are
monitoring the proceedings and will consider the impact of the decision when the outcome becomes
known.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with the U.S. to understand its implementation
plans and to mitigate any risks to the health and safety of Canadians posed by the U.S. rule.
• Drug establishment licence holders who violate the terms of the regulations will be subject to
enforcement actions. This could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or the
suspension or cancellation of their licence.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On November 30, 2020, the U.S. rule on the Importation of PrescriptionDrugs came into effect. The rule
creates a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored
program approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA), to import in bulk certain
prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be U.S. FDA
and Health Canada-approved drugs labeled for sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The
Canadian seller must be licensed by Health Canada for wholesaling, be registered with a provincial
authority, and must also be registered with the U.S. FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import
request to the U.S. FDA at least 30 days in advance of product entry and arrival into the U.S. The
program allows only a direct supply chainof one manufacturer, one Canadian seller and one importer
for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk. The Government of Canada does not consider the U.S. rule to be an effective solution to high drug
prices in the U.S. It opposed the rule during the formal regulatory consultation process and in bilateral
discussions with U.S. officials.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. The industry group Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America
(PhRMA) is challenging the U.S. rule in court. As well, large industry players, representing 90-95% of
pharmaceutical distribution in Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this
program. However, there is the potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any
industry uptake could have an impact on the Canadian drug supply.
States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription drugs
from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have enacted
legislation to authorize such a program, and 12 other states have similar legislation in progress. Florida
and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services for reviewand approval. Florida has already identified a Canadian wholesaler and a
vendor to manage its importation program, if approved. Colorado is actively researching a vendor to
manage its program, if approved.
The Governor of Florida criticized the Biden administration on March 2, 2022 for acting too slowly to
authorize its proposal. On March 31, 2022, the U.S. FDA met with the five states most advanced in the
application process for the importation programs (i.e., Florida, Colorado, Maine, New Mexico, and
Vermont) to answer questions about the importation programs. This is the first signal from the Biden
administration of its intention to work with interested States towards the approval of importation
programs, but there is still no timeline on when a decision could be made on any of the proposals.
Regulatory action to safeguard the drug supply
The Regulations Amending Certain Regulations Concerning Drugs and Medical Devices (Shortages) were
made on August 11, 2021 and make permanent the provisions that werefirst introduced in the Interim
Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply). These provisions help ensure that bulk
importation programs, such as the one established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage
in Canada. Similarto the interim order, these Regulations maintain the prohibition on selling for
consumption outside of Canada certain drugs intended for the Canadian market if that sale could cause
or worsen a drug shortage. The Regulations came into force upon expiry ofthe interim order on
November 27, 2021.
The Regulations also authorize the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or drug
establishment licence (DEL) holder that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate an
existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not inthe scope of the interim order.
Health Canada has published guidance on the new Regulations, conducted outreach to stakeholders,
and established networks for signal detection and compliance verification and promotion.Health
Canada will investigate any potential non-compliance with the new Regulations and take appropriate
actions in accordance with the level of risk. Potential compliance and enforcement approaches that may
be taken include: requests for corrective measures, on-site inspections, issuance of public
communications and, as a last resort, DEL suspension or cancellation.
COVID-19 CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE
ISSUE
• COVID-19 created an increased demand for drugs used in supporting patients with the disease,
againstthe backdrop of multiple global supply chain challenges. Drug shortages, particularly in the
context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at risk.
• Working with provinces, territories and other partners, Health Canada establisheda COVID-19
Critical Drug Reserve to support patients with COVID-19.
KEY FACTS
• The Critical Drug Reserve was established with a three month supply of 12 key drugs used in the
treatment of COVID-19 symptoms.
• Canada assumed the upfront costs to buildand manage the Reserve. The costs are shared 70% /
30% between provinces / territories and the Federal Government.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary. All jurisdictions except for Quebec and
New Brunswick have opted in, and have accessed drugsfrom the Critical Drug Reserve.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring Canadians have access to the drugs they need is a top priority. The Government of
Canada has taken proactive measures to help mitigate the risk of drug shortages, a global issue,
throughout the pandemic.
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada established the
COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve in 2020.
• This Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drug shortage management
efforts, and functions as a safety net by augmenting the supply of key drugs used in treating patients
with COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT DRUGS HEALTH CANADA PURCHASED FOR THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE …
• The Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals to support patients with COVID-
19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular blockers. These drugs have been
included in the Reserve based on Canada’s experience in managing drug supply, consultation with
provinces and territories, and advice provided by health care experts.
IFPRESSED ON PARTICIPATION …
• The Critical Drug Reserve functions as an additional safety net in the event of shortages of key
drugs used in the treatment of COVID-19 symptoms, and complements Canada’s current drug shortage
mitigation measures.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary, with most provinces and territories
participating. Both Quebec and New Brunswick have opted out, but the Government of Canada will
continue to provide support when requested.
IF PRESSED ON COST …
• To date, the Government of Canada has awarded close to $30 million in contracts for drugs in
the Critical Drug Reserve through competitive processes that are cost-shared with participating
provinces and territories.
• Drug pricing is influenced by a number offactors, including availability, supply chain constraints,
global import/export restrictions, and competition in the global marketplace.
• As with all purchasing, value for money was a key consideration.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canadaworks with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to
identify mitigation strategies, which include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative
products available in other jurisdictions. Creating a reserve for drugs critical to the treatment of COVID-
19 symptoms is one such strategy.
During the first wave of the pandemic, shortages were identified for key drugs used in treating patients
with COVID-19. The Critical Drug Reserve serves as a backstop for Canada’s existing supply,
complements the current drug shortage management systems, and has helped to prevent critical drug
shortages, which has in turn, relieved pressures on provincial and territorial health care systems.
Factors that were considered in the pursuit of a critical drug reserve included whether the drug is
important for the treatment of COVID-19 symptoms, whether the drug is in shortage or is likely to be in
shortage, and whether alternative or substitute drugs are available. The following drugs are in the
Critical Drug Reserve:
• Cisatracurium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Epinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Fentanyl (Opioid analgesic);
• Norepinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Propofol (Sedative);
• Rocuronium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Salbutamol (Bronchodilator);
• Ceftriaxone (antibiotic);
• Dexamethasone (corticosteroid);
• Hydromorphone (analgesic);
• Midazolam (sedative); and
• Vasopressin (vasopressor).
Engagement with Provinces and Territories
To address drug supply issues, Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms for managing drug
shortages, and has leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple
partners to identify shortage signals earlier, particularly for critical drugs required for COVID-19.
Given the need for close cooperation on the shortage of critical drugs, a Framework for the Effective
Management of Drug supply in the Context of the COVID-19 Pandemic was developed and agreed to by
provinces, territories and the federal government. This Framework sets out the common principles for
managing drug shortages and guiding decisions in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Principles
include solidarity, fairness, openness and transparency, and FPT collaboration. These principles have
been implemented through the federal government facilitating access to alternative drug supplies to
prevent shortages, and building the Critical Drug Reserve to support patients with COVID-19.
The CDR was established as a backstop for a limited period of time and was set to end March 31, 2022.
However, due to the prolonged pandemic the reserve has been extended by an additional three months
and will now be in place until June 30, 2022.
DRUG SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Drug shortages pose a risk tothe health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic further exposed
vulnerabilities in the drug supply chain that impacted supplies of drugs required to treat patients with
COVID-19 and other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is
continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with provinces and territories, and key supply
chain players to mitigate impacts and move towards prevention of drug shortages where possible.
KEY FACTS
• Four Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
related to COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. The provisions in these Interim Orders have been
transitioned into permanent regulations.
• As of May 24, 2022, we havebeen able to de-escalate 50 shortages from critical status, out of a
total of 71 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for our Government.
• Significant efforts have been made throughout the pandemic to respond to drug supply
disruptions. Four Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
related to COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. Theprovisions in these Interim Orders have been
transitioned into permanent regulations as of March 2, 2022, providing the government with new tools
to manage drug shortages.
• A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve was also created in collaboration with the provinces and
territories to provide a safety net of supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to help
prevent and minimize the impact of shortages.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s Role
Drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibilityrequiring federal
leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and territories and
stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory
measures, and explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fullymeet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repealed and replaced the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 thatthe Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020. The provisions of this interim order came into force as permanent
regulations on March 2, 2022.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention and Alleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to COVID-
19
Thisinterim order, made by the Minister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduced new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allowed the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allowed the Minister to impose or amend terms and
conditions on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage
related to COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim OrderRespecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduced new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
suchas the one established by the United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
It also enabled the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could help Health Canada
take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
The provisions of the two above-noted interim orders entered into force on November 27, 2021.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Drug Shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approach to mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages, and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work with Health Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocating supply where it is needed most. This has also been effective in managing
limited supplies of therapies being used to treat COVID-19 (e.g., Tocilizumab, Remdesivir) as well as
drugs that are in high global demand upon authorization by Health Canada (e.g., Paxlovid).
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve was established in 2020, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives, pain
relievers, antibiotics, muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provinces and territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• The Government has committed to implement national pharmacare, including a Canadian Drug
Agency, a national formulary, a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and a Canada Pharmacare
bill.
KEYFACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion overtwo years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to provide Prince
Edward Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s
efforts to provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
• Budget 2022 announced that the federal government will continue its ongoing work towards a
nationalpharmacare program. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working to have it
passed by the end of 2023, and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national formulary
of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We have signed a first agreement with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve
access to medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TOIMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national pharmacare,
while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the establishment of
the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTION MEDICATIONS…
• We have already taken action to improve accessibility and affordability of prescription drugs. For
example, we modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will help
Canadians afford the prescription medicines they need, improve the health of Canadians and better
meet health care system needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADIANDRUG AGENCY TRANSITIONOFFICE…
• The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office is working closely with provinces and territories,
partner organizations, patients, care providers, and stakeholders to develop an approach that addresses
shared objectives for better health outcomes for patients and a more sustainable pharmaceuticals
management system.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following public consultations this
winter, amultidisciplinary national panel will provide its recommendations this summer. The panel’s
work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), at the
request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
BACKGROUND
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progresstowards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. Thisbill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support single-payer, public pharmacare that willbe long term, predictable, fair and
acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, healthcare experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency andnational formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated inthe Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
Prince Edward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform theadvancement of national pharmacare. Through
this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs to its list
of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans for Island
residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its ongoing work
to advance national pharmacare.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
On August 21, 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’)
to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its
mandate to protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry, and some patient groups, have expressed concerns that the amendments
could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
The Government has delayed the coming into force of the amendments four times due to
considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The most recently delay of the coming into
force date to July 1, 2022, also allows the Government to further engage stakeholders on the application
of these amendments within the changing pharmaceutical landscape.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec by
Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC) and sixteen subsidiaries of brand-name companies. On June 29,
2020, in the ruling of the case IMC v Canada, the Federal Court upheld most ofthe regulatory
amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information. On December 18, 2020,
a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the Attorney General of
Canada to uphold the constitutionalityof the existing regime and regulatory amendments. Following
this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing
regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator countries, but found that the three new
price regulatory factors in addition to the collection of confidential rebate information to be invalid.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With fewor no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices, which pose
significant challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of
public and private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
• Nearly75% of rare diseases present from early in utero to late childhood, and nearly 95% of the
rare diseases affecting children are currently without treatment. It is estimated that one in 15 children
are born with a rare disease, and many of these children diebefore their first birthday: rare diseases
account for 30-40% of neonatal deaths in Canada. One in four pediatric hospital beds are currently being
occupied by a child with a rare disease.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion overtwo years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, as well as Budget 2021, this includes working with provinces, territories and stakeholders to
establisha national strategy for drugs for rare diseases for launch in 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadiansget better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases to be launched in 2022.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON COLLABORATION WITH STAKEHOLDERS…
• We held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on March
26th, 2021. Canadians-especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their parents and
caregivers-were invited to provide their views on the national strategyby participating in a public town
hall or completing the online questionnaire. A “What We Heard” report summarizing key themes and
feedback that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement has been published on the
engagement webpage.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, a second phase of targeted engagement comprising stakeholder
roundtables is taking place over April and May 2022 to seek feedback on a draft framework for the
strategy and further inform the development of the national strategy.
• Productive discussions are also ongoing with provincial and territorial counterparts.
IF PRESSED ON STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
toward delivering a national strategy for launch in 2022.
• Based on input to date, Health Canada has now developed a draft framework for the national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, Health Canada is hosting targeted roundtables with stakeholders
throughout April and May 2022 to help finalize the national strategy.
• The Government of Canada is working to launch the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in 2022 with the support of all those involved.
IF PRESSED ON MORE DETAILS ON THE DRAFT FRAMEWORK FOR THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• Based on what we have heard from stakeholders and partners to date through previous
engagement, Health Canada has developed a draft framework for the national strategy.
• The draft framework is comprised of four pillars and eight principles, as well as potential
activities that could be part of each pillar.
• Health Canada is now holding targeted consultations to seek feedback on the draft framework,
explore how stakeholders could contribute to achieving the strategy objectives, discuss implementation
considerations, and understand stakeholder preferences for involvement and engagement in the
implementation.
• The implementation of a strategy will providepeople across Canada with access to drugs for
rare diseases, while enabling federal, provincial, and territorial governments, stakeholders, and experts
to work together to enhance coordination across Canada’s drugs for rare diseases landscape.
IF PRESSEDON MORE DETAIL RELATED TO THE CANADIAN ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDERS’
(CORD) RESPONSE …
• The Canadian Organization for Rare Disorders (CORD) is a key stakeholder supporting Health
Canada’s development of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
• CORD has been very engaged with Health Canada on the development of the national strategy.
They participated in the initial broad public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, follow-up
meetings in the summer of 2021 after the publication of the What We Heard Report, and the second
phase of targeted engagement to provide feedback on the draft framework in spring of 2022.
• Health Canada is appreciative of CORD’s feedback and perspectives and looks forward to
continuing to work with CORD throughout the development and implementation of the national
strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
IF PRESSEDON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH….
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases.Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON TRIKAFTA…
• Health Canada understands that patients with Cystic Fibrosis (CF) want faster access to new and
promising drugs, particularly when limited treatment options are available.
• Recognizing the importance of this new treatment option for patients, following a priority
review, on June 18, 2021, Health Canada authorized Trikafta for CF patients aged 12 years and older,
with a gene mutation found in 90% of patients. It was approved in an aligned review with the Canadian
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), which expedited the review and reimbursement
recommendation process. Furthermore, on April 20, 2022, Health Canada approved Trikafta for children
ages six to 11 with the same gene mutation.
• The pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) undertook negotiations to reach a mutual
agreement with Vertex Pharmaceuticals for Trikafta and individual jurisdictions have begun to make
decisions as to whether they will cover the drug under their drug plans.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect smallnumbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
publichealth care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rarediseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for allpublic plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
Currently,Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considersrequests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment
of rare diseases.
SPECIFIC CHALLENGES FOR CHILDREN WITH RARE DISEASES
The four main challenges that are exacerbated for Canadian children with rare diseases and their
families are: (1) the inadequate receipt of paediatric data, particularly in comparison to counterparts in
the US and Europe; (2) barriers to paediatric clinical trials; (3) economic challenges associated with
developing, marketing, and maintaining a stable paediatric drug supply; and (4) current widespread use
of off-label medications in children.
Economic, ethical, regulatory, and infrastructure considerations associated with the conduct of child
health research have limited the numbers of clinical trials conducted with children. There are several
challenges specific to conducting clinical trials with a pediatric population with rare conditions that have
contributed to current gaps in the evidence baseon medicines for children. These challenges include the
difficulty to obtain a sufficient sample size to design and execute a well-powered clinical trial, and the
lack of special methodological and analytic expertise required to conduct innovative and adaptive study
types.
Despite these challenges, there is growing recognition of the undesired consequences of the vast gap in
knowledge, such as a lack of information to guide dosing, inappropriate formulations, less than optimal
clinical and patient-orientedoutcomes, and issues related to transitioning into adulthood.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on drugs for rare diseases, including on new
drugs for specific patient cases, and generalcalls emphasizing the need for a national strategy.
To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ONDRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partners for federal funding for drugs for rare diseases.
Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy–and the balance of access vs. affordability
vs. appropriate use–will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also help manage
expectations around the limits of federal funding.
In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials to
establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national strategy.
A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and continued through early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
Two specific meetings with pediatric stakeholders including clinicians and researchers were held in April
2021, and a follow-up meeting to discuss next steps took place in June 2021. Pediatric stakeholders also
reached out to Health CanadaMarch 2022 to submit and discuss their proposal for the national strategy
for drugs for rare diseases.
Over the summer, as a follow up to the What We Heard Report, Health Canada continued discussions
with patients and caregivers, and other stakeholders and partners to build a strategy that will work for
all Canadians. Based on input received to date, a draft framework for the national strategy was
developed. Further targeted consultations to seek feedback on this draft framework and further inform
a comprehensive model for the national strategy are taking place throughout April and May 2022.
Pediatric stakeholders have been invited to the clinicians roundtable as well as the researchers
roundtable. With the support of all those involved, the Government of Canada will work towards
launching the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases in 2022.
THE CANADIAN ORGANIZATION FOR RARE DISORDER’S (CORD) RESPONSE TO THE DRAFT FRAMEWORK
FOR THE NATIONAL STRATEGY
CORD recently published a public response to thedraft framework. They validated the stakeholder
views presented in the What We Heard Report, but they feel the draft framework uses vague language
and lacks meaningful commitment to actions or timelines. CORD was underwhelmed by the strategy’s
vision and principles presented in the draft framework. They also wanted more clarity around what the
advisory structures could look like and how they would function as part of the strategy. CORD also
proposed providing drug coverage for new transformative life-savingtherapies, rather than focusing on
an initial list of drugs of common concern.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries. As of 2017,this
international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for rare diseases.
Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting in 2021-2022, for the CIHR
to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-2022, in
support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over five
years, starting in 2022-23,for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-start
the new Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation
programming.
Budget 2021 proposed to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towardsgrowing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem CellNetwork to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for drugs for rare diseases.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
• The government is committed to creating a new Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency). The
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) is engaging provinces, territories, and stakeholders to
develop options for the mandate and functions of the new agency. The CDATO also supports work on
other pharmacare-related initiatives (e.g., national formulary, drugs for rare diseases strategy).
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 announced the creation of a new national drug agency that would build on existing
provincial and territorial successes and take a coordinatedapproach to improving the Canadian
pharmaceuticals management system.
• The Budget provided $35 million over 4 years, starting in 2019–20, to establish a CDATO to
design the agency.
• In April 2021, the government announced Susan Fitzpatrick, a former Associate Deputy Minister
of Health from Ontario, as the head of the CDATO.
• The CDATO has conducted analysis of the current pharmaceuticals management system and
undertaken significant engagement. CDATO has held over 200 meetings and roundtables to date
including with all provinces and territories, stakeholders, Indigenous representatives, and international
leaders in pharmaceuticals management.
• In December 2021, the Prime Minister reinforced the commitment to creating the CDA in the
Minister of Health’s mandate letter, stating the government would “continue engaging with willing
provinces and territories towards national universal pharmacare, while proceeding with a national
strategy on high-cost drugs for rare diseases and advancing the establishment of the Canada [sic] Drug
Agency.”
• In March 2022, the Prime Minister elaborated on the mandate of the CDA in the Supply and
Confidence Agreement with the New Democratic Party of Canada, announcing the CDA will “develop a
national formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement” in
2025.
KEY MESSAGES
• Prescription drug prices in Canada are among the highest in the developed world.
• High prices and patchwork of drug coverage leave many Canadians facing significant barriers to
getting the prescription drugs they need.
• Creating the CDA will provide the dedicated leadership and capacity needed to implement
national priorities for improving the pharmaceuticals system.
• The CDA will provide the structure and national coordination required to support efforts to
make our drug system more accessible, sustainable and prepared for the future.
• Since April 2021, the Transition Office has held over 200 meetings and roundtables with
provinces and territories and a wide range of stakeholders to inform the development of the Agency.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
• Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
• The CDA will focus on addressing system gaps and removing duplication, improving national
coordination while improving access and equity in the system. The CDA will not duplicate well-
performing functions or organizations.
• Creating the CDA will also provide the dedicated leadership and capacity needed to implement
national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
• In the face of mounting pressures on provincial and territorial healthcare systems, especially in
the wake of COVID-19, the timing is right for an Agency dedicated to supporting a coordinated national
approach.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS TO DATE
• COVID-19 sent shock waves through the entire healthcare system and Health Canada was no
exception.
• If we have learned anything from the pandemic, it is that we need a coordinated national
approach to ensure timely, affordable access to high quality drugs and vaccines.
• Since April 2021, the Transition Office has held over 200 meetings and roundtables with
provinces and territories and a wide range of stakeholders to inform the Agency.
• This continuing work will inform options for creating the Agency, including its mandate and
functions.
• We will continue to collaborate with willing provinces, territories, and other partners towards
launching the Agency.
IF PRESSED ON RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
• Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration will be the cornerstone of the CDA, and we will
continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward launching the Agency.
BACKGROUND
1. Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• Budget 2018 announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National
Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins.
• The Council engaged with Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial, and Indigenous leaders,
health care experts, and stakeholders through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire,
and written submissions.
• On June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the
implementation of national universal pharmacare over several years, including FPT collaboration to
create a new arms-length Canadian drug agency with the following functions:
o Assessing the clinical effectiveness of drugs compared to other treatment options
o Assessing the cost effectiveness of drugs compared toother treatment options
o Deciding which drugs and related products (such as devices and supplies) should be on the
national formulary
o Negotiating prices and supply arrangements with manufacturers
o Providing advice to prescribers, pharmacists, and patients on how best to use drugs
o Monitoring the safety and effectiveness of drugs in real-world use
2. Budget Commitments
• Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements
of national pharmacare
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices.
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of anational strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support this initiative.It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years,
starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases
access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2021.
3. Impact of COVID-19
Media and Public Opinion
• Media coverage of COVID-19 has increased public awareness of some elements of the
pharmaceuticals management system (e.g., science, brand names, regulatory approvals, domestic
production capacity, and supply distribution). Long-term impact on overall trust for the system is still to
be determined but may be impacted.
• National pharmacare continues to receive a moderate volume of mixed media coverage. Recent
coverage has highlighted the range of stakeholder views regarding the need for a national pharmacare
plan.
• An October 2020, Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians say they have
had to pay for half or more of their prescription drug costs over the pastyear. Against this backdrop of
COVID-19, nearly nine-in-ten Canadians support the idea (86%) of an affordable drugs program and
more than seven-in-ten (77%) supporting increased coverage should be a high priority for government.
Provinces and Territories
• Through the Council of the Federation, provincial and territorial Premiers publicly and
persistently call on the federal government to increase funding for healthcare through the Canada
Health Transfer (CHT). These calls have intensified due to the consequences of COVID-19 on healthcare
systems.
• Ahead of the federal election in August 2021, Premiers called on all federal party leaders to
commit to increasing the CHT, citing COVID-19 as having exacerbated existing stresses in the health care
system.
• Following the federal election in September 2021, Premiers called on the Prime Minister to hold
an urgent First Ministers’ Meeting on long-term, unconditional health funding and reiterated their call
for an immediate increase to the CHT. In February 2022,Premiers called for a First Ministers’ Agreement
on Sustainable Health Care Funding.
• The financial request from the Council is for the federal government to increase its share of
health care costs from 22% to 35% of total health care spending and to maintain this contribution level
over time with a minimum annual escalator of 5%.
4. Canada’s Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
• The core functions of pharmaceuticals management in Canada, as elsewhere, revolve around
activities related to scientific evidence, pricing, and reimbursement, and ultimately coverage. Access to
and use of Data to inform decisions is a significant and growing consideration, as is post-market
research, which plays an increasingly important role in reviewing and refining decisions related to
pharmaceutical products.
• Responsibilities for aspects of Canada’s system are situated in relation to jurisdictional roles and
responsibilities.
• Some functions, introduced in response to emerging system demands, new technologies, and
evolving market factors, are challenging to reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and
the provisions of the Canada Health Act.
• This evolution has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
o Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug
o Data, real-world evidence, and analytical capacity
o Health outcomes and appropriate use
o Negotiations, pricing mechanisms and sustainability
Scientific Review of Drug Safety and Effectiveness
• Regulatory Market Authorization: The federal government, through the Minister of Health, is
responsible for reviewing the safety, quality, and efficacy of health products, including pharmaceuticals
and medical devices , and authorizing their sale in Canada. This function is out of scope for the CDATO.
• Clinical and Cost-Effectiveness Reviews: The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in
Health (CADTH) is an independent not-for-profit organization that delivers timely, evidence-based
information to health-care decision-makers about the clinical and cost effectiveness of pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, diagnostics, and procedures. A core program area for CADTH is advice for drug
coverage and listing decisions.
• Quebec conducts its own clinical and cost-effectiveness reviews through INESSS, which has a
mandate to promote clinical excellence and the efficient use of resources in the health and social
services sector in Quebec.
Pricing
• Price Regulation: The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is a federal quasi-judicial
tribunal that regulates price ceilings for all patented pharmaceuticals in order to guard against excessive
profit taking. The PMPRB mandate includes reporting on price and use trends as well as research and
development activities by pharmaceutical companies in Canada.
• Price Negotiation: The provincial and territorial governments created the pan-Canadian
Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) in 2010; federal drug plans joined in 2016. The pCPA brings the collective
buying power of FPT governments to price negotiations with drug companies to achieve optimal drug
pricing outcomes for public payers. The pCPA does not include private payers. Canadians with no
coverage pay the highest regulated prices.
Coverage and Reimbursement
• Public Drug Plans: Although outpatient drug coverage isnot a mandatory feature of Canada’s
healthcare system, each of Canada’s provinces and territories offer drug coverage to some residents,
generally vulnerable or at-risk populations such as those with low income, high drug costs, or significant
health conditions. The federal government provides drug plans for some populations, including First
Nations and Inuit. Each public drug plan maintains a formulary that lists eligible drugs and the terms and
conditions of reimbursement.
• Private Drug Plans: Many working Canadians receive employer-sponsored health benefits that
typically include drug insurance. Each private plan also has a unique formulary; consequently, the terms,
conditions and limits of coverage vary from plan to plan. Employers are not required tooffer health
benefits, and many employees of small businesses, casual workers, and participants in the “gig”
economy do not have employer-sponsored coverage.
• No/Inadequate Plans: A relatively small but important share of Canadians have insufficient drug
coverage and approximately 11% of Canadians no coverage at all. Canadian patients pay nearly one
quarter (22%) of total prescription drug costs out-of-pocket.
• Mandatory coverage: Quebec is the only jurisdiction that requires citizens have prescription
drug insurance coverage, either through mandatory opt-in to a private plan or mandatory participation
in the public plan.
MODERNIZATION OF THE PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD (PMPRB)
OBJET
• L’industrie des produits pharmaceutiques de marque a exprimé ses inquiétudes quant au fait
que les modifications réglementaires pourraient entraîner une réduction des investissements
pharmaceutiques et de l’accès aux médicaments. Par ailleurs, elle a engagé des poursuites judiciaires à
cet effet. À ce jour, la Cour fédérale a décidé de maintenir la plupart des modifications, mais a déclaré la
collecte de renseignements confidentiels sur les rabais invalide. Cette décision fait actuellement l’objet
d’un appel par les demandeurs et d’un appel incident par le Procureur Général. Dans un litige distinct, la
Cour d’appel du Québec a conclu que les trois nouveaux facteurs de réglementation des prix et de la
collecte de renseignements confidentiels sur les rabais étaient invalides. Aucune des parties n'a décidé
de demander l'autorisation d'en appeler de la décision devant la Cour suprême du Canada, ces
dispositions seraient sans effet au Québec.
ISSUE
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry has expressed concerns that the regulatory
amendments could result in reducedpharmaceutical investments and reduced access to medicines.
They have also filed legal proceedings. To date, the Federal Court ruled to maintain most of the
Amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information. This ruling is currently
the subject of an appeal by the applicants and cross-appeal by the Crown. In a separate challenge, the
Court of Appeal of Québec found that the three new price regulatory factors and collection of
confidential rebate information to be invalid. Neitherparty has decided to seek leave to appeal the
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada, therefore those provisions would be of no force or effect in
Québec.
KEY FACTS
• The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of alladjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six
months due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2021, stakeholders
were informed of another 6-month delay to July 1, 2022.
• The most recent delay provides additional time for impacted stakeholders to continue to focus
their efforts on combatting the pandemic, but also recognizes the changing pharmaceutical landscape
since the Amendments were first introduced and the need for additional discussions with stakeholders.
• Furtherto consultations with stakeholders in March 2022 on a way forward, Health Canada is
moving forward with the coming-into-force on July 1, 2022, of the new basket of comparator countries
and reduced reporting requirements for medicines with lowest risk of excessive pricing of the Patented
Medicine Regulations.
• The Government will not proceed with the Amendments related to the new price regulatory
factors, nor with the requirements to file information net of all price adjustments. This will be reflected
inthe Canada Gazette in late spring 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world. Our Government’s focus
remains on helping Canadians access the prescription medicines they need.
• In addition to these regulatorychanges, the Government continues its work to streamline the
approval of new drugs, advance on universal national pharmacare, develop a national strategy for drugs
for rare diseases, and proceed with an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
• These developments will improve the accessibility of new medicines for people in Canada and
support the sustainability of the health care system, while at the same time supporting innovation and
investment in the pharmaceutical sector.
IF PRESSED ONTHE IMPACT OF THE COMING-INTO-FORCE OF THE AMENDMENTS…
• The Government is proceeding with implementing the new basket of comparator countries and
reduced reporting requirements for medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing on July 1, 2022.
• The modernized regulations will equip the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
with updated tools to regulate excessive prices of patented medicines.
• This is expected to generate significant savings over the coming years, which will improve access
for Canadians to quality medicines.
IF PRESSED ON THE AMENDMENTS NOT COMING-INTO-FORCE…
• The Government will not proceed with the Amendments related to the new price regulatory
factors, nor with the requirements to file information net of all price adjustments.
• This will be reflected in Canada Gazette in late Spring 2022.
• The Government will continue its work to streamline the approval of new drugs, advance on
universal national pharmacare, develop a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and proceed with
an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO COVID-19 PATENTEDMEDICINES (Drugs and Vaccines)…
• Our Government is committed to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines,
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its revised Guidelines, the PMPRB indicated that special consideration would be given to
specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-
wide effortto ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19
diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention.
• Under this approach, the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada wouldnot be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
• The PMPRB has committed to launching consultations on a new and different set of Guidelines
to operationalize the aspects of the Amendments that will come into force July 1, 2022.
• The Government looks forward to the results of the PMPRB’s consultation process.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government ofCanada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
IS RELATED TO THE QUEBEC COURT OF APPEAL DECISION…
• Health Canada’s decision to move forward follows consultation with stakeholders in March 2022
and thoughtful analysis of the current environment as we transition to the ongoing management of
COVID-19.
• Since the Amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations were proposed in 2019, the
pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically, a new context has developed brought on by the
pandemic, coupled with the progression of various initiatives seeking to improve accessibility and
affordability for needed medicines.
• The way forward takes into consideration the launch of major new federal initiatives such as
implementing national universal pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON INNOVATIVE MEDICINES CANADAV. CANADA (ATTORNEY GENERAL) …
• This matter is before the courts and we are monitoring it closely.
• Byproceeding forward with the new basket and reduced reporting requirements for medicines
with lowest risk of excessive pricing, the Government can continue to protect Canadians from excessive
prices of patented medicines.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH THE PMPRB GUIDELINES CONSULTATION PROCESS…
• The PMPRB has committed to launching consultations on a new and different set of Guidelines
to operationalize the aspects of the Amendments that will come into force July 1, 2022.
• The PMPRB’s upcoming consultationdoes not affect the coming into force of the revised
Amendments.
• The Government looks forward to the results of the PMPRB’s consultation process.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of thegovernment,
reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market. The
PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to
determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so)order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire into any
matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicinesrelative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth, and medicine markets as Canada.
On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB reviseddraft Guidelines on June 19, 2020 and
published its updated Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six months
due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic.On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were
informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021. In December 2020, stakeholders were
notified of another 6-month delay to July 1, 2021. In June 2021, the coming-into-force was delayed
further to January 1,2022. More recently in December 2021, stakeholders were informed of another 6-
month delay to July 1, 2022. These delays provide additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the
new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing them to
continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic. The most recent delay to the coming-into-
force date of the Amendments acknowledged the continuing challenges presented by the pandemic, but
also the evolution of the pharmaceutical landscape since the Amendments were first introduced,
signalling the government’s openness to further discussion with stakeholders.
Since 2019, the pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically, a new context has developed
brought on by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the progression of various initiatives seeking to
improve accessibility and affordability for needed medicines. Health Canada took the opportunity in
March 2022 to consult with stakeholders on a way forward. Further to theseconsultations, the
Government announced on April 14, 2022, it is moving forward with the coming-into-force on July 1,
2022, of the new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting requirements for medicines
with lowest risk of excessive pricing ofthe Patented Medicine Regulations. The Government will not
proceed with the Amendments related to the new price regulatory factors, nor with the requirements to
file information net of all price adjustments. This will be reflected in the Canada Gazette inlate spring
2022.
In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, on January 15,
2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustmentspertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definition of Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance. On April 16, 2021, the Board
revised its decision on the latter, reverting the compliance timeline back to two filing periods. Thus, the
operative date for assessing compliance was shifted to July 1, 2022.
Following the third delay of the coming-into-force, on July 15, 2021, the PMPRB launched a Notice and
Comment on proposed amendments to the Guidelines. The PMPRB proposed to change the definition of
Gap medicines, the references to the comparator countries and the international price tests for
Grandfathered medicines and their line extensions. No change to the compliance date was proposed,
thereby retaining the operative date for Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum
list prices as July 1, 2022. The deadline to submit feedback was August 31, 2021. On December 17, 2021,
the Board announced that it has decided notto proceed with the changes that were proposed in the
Notice and Comment. Following the federal Minister of Health’s statement on April 14, 2022, which
announced the Government’s intention related to the coming into force of the Amending Regulations,
thePMPRB committed to launching consultations on a new and different set of Guidelines to
operationalize the aspects of the Amending Regulations that will come into force July 1, 2022.
Moving forward, the PMPRB is putting in place a Guideline Monitoring andEvaluation Plan (GMEP) to
assess the impact of its Guidelines and inform any future adjustments required to ensure that they are
working as intended. The GMEP will be used to monitor four different areas: impact on prices, impact on
access, impact on the ecosystem and impact on PMPRB processes. For each of these four areas, the
PMPRB, in consultation with its stakeholders, will identify relevant indicators to monitor. Baseline
results (benchmarks) will be generated based on the years immediately preceding the coming-into-force
of the Amendments. Changes will be monitored on an ongoing basis and compared to the benchmarks
to identify and evaluate any relevant changes in the trends in the data.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information. Following this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022,
upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator
countries, but found that the three new price regulatory factors in addition to the collection of
confidential rebate information to be invalid. Neither party has decided to seek leave to appeal the
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed
for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating that
special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-
19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim Orders
will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the federal
Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts. This policy is reflected in the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
ACUTE SEVERE HEPATITIS IN CHILDREN
Issue
Beginning in early April 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) had reported an increase in cases of
acute severe hepatitis in children not caused by known hepatitis viruses. The Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) is collaborating with provincial andterritorial health partners across the country to
investigate cases in Canada. As of May 19, 2022, 10 cases of acute severe hepatitis in children that meet
the national case definition have been identified in Canada. PHAC continues to work with its provincial
and territorial health partners to further investigate these cases.
Key Facts
• Hepatitis is a term for liver inflammation. Depending on the cause, the disease can be very
sudden and progress to liver failure over a few days to weeks (called acute).
• Acute severe hepatitis in children is a relatively rare condition that does occur in Canada. In
many cases, an underlying cause cannot be found. Even in cases where the cause of acute severe
hepatitis is unknown, treatment is available and most children recover with medical care.
• As of May 19, 2022, 10 cases of acute severe hepatitis in children not caused by known hepatitis
viruses have been identified in Canada in 4 provinces: Alberta (3), Manitoba (2), Ontario (4), and Quebec
(1). The children are between 1 and 13 years of age, and became sick between November 3, 2021, and
April 23, 2022. All children were hospitalized. Two children have required liver transplants.No deaths
have been reported.
Key Messages
• Keeping people in Canada safe from threats to their health, and keeping our most vulnerable
citizens safe and healthy, is a top priority of the Government of Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with provincial and territorial health
partners to further investigate cases in Canada. All provinces and territories are continuing to identify
and report potential cases to the Agency so that the national scope of the investigation can be further
defined.
• This is an evolving investigation, both in Canada and internationally. More information is needed
to assess the situation and any potential risks to people in Canada. As the investigation evolves, the
Public Health Agency of Canada will provide updates to the public.
If pressedon cases reported in the media:
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is aware the media has reported possible cases of acute
severe hepatitis in children not caused by known hepatitis viruses in some jurisdictions in Canada.
• Some of these cases met the casedefinition and are currently included in the national
investigation. Other cases are being reviewed further by provincial and territorial health partners to
determine if they meet the national case definition.
If pressed on a link to COVID-19 vaccination:
• According to the World Health Organization, side effects from the COVID-19 vaccines are not
suspected to be the cause of illnesses as the vast majority of affected children did not receive COVID-19
vaccination.
Background
Investigation into acute severe hepatitis in children
On April 5, 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) was notified of 10 cases of acute hepatitis of
unknown etiology in children under 10 years of age in Scotland. Since then, further reports of cases have
continued to be reported internationally, with the majority of cases to date reported from the United
Kingdom. As of May 15, 2022, 429 probable cases have been reported to the WHO among children 16
years of age and younger from 22 countries. Twenty-six children have required liver transplants. At least
6 deaths have been reported to the WHO, but at least 14 deaths have been reported through country-
specific reports or the media.
PHAC is working closely with provincial and territorial health partners to identify and investigatecases in
Canada.
Acute severe hepatitis in children is a relatively rare condition that does occur in Canada. In many cases,
an underlying or contributing cause is unknown. It is important to note that the definition being used to
include cases in the national investigation is very broad. This means that any children with acute severe
hepatitis (inflammation of the liver) where a cause is not certain are being included in initial
investigations. Some of these children may have a diagnosis for their livercondition, but they are being
included to explore possible factors that may have triggered the condition.
It is possible that additional cases will be reported. PHAC has asked provinces and territories (P/Ts) to
look for patients in their jurisdictions,dating back to October 2021, to align with the timeframe
identified in the WHO’s international investigation. PHAC is continuing to work with all P/Ts to identify
potential cases so that the national scope of the investigation can be further defined. PHACis also
engaging with international health authorities and reporting information to the WHO.
The cause of illnesses reported internationally is unknown at this time and active investigation continues
in multiple countries. Adenovirus is currently one of the hypotheses being explored. Adenovirus is a
common virus that typically causes cold or flu-like illness or gastroenteritis. Investigation into other
possible causes and contributing factors, such as previous COVID-19 infection, other infections, and/or
environmental causes (e.g. chemicals and toxins) is continuing. According to the WHO, side effects from
the COVID-19 vaccines are not suspected, as the vast majority of affected children were too young and
did not receive COVID-19 vaccination.
PHAC’s involvement in the investigation
PHAC is collaborating with provincial/territorial public health partners to coordinate an investigation
into potential cases of acute severe hepatitis in children not caused by known hepatitis viruses. Case
definitions, case report forms, and reporting processes have been established and shared with all
partners. PHAC is connecting with international health partners to collect more information about their
investigations. All cases identified in Canada are being reported to the Pan-American Health
Organization and the WHO.
At this time in Canada, we do not know if there has been an increase in cases of acute severe hepatitis in
children not caused by known hepatitis viruses. We are currently analyzing Canadian hospitalization
datato determine the number of cases that we would normally see in Canada over time. This baseline
information will allow us to determine if we are seeing an increase in cases reported.
The National Microbiology Laboratory, in collaboration with the CanadianPublic Laboratory Surveillance
Network, has developed laboratory guidelines for testing cases of acute severe hepatitis in children not
caused by known hepatitis viruses in Canada, and these have been shared with P/Ts.
Symptoms of hepatitis
Symptoms ofacute severe hepatitis include jaundice (yellowing of the skin and eyes), abdominal pain,
nausea, vomiting, dark urine, light-coloured stools, loss of appetite, fever, and fatigue. Even in cases
where the cause of acute severe hepatitis is unknown, treatment is available, and most children recover
with medical care.
Public Communication
On May 10, 2022, PHAC provided an initial media statement to several media outlets on this evolving
issue. On May 20, 2022 PHAC issued an updated media statement to firstreport the number of cases in
Canada. As the investigation evolves, PHAC will provide updates to the public.
ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
Issue
Antimicrobial resistance has become a leading cause of death and has been declared a top global health
threat by the World Health Organization. Coordinated ‘One Health’ action across the human and animal
health sectors and the environment is needed to address the growing threat to Canadians and our
healthcare system.
Key Facts
• Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the top 10 global public health issues and Canada needs
to be prepared to face this threat.
• AMR is characterized by a decline in the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs in treating an
infection. Resistance can develop naturally over time; however, the inappropriate use of antimicrobials
in human and veterinary medicine has greatly accelerated its emergence and spread across the human,
animal, food chain.
• Antimicrobials have been instrumental in medical advances and saving lives. Without effective
antimicrobials, our ability to fight infectious diseases will significantly decline. Routine medical
procedures such as caesarean sections andjoint replacements, and even chemotherapy for cancer
patients that depend on antibiotics, will become riskier for Canadians.
• A 2022 study revealed that AMR is now a leading cause of death worldwide–estimated at
causing over 1.2 million deaths in 2019.The study has garnered significant media attention, ringing the
alarm on the next public health threat.
• There is growing international attention on the urgent need to combat AMR. The 2022 G7
Germany Presidency identified 3 health priorities of which controlling AMR was one. Canada is lagging
behind its international partners who are taking aggressive and concrete steps to address AMR. Canada
tied last among G7 countries in a 2021 study on AMR Preparedness.
• Domestically, the Canadian Antimicrobial Innovation Coalition and McMaster University recently
released a new report entitled, “Antibiotic access and capacity: A grassroots solution to improving
patient access to novel antibiotics in Canada.” The report underscores the seriousness of AMR, its
impacts on the Canadian health care system, and the need for coordinated action across multiple
disciplines and sectors to improve access to antimicrobials through incentivization and regulatory
changes.
• In 2018, 26% of total infections in Canada were resistant to first-line antimicrobial treatment,
and an estimated 15 deaths a day were directly attributable to AMR. The economic cost of AMR is
currently estimated at $2 billion and is projected to grow to $20 billion by 2050.
• Concerted action through the One Health approach that takes into account the linkages
between the health of people, animals, and the environment is necessary to combat AMR.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada recognizes that antimicrobial resistance is increasing worldwide and
is posinga serious and growing threat to human health, the health of animals, and their shared
environment.
• We have made a commitment to work with partners to take increased and expedited action to
monitor, prevent, and mitigate the serious and growing threat of AMR and preserve the effectiveness of
the antimicrobials Canadians rely upon every day.
• In October 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada created a dedicated AMR Task Force to
drive progress on policies, programs and actions to combat AMR both domestically and globally.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has identified two main priorities that will have the greatest
impact on tackling AMR: securing access to new antimicrobials for Canadians, and preserving the
effectiveness of existing and new antimicrobials
• The Government of Canada is making progress. Significant investments have been made in
research in areas such as antimicrobial discovery and alternatives and diagnostics. We are also currently
undertaking a comprehensive assessment of economicpull incentives for encouraging market entry and
sustained market availability of high-value antimicrobials in Canada.
• In parallel to securing access to antimicrobials, we are taking steps to preserve the effectiveness
of the life-saving antimicrobialswe currently have.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed over $28 million over five years, beginning in
2021-22, to expand efforts in key areas of surveillance and monitoring, including integrating wastewater
into our AMR surveillance, leveraging Canada’s success with its COVID-19 wastewater surveillance
experience.
• In addition, we are using public opinion research and behavioural science to better understand
what Canadians know about AMR and antimicrobial use. We will leverage surveillance data and trends
to better target public awareness initiatives, and to implement successful stewardship policies and
practices.
• The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has taught us the importance of a responsive and prepared
public health system. Investing further in antimicrobial resistance efforts now will ensure that Canada
addresses this growing threat in an impactful way to better protect Canadians.
Background
The antibiotics we rely on to treat common infections are becoming less effective, resulting inserious
illness and death. Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of antibiotic treatment.
In Canada in 2018, it is estimated that antimicrobial resistance (AMR) resulted in 5,400 deaths, $1.4
billion in healthcare system costs, and a loss of $2 billion in GDP. If current AMR trends are left
unchecked, by 2050 cumulative costs could rise as high as 396,000 lives, $120 billion in healthcare costs,
and $388 billion in GDP.
There is sustained momentum to address AMR through collaboration and concerted action, both
domestically and globally.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
The Government of Canada, through Budget 2021, committed $28.6 million over five years, beginning in
2021-22, with $5.7 million per year ongoing,to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health
Canada, and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. These investments will support efforts to prevent
the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand efforts to monitor the emergence of AMR in Canada.
An AMR Task Force was created within PHAC to establish a clear focus for AMR work across federal
departments and agencies. The AMR Task Force will spearhead and coordinate federal actions to
combat AMR, as well as mobilize and collaborate with domestic andinternational partners and
stakeholder groups to optimize the effectiveness of AMR actions.
The Government of Canada outlined its commitment to addressing AMR in the Federal Framework on
AMR and its supporting Action Plan under a One Health approach. InJuly 2018, the first Progress Report
on the Federal Action Plan was released.
Recognizing that the federal government cannot reduce the threat of AMR alone, and consistent with
our international partners, the Government of Canada led efforts with provinces, territories, and
stakeholders to develop the pan-Canadian AMR Framework, which was released in September 2017.
Work has been underway on a pan-Canadian AMR Action Plan to identify optimal and concrete actions
to address this complex issue across the human and animal health, and agri-food sectors. This work has
been undertaken in consultation, and with input from provincial and territorial partners and key
stakeholders. The focus by all jurisdictions on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed
progress on finalizing the Action Plan. PHAC is working with federal departments, and provinces and
territories to determine the way forward to ensure that governments and stakeholders can advance
priority actions on AMR in the short and medium-term.
The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), leads Canada’s
research efforts and is a global leader in AMR research. Over the past five years, CIHR has invested over
$138 million in AMR-related research, investing $26.3 million in 2019-2020 alone, to strengthen
research in areas such as antimicrobial discovery, target identification, alternatives, diagnostics,
surveillance, and stewardship.
CIHR is also a founding member and major funder of the Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial
Resistance (JPIAMR)—a collaboration of 28 member states aimed at coordinating research in AMR to
achieve long-term reductions in resistance levels and better public health outcomes. Through CIHR,
Canada is leading the development of theJPIAMR Virtual Research Institute—a global virtual network of
researchers, facilities and infrastructure of AMR research.
The Government of Canada participates in international forums, such as the G7, G20, World Health
Organization and United Nations toadvance AMR and other priorities with like-minded partners. At the
G7 Health Ministers’ call on November 17, 2021, and the G7 Finance Ministers’ call on December 13,
2021, Canada supported statements calling for efforts to promote the appropriate valuationof
antimicrobials and expand consideration of options to improve the antimicrobial pipeline. At the
working level, the federal government participates on numerous technical groups to address AMR and
antimicrobial use issues related to human health, animalhealth, and food production.
Regulatory and Policy Changes
As of 2017, amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations, including policy changes under
existing regulatory tools, to address gaps in the regulation of veterinary drugs to support the prudent
use of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) in animals by:
• controlling the “own use” importation of veterinary drugs
• increasing oversight on importation and quality of veterinary active pharmaceutical ingredients
• facilitating access to low risk veterinary health products, as additional tools to enhance animal
health and wellness
• requiring reports of veterinary antimicrobial sales to support resistance surveillance;
• removing growth promotion claims from MIAs
• increasing veterinary oversight with prescriptions required before the sale of all MIAs
Health Canada continues to work with other federal partners to focus on enhancing animal health and
wellness in order to reduce the reliance on routine use of antimicrobials in animals. In 2020, Health
Canada published a risk-based approach to determine whether the availability of antimicrobials in
veterinary medicine may contribute to AMR in humans (that is, whether it increases the risk that
antimicrobials become ineffective in treating infections in humans).
Additionally, Health Canada maintains a Pathogens of Interest List that serves to inform companies of
the bacterial pathogens in most urgent need of innovative therapeutic products in Canada. Health
Canada has also sponsored a challenge under the Innovative Solutions Canada program, where up to $1
million is available to innovators and entrepreneurs to support the development of new, easy-to-use
and cost effective, point-of-care diagnostic tools to help combat the rise of AMR.
AUTISM
Issue
The Government of Canada is committed toimproving the health and well-being of autistic Canadians
and to supporting caregivers. The Government is also committed to working collaboratively with
provinces, territories, families, autistic Canadians, and stakeholders toward the creation of a national
autism strategy.
Key Facts
• Autism (also known as autism spectrum disorder or ASD) is a lifelong neurodevelopmental
condition. Every Autistic person has a unique combination of symptoms, symptom intensity and co-
occurring conditions. Since everyone experiences the condition differently, supports should match
individual needs.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to helping and supporting the needs of all Canadians
with disabilities, including neurodevelopmental conditions like autism,as well as those who care for
them and provide much-needed support.
• Budget 2021 provided $15.4 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to work collaboratively
with provinces, territories, families and stakeholders toward the creation of a nationalautism strategy.
• Budget 2022 provided $20 million to the Ready, Willing and Able project to help Autistic persons
or individuals with intellectual disabilities find employment. This is part of a larger commitment to invest
an additional $272.6 million over five years, starting in 2022-2023, for the implementation of the
Employment Strategy through the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities. This investment will
help to address labour market shortages through increased participation by persons with disabilities
including ASD and make workplaces more accessible and inclusive.
• The findings of the Canadian Academy of Health Sciences’ engagement activities and scientific
review will be used along with PHAC’s engagement with federal partners, provinces, territories,
Indigenous Peoples, families and other stakeholders to inform the Government of Canada in the
creation of a national autism strategy.
BACKGROUND
In the Minister of Health’s 2021 Mandate Letter, the Prime Minister asks the Minister to work in
collaboration with provinces, territories, families and stakeholders, to accelerate the development of
the national autism strategy. This reiterates the 2019 Mandate Letter commitment to work towards the
creation of a national autism strategy.
Government of Canada Initiatives: the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is leading the
development of a national autism strategy. A strategic decision was taken to provide $1.67 million to the
Canadian Academy of Health Sciences (CAHS) to undertake a neutral, arms-length assessment on
autism.
The CAHS’ consultation process, launched in February 2021, was broad, inclusive, evidence-based and
provided all Canadians the opportunity to inform the development of the strategy. In recognition of the
breadth ofissues to be considered to develop a strategy that reflects diverse needs, the CAHS applied a
social determinants of health lens in their approach to gathering evidence and structuring the dialogue
by focusing on 3 key themes: social inclusion, economic inclusion and evidence-based supports.
A thorough evidence and scientific review was conducted by the CAHS that included: published
research, reports from government and organizations, best practices and Canadian and International
policies.
The CAHS AutismAssessment Report was published on May 10, 2022. Their findings are divided into 3
key themes: social inclusion, economic inclusion and evidence-based supports and cut across multiple
levels of government (federal, provincial and territorial) who are responsible for providing support for
autistic Canadians. Overarching themes, including intersectionality and diversity were also identified.
The report can be found on the CAHS website and will be promoted on their social media, traditional
media and meetingswith some stakeholders. PHAC continues to engage with provinces, territories, and
Indigenous Peoples, through a variety of mechanisms, regarding the national autism strategy. PHAC is
organizing a national conference on November 15-16, 2022 to build consensus on the priorities for
action towards a national autism strategy.
The Government of Canada will consider the CAHS report along with all other feedback received from
federal partners, provinces, territories, Indigenous Peoples, families, and other stakeholders to create a
strategy that improves the health and well-being of Autistic Canadians and their caregivers.
Budget 2021: the $15.4 million announced in Budget 2021 includes funding to support strategy
development ($4.1 million), address gaps in autismspectrum disorder surveillance ($2.2 million), and
assist with the development of IT infrastructure to support data collection ($0.7 million).
PHAC Investments: Budget 2018 provided $20 million over five years to support two new initiatives:
1) The Autismand Intellectual Disabilities Knowledge Exchange Network (AIDE Canada) ($10.9 million/5
years) provides access to online resources, including an inventory of services, supports, employment
opportunities and local programming for families across the country. Six AIDE Canada locations across
the country provide a point of access for Canadians to obtain resources and supports on autism. AIDE
Canada also released a COVID-19 Resource Hub to share up-to-date, trusted information related to
COVID-19 specificallytailored to, or relevant for, Canadians on the autism spectrum, their families and
caregivers; and
2) The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategic Fund is providing $9.1 million over 5 years for community-
based projects that pursue innovative program models, help reduce stigma, and integrate health, social
and educational components to better serve the complex needs of Autistic Canadians and their families.
PHAC provided $102,189 to the Canadian Paediatric Society to develop autism Guidelines for early
detectionand screening, diagnosis, and post-diagnosis follow-up (released October 2019).
PHAC Surveillance Activities: In support of the development of a national autism strategy, PHAC
continues to enhance surveillance of autism spectrum disorder to provide evidence that informs future
related investments and activities. PHAC is working with federal, provincial, territorial and Indigenous
partners, researchers and autism stakeholders to enhance its autism surveillance activities through the
development of new dataand reporting on prevalence, including all jurisdictions, expanding to all age
ranges (children, youth and adults), co-occurring conditions as well as other important demographic and
equity indicators. On February 3rd 2022, PHAC released a report titled “Autism Spectrum Disorder–
Highlights from the 2019 Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth.” This report is one of the key
commitments made as part of Budget 2021 to support the development of a national autism strategy. It
provides new evidence on prevalence, health status and life experiences of Canadian children and youth
with diagnosed ASD, prior to the COVID-19 pandemic.
Budget 2022: PHAC is investing over $3.9 million over three years to support the collection of a second
cycle of the Canadian Health Survey on Children and Youth (CHSCY). Similar to the 2019 CHSCY, this
second cycle of CHSCY will allow for further reporting on the prevalence and characteristics of autistic
Canadian children and youth as well as, the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic and information
regarding their pathway to diagnosis.
CIHR Investments: Over the last five years CIHR has invested approximately $68 million in research to
increase our understanding of autism and to provide better services and supports to autisticCanadians
and their caregivers.
This includes research on the development of innovative technologies for children with autism and their
families. For instance, an interdisciplinary team led by Dr. Francois Bolduc from the University of Alberta
is creatingan artificial intelligence-based interactive ‘chatbot’ that will allow persons with autism (and
other neurodevelopmental disorders), their families, health professionals and teachers to better
navigate the healthcare system by identifying personalized interventions and resources through
machine learning.
Dr. Lai at McGill University is exploring the relationship between research and policy, with the goal of
improving how children (and their families) with ASD and other developmental brain-based conditions,
access much-needed services and supports throughout their lifespan.
Through Canada’s Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research, CIHR and its partners are investing in CHILD-
BRIGHT, an innovative pan-Canadian network that aims to improve life outcomes for children with
brain-based developmental disabilities and their families. The network’s many projects include:
• “Ready 2 Work”, an online vocational/employment readiness platform developed alongside self-
advocates who operate vocational programs for young people with autism; and
• “MEGA TEAM”, which is evaluating whether a take-home video game can improve executive
functioning in children with autism.
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC): In April 2020, Minister Qualtrough established the
COVID-19 Disability Advisory Group, to provide real-time expert advice on the lived experiences of
persons with disabilities and ensure a disability-inclusive approach to the Government of Canada’s
response to the pandemic, in keeping with a “Nothing Without Us” approach. The Advisory Group
published a report in December 2020 outlining its recommendations and the Government’s actions to
support persons with disabilities during the pandemic. With a renewed mandate, the Advisory Group is
building on previous work and will continue to provide expert advice on disability inclusion within
Government priorities and on implementation of Government programs and policies.
The December 2021 Government mandate letters reaffirmed the September 2020 Speech from the
Throne commitment to bring forward Canada’s Disability Inclusion Action Plan (DIAP) to improve the
economic inclusion and quality of life for Canadians with disabilities. As part of this action plan, the
government is developing a robust Employment Strategy for persons with disabilities. This Strategy will
take a holistic and intersectional view of the experiences of persons with disabilities in the workforce. It
will include measures to expand access to skills training and opportunities for workers and
entrepreneurs, while also supporting employers to create inclusive workplaces. A cornerstone of the
Plan is the proposed new Canada Disability Benefit . The Plan will also include measures that support
accessible and inclusive communities, and that advance the adoption of a modern approach to disability
across the Government of Canada including a better process to determine eligibility for Government
disability programs and benefits.
The DIAP will be iterative and updated over time. In engagement with the disability community, it will
be built upon and refreshed, and grounded in the principle of “Nothing without Us”. It is a whole-of-
government plan that crosses overdepartmental responsibilities.
Employment Support (through the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities Program): To
improve employment outcomes for persons with intellectual disabilities and autism, the Government of
Canada’s Opportunities Fundfor Persons with Disabilities has invested over $40 million since 2014-2015
in the Ready, Willing and Able (RWA) project. RWA is a national employment program for autistic
persons and individuals with intellectual disabilities that is delivered through apartnership between
Inclusion Canada (formerly the Canadian Association for Community Living) and the Canadian Autism
Spectrum Disorders Alliance. Over the same period, the program has invested over $13.3 million in skills
training and employment projectstargeting persons with ASD delivered by the Sinneave Family
Foundation. Moreover, Budget 2022 provides an additional $272.6 million over five years, starting in
2022-2023 for the implementation of the Employment Strategy under the Opportunities Fund. This
investment will help to address labour market shortages through increased participation by persons
with disabilities including ASD and make workplaces more accessible and inclusive. Of these funds, $20
million is allocated to the RWA project to help persons with ASD or intellectual disabilities find
employment
Senate Bill S-203–An Act Respecting a Federal Framework for Autism Spectrum Disorder: On November
24, 2021, the Honourable Leo Housakos introduced in the Senate Bill S-203, An Act Respecting a Federal
Framework on Autism Spectrum Disorder. The purpose of the Bill is to bring forth the development of a
federal framework designed to support autistic Canadians, their families and their caregivers. The Bill
outlines requirements for the development of afederal framework, including measures to be provided,
such as financial support for autistic persons, support for caregivers, online resources and best practices,
a national research network and a national awareness campaign. The Bill also sets out requirements for
consultation, a national conference, and regular reporting to Parliament on implementation of the
federal framework.
Bill Status: Bill S-203 was referred to Committee on December 8, 2021. On April 27, 2022, the Standing
Committee on Social Affairs, Science and Technology (SOCI) passed the Bill (as amended during clause
by clause consideration on April 6, 2022). On May 12, 2022, the Bill, as amended, was passed in the
Senate and then referred to the House of Commons.
Provincial/Territorial Support: All provinces provide autism-specific funding for a range of services and
supports with current investments focused on interventions, services and education supports for pre-
school and school-aged children. While the three territories do not have any autism-specific funding,
they do have supports for broader disability services, which includes autism.
Language Note: A “person-first” approach, which acknowledges the person before the disability is seen
in wording such as “individuals with autism”. In “identity-first” language, you would see phrases such as
“autistic Canadian”. The language used to describe an individual is personal. The Government of Canada
acknowledges the diverse views of Autistic Canadians, their caregivers and the community as whole. It is
encouraged to use an individual’s expressed preferred language whenever possible.
CANCER
Issue
Cancer continues to be the leading cause of death in Canada. The Canadian Cancer Society in
conjunction with the Public Health Agency of Canada and Statistics Canada estimates that approximately
two in five Canadians will develop cancer in their lifetime and one in four will die of the disease.
Key Facts
• Four cancers-breast, lung, colorectal, and prostate-account for 46 percent of all cancers.
Canada continues to see an increase in the number of individuals diagnosed with cancer. This is
primarilydue to the aging and growing population.
• Cancer also occurs in children, with children under the age of four being almost twice as likely to
be newly diagnosed with cancer than children 5-14 years old.
• Approximately 1,000 children are diagnosed with some form of cancer every year. Close to 84
percent of children survive a cancer diagnosis after five years, and this survival rate is expected to
improve with new and better treatments.
Key Messages
• Our Government recognizes that cancer is a healthissue that impacts nearly all Canadians,
either through a personal diagnosis or that of a loved one at some point over their lives.
• Our Government continues to fund the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer at close to $50
million annually. The Partnershipis having an impact on the lives of Canadians through its work on
prevention, early detection, treatment and support for those living with cancer.
• We are also committed to supporting research in the fight against cancer. Through the Canadian
Institutesof Health Research, we invested more than $900 million over the last five years toward cancer
research and we recently announced an additional $30 million to fund targeted research for pediatric
cancers.
• Additionally, the federal government conducts ongoing cancer-focused surveillance and
research, and invests in community-based interventions that address the common risk factors for
chronic disease, such as physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use.
Background
The federal health portfolio undertakes a range of activities related to cancer, including those led by
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Institutes for Health Research.
Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is a not-for-profit corporation that was created in 2006,
and fully funded by the Government of Canada to provide a pan-Canadian perspective to cancer control
and specifically to accelerate the implementation of the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control (the
Strategy). The Strategy was built on the notion that enhanced cancer control could be achieved by
providing governments, non-government organizations and Canadians access to research, information
and decision-making tools in a coordinated fashion. Budget2016 confirmed ongoing funding for CPAC
at $47.5 million per year.
In 2018 and 2019, CPAC invested significant effort, engaging with over 7,500 stakeholders to refresh the
Strategy so that it reflected the current cancer control and health system landscape. Released in June
2019, the refreshed strategy entitled Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control 2019-2029: Doing together
what cannot be done alone, was endorsed by the Conference of Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT)
Deputy Ministers of Health. It focuses on five priorities spanning the entire cancer journey: (1) decrease
the risk of people getting cancer; (2) diagnose cancer faster, accurately and at an earlier stage; (3)
deliver high-quality care in a sustainable, world-class system; (4) eliminate barriers to people getting the
care they need; and (5) deliver information and supports for patients, families and caregivers.
Additionally, it focuses on three priorities specific to First Nations, Inuit and Métis: (1) culturally
appropriate care closer to home; (2) peoples-specific, self-determined cancer care; and, (3) First
Nations, Inuit, or Métis governed research and data systems.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund (HCCF) invests approximately $20 millionannually to
support healthy living among Canadians who face health inequalities and are at greater risk of
developing chronic diseases, including cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The HCCF supports
projects and leverages funding from partners across various sectors to address the common risk factors
(i.e., physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use) for chronic disease while aiming to create physical
and social environments that are known to support better health among Canadians.
PHAC works with Health Canada to advance Canada’s Tobacco Strategy (Strategy) through the HCCF to
fund projects that focus on tobacco cessation and prevention with a particular emphasis on priority
populations that have significantly higher prevalence rates of tobacco use. The HCCF is investing $4.25
million annually to support tobacco cessation and prevention projects under the Strategy. Between
2016 and 2021, PHAC invested nearly $6 million in the “Walk/Run to Quit” initiative to support the
Canadian Cancer Society in partnership with the Running Room to help smokers quit by incorporating
physical activity into their daily lives.
PHAC analyzes national data to monitor trends in cancer incidence and mortality over time (e.g.,
Canadian Cancer Statistics). PHAC leads the Cancer in Young People in Canada Program surveillance
system and is a member of several CPAC advisory committees.
PHAC supports the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care, an independent arms-length
organization, to develop guidelines for primary care practitioners in Canada. The Task Force has
produced evidence-based screening guidelines for breast, lung, cervical, colorectal and prostate cancers.
The guidelines support clinicians in identifying cancers early and reducing morbidity and mortality.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, CIHR invested approximately $927 million in cancer research, including
$218 million in 2019-2020 alone.
Examples of recent investments include:
• $4 million in January 2021 to fund innovative research to develop novel approaches to cancer
prevention and early detection using digital solutions;
• $2.5 million in March 2020 for the development of research support infrastructure to facilitate
multi-site studies for enhanced and expedited pediatric cancer research; and
• a joint commitment of $10 million with the Canadian Cancer Society in April 2019 to address
recently identified gaps in cancer survivorship research.
Budget 2021 committed $30 milliondollars over two years to CIHR to fund targeted research into
pediatric cancer. With this new investment, CIHR has recently launched a research initiative on pediatric
cancer, leveraging its Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and through a
new funding opportunity, catalyze the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium. The Consortium will
advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform policy and practice
predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve lives of pediatric cancer
patients and their families and caregivers. Applications to the Consortium funding opportunity are open
and funding is expected to start in summer 2022. CIHR’s Institute of Cancer Research helped build the
Canadian Cancer Research Alliance, a coordinating voice for cancer research in Canada and supported by
CPAC.
DEMENTIA
BUDGET 2022 KEY MESSAGES:
• Through Budget 2022, the Government of Canada proposes toinvest an additional $50 million in
dementia and brain health, to complement and bolster existing investments in these areas.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $30 million over three years, starting in 2022-23, to the Public
Health Agency of Canada, for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation to help accelerate
innovations in brain health and aging.
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain
health, to improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, to address mental health
consequences for caregivers and to evaluate and support different models of care.
Issue
Dementia is a set of symptoms affecting brain function. It is often characterized by changes in memory,
mood, judgement and other cognitive functions. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form. In
2017–2018, almost 452,000 Canadians aged 65 and older were living with diagnosed dementia. This
number is expected to increase with Canada’s growing and aging population.
Faits saillants
• En juin 2019, le document Une stratégie nationale sur la démence pour le Canada: Ensemble,
nous y aspirons a été publié. Les investissements fédérauxdans la recherche, la surveillance, les
initiatives de sensibilisation, les projets communautaires et les orientations en matière démence
soutiennent la mise en œuvre de la stratégie. Le rapport annuel au Parlement de 2021 sur la stratégie a
été déposé le19 janvier 2022.
Key Facts
• In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Federal
investments in dementia research, surveillance, awareness initiatives, community-based projects, and
guidance are supporting the implementation of the strategy. The 2021 annual report to Parliament on
the strategy was tabled on January 19, 2022.
Key Messages
• In 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy. We report to
Parliament annually on the strategy and the third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022.
• Through Budget 2022, we are proposing to invest an additional $50 million to advance efforts in
the areas of dementia and brain health.
• Proposed new investments include $20 million for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to
support research to learn more about dementia and brain health, and $30 million for the Centre for
Aging and Brain Health Innovation to accelerate innovations in brain health and aging.
• These new investments build on previous funding including over $212 million invested between
2016 and 2021 to advance research on dementia, and $70 million over 5 years to support dementia
awareness, surveillance, guidance on diagnosis and treatment, and community-based projects.
Background
Dementia Strategy
On June 22, 2017, the National Strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias Act came into
force and provided for the development and implementation of a national dementia strategy. A
Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released in June 2019, and has has three
national objectives: prevent dementia; advance therapies and find a cure; and improve the quality of life
of people living with dementia and their caregivers. Legislation requires the Minister to prepare an
annual report to Parliament. The third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022.
Federal Investments
Budget 2022 announced new proposed investments of $50 million to support dementia and brain
health-related research, further complementing the implementation of the national dementia strategy.
Budget 2019 announced $50 million over 5 years, starting in 2019-20, to support other key elements of
the strategy’s implementation, including a national public education campaign, targeted awareness
raising projects, dementia guidance, and enhanced dementia surveillance. Thirteen awareness raising
projects under the Dementia Strategic Fund (DSF) began in summer/fall 2021. This fund also supports
Indigenous-led organizations to build capacity to conduct dementiaawareness-raising activities. In
addition, the results of a capacity-building project focused on dementia-related stigma in Indigenous
communities, led by the Native Women’s Association of Canada, are being used to support an
awareness initiative.
Budget2018 allocated on-going annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia Community Investment
(DCI) to support community-based projects that optimize the health and wellbeing of people living with
dementia and family/friend caregivers, and increase knowledgeabout dementia and related risk and
protective factors. Funded projects undertake intervention research to evaluate the effectiveness of
their interventions and the context in which they work best. The DCI has launched 22 projects to date,
including the “Canadian Dementia Learning and Resource Network” which acts as a knowledge hub to
facilitate learning, collaboration and amplification of project findings and successes.
Other federal investments are supporting improvements in health care relevant to dementia. Budget
2021 announced $3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, for Health Canada to support provinces
and territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied. Our government is also providing $6
billion over ten years, starting in2017-18, directly to provinces and territories to better support home
and community care services, including palliative care.
In response to the impact of COVID-19, Government of Canada investments are supporting vulnerable
populations, including people living with dementia and their caregivers. On April 21, 2020, the
Government of Canada announced $350 million for the Emergency Community Support Fund, delivered
by national charitable and non-profit organizations and assisting, for example, with home deliveries of
groceries and medications, as well as transport services.
Dementia Research
Budget 2022 proposes to provide $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to ramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain health,
to improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and address
mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
This investment will build upon the research that the Government of Canada, through CIHR, has already
supported across the country to delay the clinical progression of symptoms of dementia, and improve
the quality of life of people living with dementia and their caregivers. Between 2016-17 and 2020-21,
CIHR invested over $212 million in dementia research. This includes through the Canadian Consortium
on Neurodegeneration in Aging, which is Canada’s research hub on neurodegenerative diseases that
affect cognition in aging, including Alzheimer’s disease, andwas renewed in 2019 for five years with
$31.6 million in federal funding and an additional $14 million from partners.
Budget 2022 also proposes to provide $30 million over three years, starting in 2022-23, to the Public
Health Agency of Canada, for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation (CABHI) to help
accelerate innovations in brain health and aging. CABHI was established in 2015 by Baycrest Health
Sciences and brings together health care, science, industry, not-for-profit and government partners.
PHAC provided an initial investment of $42 million over five years to Baycrest Health Sciences to launch
CABHI in 2015. Subsequently, PHAC (with funding support from Health Canada) provided bridge funding
of $2 million in 2020-21 to maintain operationsand core staff after the initial five years of funding ended
on March 31, 2020.
Dementia Surveillance
The Enhanced Dementia Surveillance Initiative (EDSI) funds projects that support the surveillance and
data pillar of the national dementia strategy. Nine projects were put into place to better understand
how dementia affects Canadians. This includes projects, led by academic and federal partners, exploring
innovative ways to address surveillance data gaps related to the causes, progression stages and impacts
of dementia; the associated sociodemographic, risk and protective factors; and caregivers. In addition,
several provinces, in collaboration with PHAC, are implementing projects to enhance surveillance of
dementia through the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System. These projects are building on
PHAC's ongoing work with all provinces and territories through this system to provide updated data on
the prevalence, incidence and all-cause mortality of Canadians with dementia by age group, sex,
provinceand territory over time. A new webpage was created onCanada.cato showcase the EDSI, and
to promote the projects being undertaken to inform public health actions with new surveillance data on
dementia.
International
Internationally, Canada endorsed theWorld Health Organization’s (WHO) Global Action Plan on a Public
Health Response to Dementia (2017-2025). The WHO’s Global Dementia Observatory (2017), supported
by the Government of Canada, monitors progress on the Global action plan and is actively collecting
data on 35 key dementia indicators. PHAC also represents Canada on the World Dementia Council,
which is an international charity that identifies and pursues opportunities for global collaboration on
dementia.
DELIVERING ON THE RESEARCH AND INNOVATIONPILLAR OF THE GOVERNMENT OF CANADA’S A
DEMENTIA STRATEGY FOR CANADA: TOGETHER WE ASPIRE
BUDGET 2022 KEY MESSAGES:
• Mr. Speaker, in June 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy.
• To support the implementation of the Strategy, we are pleased to announce that Budget 2022
includes a commitment to invest $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research.
• This investment will increase our knowledge of dementia and brain health, which will lead to
improved health outcomes and supports for Canadians living with dementia and caregivers.
ISSUE
• Budget 2022 proposes to provide $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research toramp up efforts to learn more about dementia and brain
health, to improve treatment and outcomes for persons living with dementia, and to evaluate and
address mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
KEY FACTS
• In 2017–2018, almost 452,000 Canadians aged 65 and older were living with diagnosed
dementia. Currently, about two-thirds of those diagnosed with dementia over the age of 65 are women.
• 9 Canadians age 65+ are diagnosed with dementia every hour.
KEY MESSAGES
• In June 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy, which we
report to Parliament on annually. The latest annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022.
• We have invested over $212 million invested over the last five years, with $49 million in 2020-21
alone, to advance research on Alzheimer’s disease and related dementias.
• This includes the Canadian Consortium on Neurodegeneration in Aging, Canada’s research hub
on neurodegenerative diseases that affect cognition in aging, which was renewed in 2019 for five years
with $31.6 million in federal funding and an additional $14 million from partners.
• This new investment of $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, will contribute to
supporting the goals of the research and innovation pillar of Canada’s national dementia strategy.
• Budget 2022 also includes an investment of $30 million over three years, starting in 2022-23, to
the Public Health Agency of Canada, for the Centre for Aging and Brain Health Innovation to help
accelerate innovations in brain health and aging.
BACKGROUND
This investment will directly support the Minister of Health’s mandate letter commitment “to promote
seniors’ physical and mental health to enable them to live longer at home”.
The researchand innovation pillar of A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire (the
Strategy) seeks to identify and address the current knowledge gaps related to dementia and ensure
dementia research provides the greatest impact possible for people living with dementia in Canada. This
investment of $20 million over five years, will contribute to supporting this pillar of the Strategy.
Through CIHR, the Government of Canada will support the most promising dementia and brain health
related research through strategic funding opportunities.
In 2020-21, the Government of Canada, through CIHR, invested over $49 million in dementia research.
This includes through the CIHR Dementia Research Strategy and the Canadian Consortium on
Neurodegeneration in Aging, whichis Canada’s research hub on neurodegenerative diseases that affect
cognition in aging, including Alzheimer’s disease, and was renewed in 2019 for five years with $31.6
million in federal funding and an additional $14 million from partners.
DIABETES
Issue
Diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin or when
the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Uncontrolled or undiagnosed diabetes can lead
to serious complicationsand premature death. Those who have diabetes can take steps to control the
disease and lower the risk of complications. Canadians living with diabetes may be at greater risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Key Facts
• Approximately 3.4 million Canadians areliving with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases
are diagnosed each year.
• Some Canadians, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African and South Asian
descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type2 diabetes
compared to the general population.
• Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2
diabetes and prevent negative diabetes-related health outcomes.
Key Messages
• Our top priority is to protectthe health and safety of Canadians. Our Government recognizes
the impact diabetes has on the health of Canadians.
• Starting in 2021-22, the Government is investing $35 million over five years, with up to $15
million matched by JDRF Canada (formerly the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), to support
diabetes research, surveillance and prevention, including the development of a national framework for
diabetes and a Diabetes Challenge Prize.
• We are also supporting community-based initiatives that aimto help Canadians reduce their risk
for chronic diseases, including diabetes, by promoting physical activity, healthy eating, and tobacco
prevention and cessation.
BACKGROUND
Approximately 3.4 million Canadians are living with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year. Some Canadians, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African and
South Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type 2
diabetes compared to the general population.
Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and
prevent negative diabetes-related health outcomes. Evidence demonstrates that there is an increased
risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19 (bothhospitalization and mortality) among Canadians with
diabetes and those who are obese. COVID-19 is also having a disproportionate impact on specific sub-
groups of the population, many of whom are at greater risk of suffering from the health, social and
economic effects of the pandemic.
Government of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collection and analysis of chronic diseases
and their risk and protective factors, strengthens collaborations to better track disease trends and risks,
and supports the development of policy and program interventions and prevention guidelines for
primary care.
PHAC is also supporting community-based initiatives to improve health behaviours and address health
inequalities among priority populationsat greater risk of developing chronic diseases. In particular,
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund invests approximately $20 million annually and
leverages additional funding from partners to support projects that focus on behavioural risk factors,
including physical inactivity, unhealthy eating and tobacco use, that are associated with the major
chronic diseases of diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer.
To help Canadians identify their risk of diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC developed CANRISK,
the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible to Canadians through partnerships with
Diabetes Canada, major food and drug stores such as Loblaws, Shoppers Drug Mart, Rexall and
Pharmasave, and others.
From 2015-16 to 2019-20, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), invested approximately $238 million in diabetes research.
In Budget 2021, the Government announced $25 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for diabetes
research (including Type 1 diabetes), surveillance and prevention, and to work towards the development
of a national framework for diabetes. As part of these investments, the Government of Canada, through
CIHR, will recommit to the JDRF-CIHR Partnership to Defeat Diabetes, investing up to $15 million to be
matched by JDRF Canada and its donors. The national framework will be developed in consultation with
provinces and territories, Indigenous groups and stakeholders, and will help to support improved access
to prevention and treatment, as well as better health outcomes for Canadians.
Budget 2021 also announced $10 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for a new Diabetes
Challenge Prize to help surface novel approaches to diabetes prevention and promotethe development
and testing of new interventions to reduce the risks associated with Type 2 diabetes.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) released its report entitled A Diabetes
Strategy for Canada. The Government Response to this report was tabled in Parliament on June 23,
2021.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173) designating the month of November as
Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal–Ontario) introduced Bill C 237,
which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with stakeholders, to develop a national
framework designed to support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better
health outcomes for Canadians. The National Framework for Diabetes Act received Royal Assent on June
29, 2021. The Act calls on the Minister of Health to prepare a report setting out the framework within
one year of the Act coming into force (June 2022).
PHAC is undertaking a virtual engagement process to inform the development of the framework.
Through this engagement, a range of key stakeholders and Canadians affected by diabetes will have an
opportunity to share their views, experiences and perspectives to support improved access to diabetes
prevention and treatment to ensure better health outcomes for Canadians. An Indigenous-led
engagement process with Indigenous organizations will help identify priorities and ways forward to
address diabetes in the Indigenous population.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Issue
The emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic create additional risks
for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families. Family violence,including all forms of
intimate partner violence, accounts for roughly 40% of violent crime reported to police.
Key Facts
• During the pandemic, risk factors (e.g., depression, parental stress, alcohol consumption) for
child maltreatment and family violence have increased.
• 5% of Canadians reported concerns about violence in their homes during the third wave of the
pandemic, between February and May 2021.
• Spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
Key Messages
• Gender-basedviolence, including family violence, is a serious public health issue that can have
lasting impacts on both the physical and mental health of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 included more than $3 billion over five years, and close to $200 million ongoing, to
prevent and address gender-based violence, including $2.2 billion over five years and $160.9 million
ongoing to respond to the tragedy of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls.
• Budget 2021 also featured $601.3 million over five years to advance anew National Action Plan
to End Gender-Based Violence. This includes an investment of $50 million over five years to the Public
Health Agency of Canada to design and deliver public health interventions that promote safe
relationships and prevent family violence, including intimate partner violence, child maltreatment, and
elder abuse.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government has announced new initiatives to
address family violence; including funding for Kids Help Phone and for shelters and sexual assault
services, income support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable organizations.
Background
The consequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short-and long-term
mental and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs. These can include: behavioural
problems in children; drug and alcohol use and attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and
lack of stable employment in adulthood; and depression and financial problems in older adults. In
addition, spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The federal government has invested nearly $200 million starting in 2017-18 until 2022-23, and over $40
million per year ongoing, in the Federal Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence. Budget
2021 included more than $3 billion over five years and close to $200 million ongoing to prevent and
address gender-based violence, including $2.2 billion over five years and $160.9 million ongoing to
respond to the tragedy of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. Budget 2021 also
featured $601.3 million over five years to advance toward a new National Action Plan to End Gender-
Based Violence.
The COVID-19 pandemic has increased risks for the health and safety of vulnerable Canadians, as
children and families face increased stress, and may have difficulty leaving abusive relationships or
accessing support or prevention programs. The Survey of COVID and Mental Health indicates risk factors
(e.g., depression,parental stress, alcohol consumption) for child maltreatment and family violence have
increased. 5% of Canadians reported concerns about violence in their homes during the third wave of
the pandemic, between February and May 2021. Estimates of concerns about family violence in their
own homes were similar for women and men.
Between March and October 2020, the Government announced COVID-19 Initiatives that will help
address pressures on vulnerable families. These include:
• $7.5 million investment to Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis support for
children and youth;
• $100 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
• multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and families,
including the enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence–the Health Perspective
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Preventand Address Gender-Based Violence, PHAC is investing
up to $8.5 million per year ongoing to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child
maltreatment, and equipping health professionals to recognize and respond safely to gender-based
violence.
Preventing and Addressing Family Violence–the Health Perspective
As a part of Budget 2021’s investments towards a National Action Plan to End Gender-Based Violence
and PHAC’s previous investment to support the health of survivors of family violence, PHAC is investing
up to $10 million per year from 2022-23 to 2024-25 and up to $6.5 million in 2025-26 to support
projects to deliver and test interventions that promote safe relationships and prevent family violence,
including intimate partner violence, child maltreatment and elder abuse.
Family Violence Initiative
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative, which brings together 12 departments and
agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family violence. On behalf of the FamilyViolence
Initiative, PHAC hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a web-based source of current information
on family violence for health professionals and the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to
supports and services available in eachprovince and territory.
Family Violence Surveillance
PHAC uses surveys of Canadians about their own experiences, surveys of proxy informants such as child
welfare workers, and administrative data from child welfare case management systems to assess and
monitor the prevalence of child maltreatment and related factors.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health
PHAC’s analyses of surveillance data from the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health are contributing
to the understanding of the wider impacts of COVID-19 on family violence, parenting challenges, and the
risk factors for both.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family relationships
and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts public health surveillance on child maltreatment and other
family violence; and supports analysis to understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
HIV/AIDS
Issue
Community-based organizations and researchers have called on theGovernment of Canada to increase
funding to address HIV and other sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections (STBBI) in Canada.
National stakeholders are increasing calls for additional funding and it is anticipated that their calls will
be amplifiedaround upcoming public events, particularly the 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS
2022).
Key Facts
• In July 2019, the Government of Canada released its Five-year Action Plan on STBBI (2019-2024).
The Action Plan outlines seven priority areas forfederal action on STBBI.
• Community partnerships help the Government of Canada advance the work of our Action Plan
and achieve global STBBI targets by providing innovative, tailored approaches to address STBBI that are
free of stigma and discrimination.
• The Community Action Fund (CAF) invests $26.4 million annually to support the community-
based response to STBBI in order to prevent new infections, reduce stigma and discrimination and
increase access to testing and treatment. From this investment, $4 million annually is dedicated to
projects led by Indigenous organizations.
• The Harm Reduction Fund (HRF) invests $7 million annually to support community-based
projects across Canada that will help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share drug-use
equipment such as needles and pipes. These funds complement existing investments under CAF by
focusing on a population that is particularly at-risk of these infections.
• The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) also funds HIV and hepatitis C research. From
2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over $228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63 million on
hepatitis C research.
• The 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS 2022) will be held in Montreal from July 29–
August 2, 2022. This will be the first time a hybrid in-person and virtual format will be utilized, due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Canada has hosted the conference three times in the past: Montreal in 1989,
Vancouver in 1996, and Toronto in 2006.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with domestic and international partners
toward the global goal of reducing the health impacts of AIDS and other sexually transmitted and blood-
borne infections by 2030.
• The contribution of community-based organizations is central to Canada’s ability to achieve
global targets. Community-based organizations play a critical role in engaging Canadians living with or
affected by HIV and those at risk of infection.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to reducing barriers andensuring that
Canadians have equitable access to prevention, testing, care, and support for HIV and other sexually
transmitted and blood-borne infections, and that these resources are reaching those who need them
most.
If pressed on funding
• In 2021, the Public Health Agency of Canada invested $88.5 million to address HIV and other
sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections initiatives in Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada invests $26.4 million annually through the HIV and Hepatitis
C Community Action Fund to support community-based programs across Canada to address HIV,
hepatitis C and other sexually transmitted.
• Through the Harm Reduction Fund, the Agency also invests $7 million annually to support
projects that help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share inhalation and injection drug-use
equipment.
Background
The Pan-Canadian Framework for Action on Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections (STBBI)
In 2018, the Pan-Canadian Framework for Action on STBBI was released by federal, provincial and
territorial Ministers of Health. The Framework provides a comprehensive multi-sectoral approach to
reduce the impact of STBBI in Canada as well as to contribute to global efforts to end these infections as
major health concerns.
Government of Canada Five-Year Action Plan on STBBI
In July 2019, the Government of Canada released its own Five-year Action Plan on STBBI (2019-2024),
which outlines a renewed and expanded collaborative approach to implementing the Framework for
Action on STBBI within the federal mandate. The Action Plan encompasses the work of ten federal
departments, reflecting a whole-of-government approach. The Action Plan aims to accelerate federal
efforts to prevent, diagnose and treat STBBI, and address barriers to care. The Action Plan is based on
the latest evidence and reflects priorities identified by partners and stakeholders.
The Action Plan outlines seven priority areas for federal action on STBBI: 1) Moving toward Truth and
Reconciliation with FirstNations, Inuit, and Métis peoples; 2) Stigma and discrimination; 3) Community
innovation-Putting a Priority on Prevention; 4) Reaching the undiagnosed-Increasing access to STBBI
testing; 5) Providing prevention, treatment and care to populations thatreceive health services or
coverage of health care benefits from the federal government; 6) Leveraging existing knowledge and
targeting future research; and 7) Measuring impact-monitoring and reporting on trends and results.
COVID-19 Impacts on STBBI
Key populations disproportionately impacted by STBBI were disproportionately impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic, specifically health care providers’ ability to deliver STBBI-related services and people’s
access to such services were adversely impacted. However, the pandemic presented an opportunity to
address STBBI through innovative measures. STBBI service providers in Canada have demonstrated
resilience and innovation by developing new service delivery models including new remote services that
met the challenges created by the pandemic. In an online 2020 survey, new approaches to service
delivery were reported across the country including: mobile outreach for HIV, hepatitis C and other STI
testing services; delivery of harm reduction supplies by outreach including mobile vehicle and home
delivery; and self-serve pick-up and drop-off of harm reduction supplies at service windows or curbside
depots.
Community Funding
Investments in community projects are an essential part of the government's response, and the
government is working closely with its provincial and territorial partners to ensure that their efforts are
complementary and that their investments have the maximum impact.
HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (CAF)
Through the CAF, PHAC invests $26.4 million annually to support community-based responses to STBBI
in order to prevent new infections, reduce stigma and discrimination and increase access to testing and
treatment. From this investment, $4 million annually is dedicated to projects led byIndigenous
organizations.
The CAF supports integrated approaches to disease prevention, increasing the effectiveness of
prevention initiatives and supporting a more efficient community-based response by addressing
common transmission routes, risk behaviours, affected populations, and stigma associated with STBBI.
Harm Reduction Fund (HRF)
Through the HRF, PHAC invests $7 million annually to support community-based projects across Canada
that will help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share injection and inhalation drug-use
equipment. These funds complement existing investments under the CAF by focusing on a population
that is particularly at-risk for these infections. The funding helps community-based organizations
implement or enhance harm reduction measures by providing: education resources for people who use
drugs; support for peer-based outreach and navigation initiatives; and training for health providers.
Investments in the HRF also support objectives within the Canadian Drug and Substance Strategy.
Funding to Support Researchers
Canada also recognizes the importance of funding research that creates new knowledge and resources
that improve the health of Canadians that are affected by HIV and STBBI. Understanding how the social
determinants of health affect those impacted by HIV and other STBBI will allow Canada to create more
equitable approaches that help us reach our global targets. From 2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over
$228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63 million onHepatitis C research.
Additional STBBI Investments
• From 2017-2022, Indigenous Services Canada allocated $37.5 million over five years and $11
million ongoing for STBBI programs and services for First Nations and Inuit communities.
• $5 million over five years under the new Innovative Diagnostics Program at the National
Microbiology Laboratory.
• $6 million over five years (2019-2024) to support research to investigate the introduction of new
testing technologies in Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
MEASLES IN CANADA
Issue
The World Health Organization (WHO) reported that the number of cases of measles worldwide was
79% higher in the first two months of 2022 compared to the same timeframe in 2021.
Key Facts
• Prior to theCOVID-19 pandemic, there had been an increase in the number of confirmed
measles cases reported in Canada between 2017 and 2019, which coincides with the global trend of the
disease.
• No confirmed measles cases were reported in Canada between March 2020 and February 2021,
due to a combination of domestic measles elimination through vaccination and no importation of
international cases as a result of COVID-19 border restrictions.
• As of May 18, 2022, two (2) confirmed measles cases were reported in Canada.Both cases were
imported from outside the country and were travel-related.
Key Messages
• Vaccination is a safe and effective protection against measles. Measles is rare in Canada, thanks
to vaccination, but this is not the case in all countries.
• We will continue to provide Canadians with reliable information about vaccination and promote
vaccination to protect Canadians from serious illnesses.
If pressed
• While vaccination is not mandatory in Canada, the Government of Canada is committed to
vaccination as a safe and effective public health measure that can prevent disease and disability.
• Provincial and territorial governments deliver vaccination programs and determine public health
requirements in their jurisdictions.
BACKGROUND
Measles is ahighly contagious respiratory tract infection caused by the measles virus. Measles is spread
by contact with an infected person through coughing and sneezing. It is a leading cause of death among
young children globally.
Measles has been eliminated in Canada since 1998. In June 2021, the National Certification Committee
re-verified Canada’s elimination status for measles, rubella and Congenital Rubella Syndrome (CRS) for
the 2016-2020 period. There was notable measles activity in the Region of the Americasin 2021,
specifically in Brazil where over 650 cases were reported.
Measles is relatively rare in Canada due to effective vaccination programs. However, it is important that
Canadians continue to be vaccinated against measles given the travel-related risks of infection and
spread to unvaccinated people.
Measles is a notifiable disease in all provinces and territories (P/Ts). When a healthcare provider
diagnoses a case of measles, notification is also made to the respective jurisdictional public health
agency. This helps P/Ts implement measles prevention and control strategies as quickly as possible.
There is no specific treatment for measles. Individuals with measles should self-isolate during the
infectious period to prevent infecting others. People shouldtalk to their health care provider if they
think they have measles.
Measles Outbreaks Nationally and Internationally
As of May 18, 2022, 2 cases of confirmed measles cases have been reported in Canada in 2022. Both
cases were imported. In Canada, duringthe COVID-19 pandemic, very few measles cases were reported
(one in 2020 and zero in 2021). In recent pre-pandemic years, an average of 62 measles were reported
between 2017 and 2019 (ranged from 29 to 113 cases).
The United States Centers for Disease Control and Prevention provides monthly updates on the measles
situation in the U.S. As of April 29, 2022, there have been 2 confirmed measles cases in 2 jurisdictions
this year. Since 2016, multiple large-scale measles outbreaks have been reported across Europe, with
almost all European countries reporting measles cases by 2017. According to the World Health
Organization, cases of measles in the European Region hit a record high in 2019.
Mandatory Vaccination in Schools
Vaccination is not mandatory in Canada;however, some P/Ts, including British Columbia, Ontario, and
New Brunswick, require proof of vaccination for measles and other vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs)
in order to register in public schools.
Federal Role
The Public Health Agency of Canada(PHAC) works with P/Ts in the management of outbreaks of VPDs by
providing technical advice and assisting with laboratory testing when requested by a P/T. P/Ts and local
public health are responsible for delivering public health programs, including vaccination programs and
investigation and follow-up of measles cases and outbreaks.
The federal government has a role in regulatory approval of vaccines, vaccine safety, national
surveillance for VPDs and adverse events following vaccination, bulk purchasing ofvaccines, national
leadership, and coordination in knowledge development, innovation, and sharing of best practices.
Each week, PHAC receives measles surveillance data from P/Ts and reports cases to the Pan American
Health Organization. Weekly measles surveillance reports are publicly available on theCanada.ca
website.
Measles Vaccination Coverage Rates
PHAC estimates vaccine coverage through the Childhood National Immunization Coverage Survey,
conducted every two years. The latest survey completed in 2019 estimated that 90% of Canadian
children had received at least one dose of measles vaccine by two years of age. This is below the 95%
coverage target for measles vaccines.
CASES OF MONKEYPOX IN CANADA
Issue
As of June 7, 2022, at 1:00pm EDT, there are 81 confirmed cases of Monkeypox in Canada (71 in QC, 8 in
ON, 1 in AB, and 1 in British Columbia). Follow-up with provinces to confirm new cases is underway. The
PHAC-verified case count will be updated every Tuesday and Thursday at 1:00 pm EDT; therefore, the
next update is on Thursday, June 9. Prior to the current international outbreak of Monkeypox, Canada
has never had any confirmed cases of Monkeypox.
Key Facts
• Monkeypox is a zoonotic infectious disease found in parts of central and West Africa. It results in
occasional human infections that are usually associated with exposure to infected animals or
contaminated materials.
• Following notification received from the United States Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention about a U.S. traveler with Monkeypox who visited Montreal, Quebec in early May 2022, the
Public Health Agency of Canada, in collaboration with public health authorities, launched activities to
raise awareness and vigilance for Monkeypox.
• The first two cases of Monkeypox inCanada were reported on May 19, 2022 in Quebec.
• Signs and symptoms of Monkeypox can typically include fever, a rash that often appears within
a few days after symptoms such as fever develop, as well as headache, muscle aches, exhaustion, and
swollen lymph nodes.
• Monkeypox is spread to people through: 1) direct contact with bodily fluids; 2) lesions of
infected animals or people; 3) respiratory droplets from an infected person; and 4) from mother to
fetus.
• The incubation is usually between 6 to 13 days but can range from 5 to 21 days.
• There are no well-established treatments for Monkeypox and limited data is available on the
clinical effectiveness of specific treatments in humans, although antivirals developed for use against
smallpox and post-exposure vaccination with
the smallpox vaccine may help. Prior vaccination against smallpox provides cross-protection.
Key Messages
• Keeping people in Canada safe from threats to their health, and keeping our most vulnerable
citizens safe and healthy is a top priority of the Government of Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is actively working with public health partners to investigate
reports of suspect cases of Monkeypox in Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada has alerted public health authorities to work with health
care providers to look for patients who have signs or symptoms consistent with Monkeypox, including
whether they have reported travel or have specific risk factorsfor Monkeypox.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) is conducting
testing to confirm or rule out a diagnosis of monkeypox for suspected cases.
• While the risk of infection is currently low to the general population, monkeypox can affect
anyone in close contact with an infected person. People in Canada should be aware of the symptoms of
Monkeypox and report any concerns to their health care provider. Information is available on
Canada.ca.
• As with many other diseases spread through close contact, people can lower their risk by
maintaining physical distance, wearing masks, covering coughs and sneezes and, practicing frequent
hand washing.
• The investigation is evolving in Canada and internationally. The Public Health Agency of Canada
will continue to work with the provinces and territories to assess the risks to people in Canada, respond
to the evolving situation, and continue to provide updates to the public as new information becomes
available.
If pressed on vaccinations:
• There is ongoing work underway with provinces and territories to provide access to approved
vaccines in Canada that, if required, can be used in managing Monkeypox in their jurisdiction.
• As a preparedness step, the Public Health Agency of Canada provided Quebec with a small
shipment of Imvamune vaccine from Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to support their
targeted response.
• At this time, and in alignment with international expert assessments, including the World Health
Organization, there is no need for the vaccine to be used for mass immunization.
If pressed on the risk to people in Canada:
• The Agency is continually assessing the possible risk of exposure to Monkeypox virus in Canada.
At this time, people who might beat risk of contracting monkeypox in Canada are those who have had
close or intimate contact with a person experiencing monkeypox.
• People who have a new rash or sores on their skin, fever or swollen lymph nodes, should
contact their health care providerand let them know if they have had sexual activity or close personal
contact with others in the last 21 days.
• As with many other diseases spread through close contact, people can lower their risk by
maintaining physical distance, and frequent hand and respiratory hygiene, including masking.
Background
Limited cases of travel-related Monkeypox were identified internationally prior to the current outbreak.
As of June 2, 2022, there have been 780 confirmed cases reported to the WHO across 27 non-endemic
countries, including Canada. There have been no deaths associated within the current monkeypox
outbreak in non-endemic countries, however, cases and deaths continue to be reported from endemic
countries, according to the WHO.
Monkeypox is typically transmitted from animals to humans. However, human-to-human transmission
can result from direct contact with their body fluids, respiratory droplets, or Monkeypox sores, or by
sharing clothing, bedding or common items that have been contaminated with the infectedperson’s
fluids or sores. Transmission via respiratory droplets usually requires prolonged face-to-face contact,
which can put health care providers and household members of active cases at greater risk.
Canadian samples of suspected Monkeypox virus infection are being sent to the National Microbiology
Laboratory for laboratory analysis and confirmation. Results are being shared with local health
authorities in the respective jurisdictions so appropriate public health measures can be taken if
necessary. Todate, confirmed cases have been identified in both the Provinces of Quebec and Ontario.
Currently, there is no specific treatment approved for Monkeypox, however, it is often self-limiting and
symptoms usually resolve spontaneously within 14 to 21 days.Health Canada has authorized the vaccine
Imvamune for active immunization against Monkeypox, smallpox and related Orthopox virus infections
and diseases in adults 18 years of age and older determined to be at high risk for exposure. Imvamune is
authorizedunder the Extraordinary Use New Drugs regulatory pathway, which permits the restricted
sale of the product for emergency preparedness in Canada for use by federal, provincial and territorial,
and municipal governments.
PHAC continues to support provincialpublic health authorities to manage this outbreak by coordinating
national surveillance, providing guidance and medical countermeasures. PHAC will continue to monitor
this evolving outbreak and work collaboratively with public health authorities to protectthe health of
Canadians.
PEDIATRIC CANCER
ISSUE
• Budget 2021 committed $30M over 2 years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) to address gaps in pediatric cancer research and ensure sustainable funding in this area.
KEY FACTS
• While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it was
estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to supporting the bravechildren and their families who are going
through the devastating experience of pediatric cancer.
• That is why we are committing $30 million dollars to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
to fund targeted research into pediatric cancer.
• CIHR isin the process of selecting the best research projects to have applied under this targeted
initiative and will soon be funded.
• This funding will support promising research projects with the greatest potential for fighting
pediatric cancers, and will establish a foundation for coordinated research and knowledge mobilization
within this area in Canada through the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium.
• These investments will help improve health systems and health outcomes for pediatric cancer
patientsand their families.
BACKGROUND
Cancer is one of leading causes of disease-related deaths in Canadian children over the age of one
month. While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it was
estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019. In
general, it is recognized that cancers in children act differently and are found in different organs than in
adults while tumors in children tend to grow and spread throughout thebody more quickly. In
recognition of the significant impact that pediatric cancer has on both individuals and their families and
caregivers, additional support is needed to increase access to clinical trials, the development of a
pediatric cancer drug discovery program and increased funding for pediatric cancer research.
As Canada’s federal health funding agency, CIHR’s strong connections to the pediatric cancer research
and advocacy communities in Canada ideally position it to deliver on this importantpriority and enhance
pediatric cancer research from a national perspective. Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested
over one billion dollars ($1,008,817,314) in cancer research, including more than $49 million specifically
on pediatric cancer, while also building strong connections to the pediatric cancer research and
advocacy communities across Canada.
With this new investment, CIHR has launched a research initiative on pediatric cancer, leveraging its
Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and through a new funding
opportunity, will catalyze the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium.
The Consortium will advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform
policy and practice predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve lives
of pediatric cancer patients and their families and caregivers. An interconnected Consortium will bring
together the ecosystem of pediatric cancer research platforms, networks, research teams, policy makers
and people with lived/living experience, Indigenous communities and organizations, healthcare
providers and other entities.
The Consortium will work to establish core research platforms and projects that will advance priority
areas suchas:
• Personalized genomic medicine;
• Cell-based therapies;
• Quality of life for pediatric oncology patients throughout the life course, including the
prevention of longer adverse effects (or late effects) of pediatric and adolescent cancer treatments;
• Research on equitable and rapid access to medicines.
It is important to note that support for priority-driven research in pediatric cancer will not only allow
identifying innovative solutions to support pediatric cancer patients and their families but will also
improve the research pipeline and build capacity for the next generation of pediatric cancer researchers
and help create positions for highly qualified personnel in universities and research institutions and act
as a strong lever to promote economic stimulation and growth.
The funding opportunity for the Consortium recently closed for applications, a notice of decision is
anticipated in August with funding expected to start in Summer 2022.
SENIORS AND HEALTHY AGING
Issue
TheHealth Portfolio works with a wide range of partners on health promotion, disease prevention and
research to support healthy aging as a public health priority. While chronic diseases remain the leading
cause of death among seniors, older adults are also among those most at risk of getting COVID-19 and
developing severe complications. Efforts are underway to keep seniors safe and continue to support
them in their homes, communities and care facilities.
Key Facts
• Seniors are the fastest growing age groupin Canada
• $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years–starting in 2017–directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• PHAC invested $75 million in the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in New Brunswick.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to keeping seniors healthy, safe and socially
connected, and helping them maintain their independence and remain in their homes as long as
possible.
• The government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had unprecedented consequences for older Canadians with the
majority of COVID-19deaths occurring among adults aged 65 years and older, approximately 80% in
2020.
• To support Canadians during COVID-19, our Safe Restart Agreement with provincial and
territorial governments included $740 million to support at-risk populations, includingincreasing
infection prevention and control measures to protect people living in long-term care, and those
receiving home care and palliative care.
• In addition, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR), has invested over $450 million over the past five years to support research in the area of seniors’
health including projects to support older Canadians through the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Through our $75 million investment in the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project inNew Brunswick, we
are testing innovative solutions to support healthy aging.
Background
In December 2021, the Prime Minister mandated the Minister of Health to, during the UN Decade of
Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promote seniors’ physical and mental health to enable older adults to live
longer at home. The Minister of Health was also asked to negotiate agreements with provinces and
territories to support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds.
COVID-19 Initiatives
Older adults, especially those with underlying medical conditions, and those residing in long-term care,
have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has
released guidance, information and awareness resources to support older adults during the COVID-19
pandemic, including: Infection Prevention and Control for COVID-19: Interim Guidance for Long Term
Care Homes; and awareness resources for vulnerable populations, including a website with information
specific to seniors and COVID-19.
Budget 2021 provided funding of $100 million over three years to support the mental health of
populations disproportionately affected by COVID-19, including older adults.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the desire ofCanadian seniors to stay in their own homes and
communities as long as possible. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada committed $90
million over three years to the new Age Well at Home initiative.
Age Well at Home will provide funding opportunities to seniors-serving organizations to provide
practical supports to help vulnerable seniors stay at home longer. This initiative will also support
regional and national projects that help expand services that have already demonstrated results in
helpingseniors stay in their homes. These investments will complement provincial and territorial efforts
to support seniors by mobilizing community organizations and volunteers.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
PHAC monitors and reports on the health of older Canadians, and promotes their health and wellbeing.
Key areas of work include:
• promoting age-friendly communities, where older adults and community leaders work to create
supportive physical and social environments
• promoting fall prevention approaches by increasing public awareness, and improving the
availability of data to inform public health decision-making
• raising awareness of seniors’ mental health, including substance use, and working with partners
to develop resources for seniors, families and healthprofessionals.
Healthy aging initiatives can prevent illness and injury, reduce the impact of existing health conditions,
help people recover from ill health and frailty, increase independence, and improve quality of life.
In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Budget 2019
announced $50 million over 5 years, starting in 2019-20, for initiatives to support key elements of the
strategy’s implementation. This is in addition to on-going annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia
Community Investment to support community-based intervention research projects that optimize the
health and wellbeing of people living with dementia and family/friend caregivers, and increase
knowledge about dementia and related risk and protective factors.
In 2018, the Government of Canada provided $75 million to support the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in
New Brunswick. This project is testing innovative solutions that support healthy aging. Thirty-nine
projects were announced in February 2021 and results of these projects will be shared with jurisdictions
across Canada.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested more than $450 million to support research
on aging between 2015-16 and 2019-20, including research relatedto mobility, dementia, falls
prevention, late life issues and palliative care, age-friendly communities, and technological innovations.
Since 2009, CIHR has supported the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA), a national, long-term
study to help better understand the determinants of healthy aging. Given the unique challenges
presented with COVID-19, the CLSA has focused their efforts to support older adults in this challenging
time. In 2020, the CLSA launched a COVID-19 research project to gather thelived experiences of older
adults during the pandemic to generate evidence to further assist the government-wide response. In
addition, in collaboration with PHAC, CIHR provided an additional $1.2 million grant to the CLSA to
support the collection of COVID-specific data to assess the urgent issues and the long-term impacts of
the pandemic on older Canadians. Finally, CIHR, alongside national and provincial partners, including
Healthcare Excellence Canada, invested a total of $3.4 million to support the implementation and
evaluation of promising practices and policy interventions to improve pandemic preparedness within
long-term care homes.
International Initiatives
In December 2020, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 2021-2030 to be the United
Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing. Globally, the impact of COVID-19 on older adults has underscored
the importance of healthy aging.
TUBERCULOSIS
Issue
Tuberculosis (TB) is a preventable and curable infectious disease, and yet itremains a public health
challenge. Although Canada is a low-incidence country, Indigenous Peoples and foreign-born individuals
from high-incidence countries are disproportionately affected.
Key Facts
• In 2020, the rate of active TB cases reported per 100,000 population in Canada was:
o 4.7 (5.1 among men, and 4.2 among women)
o Among Indigenous populations the rates were:
• 13.6 among First Nations, 2.8 among Métis, and 72.2 among Inuit
o For persons born outside of Canada, the rate was 14.3 per 100,000
• High rates of TB among Indigenous populations are associated with social determinants of
health, such as: poverty, food insecurity, poor housing conditions (particularly overcrowding and
inadequate ventilation), and higher rates of other health problems(e.g. diabetes).
Key Messages
• Our Government recognizes the impact of tuberculosis on individuals and families.
• We are working with provincial, territorial, and Indigenous partners to reduce rates of
tuberculosis. We want to improve access to prevention, treatment and care in communities most at risk
for the disease.
• Our approach is focussed on removing barriers such as stigma, and providing culturally
appropriate services and treatment.
• We are committed to our working with all partners to eliminate tuberculosis and to address its
underlying causes such as poverty, food insecurity and inadequate housing.
Background
Federal Role
TB is a disease of social inequality. Addressing it requires multi-sectoral action on the part of
governments, industry and civil society. Government of Canada priorities focusing on reconciliation with
Indigenous Peoples, food security, housing, poverty reduction and job creation are helping to leverage
public health efforts at the local level.
Provinces and territories are primarily responsible for the delivery of health care to eligible residents
under provincial and territorial health insurance plans. As such, the essential components of an effective
TB prevention and control program, including contact tracing, outbreak management, and monitoring
and evaluation, are typically coordinated and delivered by the provinces and territories.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) supports TB prevention and control through national
surveillance; epidemiological support;deploying National Emergency Strategic Stockpile assets; and
diagnostic/references services to support the detection and identification of TB.
Inuit-Crown Partnership Committee–Toward TB Elimination in Inuit Nunangat:
In March 2018, the Government of Canada and Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami announced their commitment to
work collaboratively towards eliminating TB across Inuit Nunangat by 2030 and reducing active TB by at
least 50% by 2025. Budget 2018 earmarked $27.5M over five years to support this work.
The release of the Inuit TB Elimination Framework in December 2018 marked an important milestone in
the journey towards TB elimination in Inuit Nunangat and is helping shape action plans in each of the
four Inuit regions. As Inuit continue on the path of self-determination, distinctions-based, culturally
appropriate care is fundamental to how TB services are delivered.
ENDING COSMETIC TESTING ON ANIMALS IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Non-governmental organizations, members of Parliamentand concerned Canadians have
pressed Health Canada to ban cosmetic animal testing. Since April 2021, the Department has received
approximately 69,000 correspondence items about banning cosmetic animal testing in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• The Minister of Health’s mandate letter published in December 2021 includes a commitment to
introduce legislation to end testing on animals. As a first step, Health Canada is considering how
legislative requirements for cosmetics could be amended to ban cosmetic testing on animals. As early as
2009, an estimated 99% of cosmetic safety assessments in the European Union and United States did
not rely on animal testing. To date, 41 countries have enacted measures to prohibit cosmetic animal
testing (including all European Union countries, Australia, the United Kingdom, and South Korea).
• Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or
cosmetic ingredients; however, ingredients found in other products tested on animals may also be used
in cosmetics.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that Canadians are concerned about the wellbeing of animals and
supports the elimination of cosmetic animal testing.
• There have been significant advances in alternative testing methods that support reducing our
reliance on animal testing.
• Our Government has committed to introduce legislation to end testing on animals, and will
continue to explore alternatives and take steps to further reduce reliance on animal testing.
IF PRESSED
• Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or
cosmetic ingredients under the Food and Drugs Act.
BACKGROUND
Non-governmental organizations, members of Parliament and concerned Canadians have pressed
Health Canada to ban cosmetic animal testing. Health Canada supports the elimination of cosmetic
animal testing.
The European Union banned the sale of cosmetic products and ingredients that have been tested on
animals in March 2013.
In 2017, as part of a campaign by animal rights organizations, a Senate Public Bill (cruelty-free
cosmetics) was introduced in Canada to propose amendments to the Food and Drugs Act that would ban
cosmetic testing on animals. In June 2019, the Government of Canada announced its support for the bill,
provided that key amendments were made. With the dissolution of 42nd Parliament, the bill died on the
Order Paper.
There have been significant advances in alternative testing methods that support reducing our reliance
on animal testing. In April 2021, the Government re-affirmed its commitment to reduce reliance on
animal testing with the introduction of a bill proposing to strengthen the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999. The bill included an aspirational statement in the preamble to reduce, refine or
replace the use of vertebrate animals in the testing and assessment of substances. The bill had been
introduced at first reading when the 43rd Parliament was dissolved on August 15, 2021, and died on the
order paper.
On February 9, 2022, the Government introduced Bill S-5, Strengthening Environmental Protection for a
Healthier Canada Act. Bill S-5 would amend the preamble of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act,
1999 to recognize the need to reduce reliance on animal testing when assessing the risks that chemical
substances may pose to human health and other species. This proposed amendment would encourage
the promotion, development, and timely use of alternative methods and strategies (e.g., computer-
based models, testing on cell cultures). This commitment is in line with international efforts to reduce,
refine or replace vertebrate animal testing, and contributes to and capitalizes on advances in
technology. Bill S-5 is currently being considered by the Standing Senate Committee on Energy, the
Environment and Natural Resources. The Senate Committee received submissions and witness
statements from several stakeholders calling for amendments to Bill S-5 to go further than preambular
language. They want to see provisions related to ending animal testing in the Act. The Senate
Committee is considering these proposed amendments in developing their motions to amendBill S-5.
Since April 2021, the Department has received approximately 69,000 correspondence items about
banning cosmetic animal testing in Canada.
The Minister of Health’s December 2021 mandate letter included a commitment to introduce legislation
to end testing on animals.
As a first step towards this commitment, Health Canada is considering how legislative requirements for
cosmetics could be amended to ban cosmetic testing on animals.
Cosmetic Animal Testing
Increasing concern for animal welfare hasdriven consumer demand for cruelty-free cosmetics and a
global decline in cosmetic animal testing, with many alternatives either in use or in development.
To date, 41 countries have enacted measures to prohibit cosmetic animal testing (e.g., all European
Union countries, Australia, United Kingdom, and South Korea). In 2009, an estimated 99% of cosmetic
safety assessments in the European Union and United States did not rely on animal testing. In 2017,
Cosmetics Alliance Canada indicated that more than 99%of new cosmetics are developed without
testing on animals. Animal testing for the small remaining portion of cosmetic products is generally
linked to an ingredient also used in a product where animal testing is required (e.g., pharmaceuticals), or
for export to a foreign country (e.g., China).
Regulation of Cosmetic Products Under the Food and Drugs Act
The Food and Drugs Act and its Cosmetic Regulations set out the health and safety requirements for
cosmetics in Canada. Industry must ensure that products:
• are safe for their intended use; and
• meet mandatory labelling requirements (i.e., list of ingredients and directions for safe use).
Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or cosmetic
ingredients; however, many ingredients found in other products tested on animals may also be used in
cosmetics (e.g., a preservative used in a topical drug may also be used in a cosmetic). Health Canada
continues to accept such safety data derived from animal testing, whensubmitted by companies.
Animal testing is required under other regulatory frameworks within Health Canada’s purview (e.g.,
drugs, natural health products, consumer chemicals), as well as for assessing the environmental and
human impacts of new chemicalsentering Canadian commerce. While there have been significant
advancements in the development and implementation of non-animal testing methods, science has not
yet progressed to the point where alternative methods can completely replace animal testing. There are
several complex health endpoints relating to cancer, reproductive toxicity, and the way the body
processes toxins that are lacking validated alternative methods to animal testing. The Department
continues to support the development and use of alternatives to animal testing through the
participation on national and international scientific committees.
LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT
ISSUE
• The Cannabis Act requires the Minister of Health to initiate a review of the Act’s administration
and operation starting three years after the Act came into force (i.e., after October 17, 2021). The
Minister is required to table a report on the review, including any findings or recommendations resulting
from it, in both Houses of Parliament no later than 18 months after the review begins.
KEY FACTS
• Not applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• The Cannabis Act established a new control framework for cannabis designedto better protect
public health and public safety, and minimize harms associated with cannabis use.
• The Act requires a legislative review to start three years after coming into force, and a report to
be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 18 months after the review begins.
• Our Government is committed to putting into place a credible, evidence-driven process for the
legislative review, which will assess the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives.
IF PRESSED ON INCLUDING THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW …
• Health Canada is committed to actively monitoring and evaluating patients’ reasonable access
to cannabis for medical purposes.
• Health Canada acknowledges the significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabisfor
medical purposes framework and recognizes the opportunity that the legislative review presents to hear
the views and perspectives of these stakeholders.
BACKGROUND
The Cannabis Act came into force on October 17, 2018, creating a strict legal framework for controlling
the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada. The Act aims to keep
cannabis out of the hands of youth and keep profits out of the pockets of criminals and organized crime.
Section 151.1 of the Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its
administration three years following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and
that a report of the review’s findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of
the start of the review.
The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of the
Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young
persons in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of
cannabis plants in a dwelling-house.
Over the past three years, the Minister of Health, with the support of the Minister of Public Safety and
Emergency Preparedness and the Minister of Justice, and together with provinces and territories, as well
as Indigenous leaders, have worked diligently to implement the cannabis legislative framework.
The Government of Canada has made progress toward the implementation of the cannabis framework
by putting in place measures aimed at protecting children and youth from accessing cannabis;
establishing a strictly regulated, legal supply chain for cannabis, and by making significant investments in
public education, awareness, research, monitoring and surveillance efforts.
The review provides an initial and early opportunity to assess progress towards achieving the objectives
of the Act, and to help ensure that the legislation is meeting the needs and expectations of Canadians
through a credible, evidence-driven review process.
Health Canada has been actively monitoring the perspectives of stakeholders, including industry, public
health experts, and the law enforcement community and is taking into account the views and
expectations of stakeholders as we prepare for the review. Particular emphasis has been placed on early
engagement with Indigenous communities and to helping ensure that the review process reflects their
interests and expectations.
STRENGTHENING THECANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT, 1999
ISSUE
• The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA) is Canada’s key statute to prevent
pollution and protect the environment and human health. The Act has not been substantially amended
since 1999.
• On February 9, 2022, the Government introduced in the Senate Bill S-5: Strengthening
Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada Act to amend CEPA to better protect Canadians and
their environment.
• Mandate letters issued to both the Minister of Health and the Minister of Environment and
Climate Change reaffirm the Government’s commitment to strengthen the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999 and to recognize the right to a healthy environment.
KEY FACTS
• CEPA is Canada’s cornerstone federalenvironmental protection law protecting Canadians and
the environment.
• On February 9, 2022, the Government introduced in the Senate Bill S-5: Strengthening
Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada Act, which would modernize the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999 for the first time in over twenty years and make related
amendments to the Food and Drugs Act.
• On April 28, 2022, the Senate Committee on Energy, Natural Resources and the Environment
began their detailed study of Bill S-5.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of all Canadians.
• By strengthening the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999, the Government will
strengthen its ability to protect Canadians and their environment from chemical substances.
• The Government will recognize for the first time in federal law that every individual in Canada
has a right to a healthy environment as provided under CEPA, and that the Government has a duty to
protect that right when administering the Act.
IF PRESSED ON …
• As the lead for these initiatives, the Minister of Environment and Climate Change will have my
full support to strengthen the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999, to protect everyone from
chemical substances.
How will Bill S-5 protect Canadians?
• Bill S-5 recognizes the right to a healthy environment for every individual in Canada and it allows
the government to better protect Canadians who are more exposed to harmful chemicals or more
susceptible to their effects.
BACKGROUND
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999:
The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 is Canada’s key statute to prevent pollution and
protect the environment and human health. While the Act is mainly under the authority of the Minister
of the Environment andClimate Change, the Minister of Health shares responsibility for Parts 5 and 6 of
the Act, which requires the Government to assess and manage the risks to Canadians and the
environment from substances.
The Minister of Health has authorities under the Act to:
• Conduct research and biomonitoring on the effects of chemicals on human health; and
• Issue health-related environmental objectives, guidelines and codes of practice (e.g., national
drinking water quality guidelines and health-based Residential Indoor Air Quality Guidelines).
Mandate Letter Objectives:
Mandate letters issued to the Minister of Health and to the Minister of Environment and Climate
Change instructed both Ministers to enact a strengthened CEPA to protect everyone, including people
most vulnerable to harm from toxic substances.
Minister Guilbeault was further instructed in his mandate letter to recognize the “right to a healthy
environment” in federal law and introduce legislation to require the development of an environmental
justice strategy and the examination of the link between race, socio-economic status and exposure to
environmental risk.
Further, amendments to CEPA will support the Minister of Health’s commitment to introduce legislation
to end animal testing. Bill S-5 wouldamend CEPA to recognize the need to reduce reliance on animal
testing when assessing the risks that chemical substances may pose to human health and other species.
Consultations on supply chain transparency and labelling:
In addition, the Government hasindicated that it will be moving forward on the following initiatives
related to the labelling of products:
• Consultations, launched on March 4, 2022 and concluding in fall 2022, to enhance supply chain
transparency and strengthen mandatory labelling inCanada to address the growing demand for greater
information on the chemicals in various products, some of which may have impacts on the health of
Canadians, on the environment or both.
• Proposed amendments to the Cosmetic Regulations to better informconsumers of the presence
of certain fragrance allergens in cosmetics, which will help them make decisions and protect their
health.
CIHR SUPPORT FOR RESEARCH ON MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has committed to work with the provinces and territories to
increase the availability of high-quality mental health and addiction services for Canadians, particularly
in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
KEY FACTS
• Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research, over $146 million in research on addictions, and over $23 million dollars
in research related to suicide prevention.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, the Government of Canada committed $45 million over two years
to develop evidence-informed national mental health service standards.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government continues to recognize the importance of funding innovative and timely
research that will improve health outcomes for people experiencing challenges related to mental health
and substance use.
• That is why, over the last five years, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, we
have invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural disorders research and over $146
million in research on addictions.
• This includes investments of $13.5 million in the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative,
supporting research to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to develop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
BACKGROUND
Mental Health
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural
disorders research. This represents more than 1700 projects led by experts across the country.
For example, CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS Open
Minds, a national project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care by
developing and testing evidence-informed approaches. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7
provinces and one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways
based on local context. For example, in Ulukhaktok, a remote community in the Northwest Territories
where professional service providers are not always available, the site is evaluating a model where lay
health workers are trained to provide support to youth in distress.
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $23 million dollars in research related to suicide
prevention. This research will lead to the discovery of new, effective solutions for better prevention.
In addition, CIHR committed for$6.25M over 5 years to the Mental Health in the Early Years funding
opportunity in March 2022, with a focus area on mental health initiatives for Indigenous peoples, as well
as transforming mental health with integrated care.
Furthermore, the Integrated Youth Services Network of Networks Initiative ($1M over 1 year), was
launched in April 2022 to create a Canada-wide network of provincial and territorial learning health
systems for Integrated Youth Services for mental health and substance use.
The impactsof COVID-19 on mental health, substance use, and addiction are also being measured,
offering new evidence-based treatments and services to all Canadians. Recent findings identified that
substance use is increasing during COVID-19, and that treatment disruptions can cause relapse,
withdrawal and the restart of risky injection behaviours. While caregivers themselves and older
Canadians require additional supports.
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative (CMH)
The mental health of Canadians has worsened during the pandemic. In April 2020, CIHR launched the
CMH initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19. CIHR launched four funding opportunities under this initiative,
supporting a total of 101 projects for a total investment of $13.7M from CIHR and partners, including:
• Rapid synthesis and knowledge-to-action funding opportunity for current evidence on mental
health service needs, delivery and guidelines, practice and related issues, in the COVID-19 context.
• $1M directed grant to the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providers in light
of COVID-19.
• COVID-19 Mental Health & Substance Use Service Needs and Delivery funding opportunity to
advance research on understanding rapid system transformations, developing innovative adaptations of
services and/or delivery and matching access to service with needs.
• $191K tofour CMH grantees to accelerate rapid research related to emerging SARS-CoV-2
variants and generate timely evidence relevant to biological, clinical, health system, and public health
strategies.
Budget 2021
Highlights with respect to mental health research and services from Budget 2021 include:
• $45 million/2 years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, PHAC, and CIHR to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders.
Substance Use
CIHR supports researchers across Canada that aim to address various issues related to substance use
and has invested more than $146 in the area between 2016-17 and 2020-201.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM was originally composed of four large regional
nodes (British Columbia, Prairies, Ontario, Québec/Atlantic) that connected researchers, service
providers, decision makers and people with lived experience from across Canada. CRISM is recognized as
a critical network that responds to the policy and evidence needs of decision-makers. CRISM activities
include:
• The OPTIMA Study (2016-ongoing)–a national multi-site clinical trial involving over 270
participants recruited from all four CRISM Nodes to compare and evaluate two models of care for the
treatment of opioid use disorder. (~$4.4 million over 4 years).
• National Treatment Guideline–CRISM has developed a National Guideline for the clinical
management of opioid use disorder, which was published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal
on March 5, 2018.
• Implementation Research Program–On September 14, 2017, CIHR announced a new
investment of $7.5 million over six years for CRISM to conduct a national research program for effective
implementation of evidence-based interventions into clinical and community.
On April 16, 2021, CIHR launched CRISM Phase II: Regional Nodes funding opportunity. This funding
opportunity represents a total investment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to
build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number of Regional
Nodes to enhance geographic coverage (i.e. creating a new stand-alone node for the Atlantic region)
while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding capacity (including the creation of an
Indigenous Platform and a Coordinating Centre).
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidencebase and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
In November 2020, CIHR hosted the ‘Innovations in Virtual Care for Mental Health and Substance Use’
BBE in collaboration with the British Columbia Ministry of Health, British Columbia Ministry of Mental
Health and Addictions, and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. This BBE brought together
provincial policy and decision makers, researchers and implementation experts, non-governmental
organizations and other key stakeholders to gain an understanding of how virtual care can meet the
unique and evolving mental health and substance use service needs of British Columbia’s diverse
population during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
CONSIDERATIONS
Budget 2022 committed to ensuring that everyone can receive the care they need by investing in
identifying and expanding effective mental health interventions, including building on Budget 2021
investments, and to engage with provinces and territories to develop a new Canada Mental Health
Transfer.
FOOD SAFETY
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has made key investments to its inspection activities inan effort to
enhance food safety in Canada. At present, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has the resources it
needs to deliver on its mandate for food safety, animal and plant health.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 provided the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with an additional $31M over two
years to maintain its inspection activities and to strengthen and modernize its food safety inspection
system.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the best food safety systems in the world.
• The Safe Food for Canadians Act and the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations, which came into
force in 2019, provides a new approach for food safety and improves the ability to respond to non-
compliances.
• Budget 2021 invested $31M over two years in renewed funding to allow the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency to continue to apply and strengthen its risk management approach to food safety.
The funding will allow for improved risk targeting for both domestic and imported foods and guide
preventive and targeted food safety activities.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19 …
• Food safety and consumer protection are key priorities of the Government of Canada.
• There is currently no scientific evidence that food or food packaging is a source or transmitter of
the COVID-19 virus and there have been noreported cases.
• The government has taken steps for the ongoing delivery of critical Canadian Food Inspection
Agency services during the pandemic to do its part to maintain Canada’s food supply, including
prioritizing its meat inspection work.
IF PRESSEDON FOOD SAFETY IN MEAT PROCESSING PLANTS …
• This Government takes food safety seriously.
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency conducts daily inspections at federally licenced meat
processing establishments. The inspection approach is different for licence holders who produce foods
other than meat, where daily inspection presence is not a requirement.
BACKGROUND
All food sold in Canada is expected to be safe, and it is industry’s responsibility to produce safe food.
When there is reason to believe that a food is contaminated or does not follow federal regulations, the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) may employ various compliance approaches and will typically
initiate a process to investigate and recall products, if necessary.
The number of inspection staff changes due to seasonal requirements and is adjusted based on demand.
The type and frequency of inspections done by CFIA vary by commodity, by risks, and mirror what is
done in other countries (for ex., CFIA staff do full-time slaughter inspection and daily meat processing
shift inspections just like USDA staff in US meat plants).
The CFIA does on-site visits once a day or more in meat processing plants in order to make them eligible
for export to the US under the terms of a long-standing equivalency agreement. The CFIA delivers
inspection activities in other food plants at a lower risk-based frequency that reflects the type of
product being made, the type of consumer it is being made for, and the food business` compliance
history.
On January22, 2021, the federal government announced $162.6 million for CFIA over the next 5 years,
and then $40 million per year of ongoing funding. These funds will augment CFIA's oversight and
surveillance capacity in its domestic programs by dedicating resourcesto areas of highest risk.
The investment is critical to alleviating the resource pressures CFIA is facing due to increased demand
and operational risks, which are a result of rapid growth in international trade, technology
developments, changing consumer preferences and new food safety threats.
As part of its normal business, CFIA has been undertaking a series of initiatives to improve inspection
delivery, achieve greater industry compliance with food safety requirements, and better protect
consumers.
The Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFCA) and Safe Food for Canadians Regulations (SFCR), which came
into force on January 15, 2019, is an example of this Government’s commitment to strengthen an
already strong food safety inspection system. The regulations apply to imported, exported or inter-
provincially traded food.
The new regulations are also consistent with international food safety standards, they strengthen
Canada’s food safety system and enable industry to innovate and create greater market access
opportunities for Canadian food products exported abroad.
These regulations help Canadian food businesses continue to have access to trading partners like the
United States, who have already adopted similar regulations.
Budget 2021’s funding of $31M over two years will allow the CFIA to continue to strengthen its risk
management approach to food safety through improved understanding of the dynamic risk landscape,
both domestic and foreign, and to guide preventive and targeted food safety activities. This will be
achieved through sustained verification activities of industry compliance with legislation and improved
offshore preventive activities for all exported and imported food products.
GLYPHOSATE
ISSUE
• Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticideglobally. Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) published its final re-evaluation decision document for pesticides containing
glyphosate, on April 28, 2017, allowing its continued use in Canada (marketed under brand names such
as Roundupand Vision). Several Notices of Objection (NoOs) were filed at the time, and following a
review of stakeholders’ concerns, the Department confirmed that issues raised in these NoOs were not
scientifically supported.
• The decision not to strike a review panel was appealed to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA) by
some of the stakeholders that filed one of the original NoOs. On February 2, 2022, the FCA ruled that
Health Canada’s PMRA must now reconsider striking a review panel. Health Canada is currently
reconsidering the information provided in the NoOs.
• Concurrently, PMRA is also advancing on its Transformation Agenda that will strengthen its
oversight and its protection of human health and the environment. The transformation process will
ensure the pesticide review process meets the expectations of Canadians in the areas of transparency
and sustainability.
KEY FACTS
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision notto establish a reviewpanel was filed. On February 13,
2020, the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. This decision was subsequently
appealed. A hearing on the merits of the appeal was held December 9, 2021, and the Federal Court of
Appeal set aside the decision of the Federal Court. Health Canada will reconsider the NoOs as required
by the Federal Court of Appeal, taking into account the guidance provided by the Court in its reasons.
• Media and stakeholder interest in glyphosate remains high. It is the subject of class-action
lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that have yet to be resolved. Much of the interest stems
from the hazard classification of glyphosate as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC). This concern was addressed by Health Canada in its final decision based on
an extensive risk assessment, which aligns with major pesticide regulatory bodies around the world.
• Public debate regarding the safety of glyphosate continues. There are also a number of
Canadian municipalities that have bannedor examining their use locally,
• In spring 2021, proposed changes to Maximum Residue Limits (MRLs) for glyphosate generated
thousands of comments from concerned stakeholders. Increases to MRLs are currently paused until
after completing review of extensive comments received.
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs), including those for glyphosate. MRL proposals will be published after Health Canada has
completed reviewing the extensive comments received during MRL consultations in 2021.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions. Health Canada scientists regularly re-evaluate pesticides approved in Canada
to ensure they can be used safely, and that human health andthe environment are protected.
• Health Canada scientists have conducted an extensive review of this chemical and have
concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions are followed.
• As part of its Transformation Agenda, Health Canada is strengthening its oversight of pesticides
and the protection of human health and the environment. This includes increased stakeholder
collaboration to generate independent data and enhanced transparency of decision-making.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S AWARENESS AND USE OF THE “MONSANTO PAPERS” IN THE REVIEW
OF GLYPHOSATE
• Health Canada scientists are aware of concerns raised in the media around the independence of
some scientific reviews of glyphosate.
• Health Canada scientists had access to all relevantdata and information from the federal and
provincial governments, international regulatory agencies, published independent scientific reports and
pesticide manufacturers. A total of 1368 peer-reviewed scientific papers were considered in the review.
IFPRESSED ON THE INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC)
• Health Canada took the International Agency for Research on Cancer findings into consideration,
but found that the level of exposure of Canadians to glyphosate does not cause any harmful effects,
including cancer.
• Health Canada’s finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority, the European
Chemicals Agency, the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency.None of these pesticide regulatory authorities considers glyphosate
to be a cancer risk to humans when used according to the label.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN FOOD
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency shows levels found are nota cause for
health concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSEDON GLYPHOSATE IN DRINKING WATER
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk of glyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosatewas found not to be of
concern.
• Monitoring data from both surface and ground water sources were considered in this risk
assessment.
IF PRESSED ON WHY HEALTH CANADA PAUSED DECISIONS ON INCREASES TO MAXIMUM RESIDUE
LIMITS UNTIL 2022, AND THE ESTABLISHMENTOF A SCIENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs), including those for glyphosate. MRL proposals will be published after Health Canada has
completed reviewing the extensive comments received during MRL consultations in 2021.
• PMRA may seek advice from the Scientific Advisory Committee on proposed increases to
glyphosate MRLs; however, not all MRL decisions will go to the Committeefor specific scientific advice.
• Health Canada remains committed to timely, evidence-based decisions on pesticides. Health
Canada will make every effort to integrate scientific advice from the Committee without affecting
existing timelines to reach regulatory decisions.
BACKGROUND
• Health Canada published its Re-evaluation Decision document for glyphosate on April 28, 2017.
The evaluation determined that glyphosate is unlikely to be genotoxic or carcinogenic. Health Canada
considered the findings of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) that glyphosate is
“probably carcinogenic to humans”, but did not alter the decision. It is important to note that the IARC
classification is a hazard classification and not a health risk assessment. This means that the level of
human exposure, which determines the actual risk, was not taken into account by IARC. Health Canada’s
finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA),and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
• In May 2017, eight Notices of Objection (NoOs) to the glyphosate decision were filed with
Health Canada. On January 11, 2019, Health Canada scientists concluded that the concerns raised by
the objectors could not be scientifically supported when considering the entire body of relevant data.
Therefore, the final re-evaluation decision for glyphosate did not change. Health Canada published its
response to each notice of objection in the Public Registry.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in respect of part of the
glyphosate re-evaluation was filed on February 11, 2019 by two of the objectors. On February 13, 2020,
the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. One of the objectors appealed the
decision to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA) on March 13, 2020. On August 14, 2020, three NGOs
soughtleave to intervene jointly in the appeal and the Court granted leave to intervene on October 7,
2020. In December 2020, a fourth NGO filed a motion with the Court seeking leave to intervene in the
appeal, which the Court denied on February 5, 2021. This NGO applied for leave to appeal the FCA’s
decision to the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) on April 7, 2021. On March 24, 2022, the SCC dismissed
the NGO’s application for leave to appeal to the SCC.
• A hearing on the merits of the appeal was held December 9, 2021, before the FCA. The FCA
allowed the appeal and set aside the decision of the lower Court. Health Canada is currently working on
integrating the FCA’s guidance to inform future decisions in respect of NoOs. PMRA will then reconsider
the NoOs as required by the FCA.
• Public interest in the safety of glyphosate used in agriculture, forestry, and by homeowners
remains high. Media interest stems from the hazard classification of glyphosate as a probable
carcinogen by the IARC and coverage of classaction lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that
have yet to be resolved. A number of Canadian municipalities are examining the issue of glyphosate use.
The City of Laval, QC banned the use of glyphosate earlier in 2021.
• As part of targeted reviews of the Pest Control Products Act announced on August 4, 2021,
Health Canada is pausing decisions on increases to MRLs, including glyphosate, until after completing
review of extensive comments received during MRL consultations in 2021, and the consultation period
on the targeted review of the PCPA, which has been extended to June 30, 2022. The announcement of
August 4, 2021, also included funding that will allow the creation of a new expert panel process to
provide advice, as appropriate, prior to certain evidence-based decisions on pesticides, including on
MRLs.
• On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new
Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. Nominations closed March 11, 2022
and the committee membership will be announced once the assessment process is complete. The role
of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide scientific advice in response to
targeted questions from the PMRA related to specific technical aspects of assessments or scientific
reviews. PMRA may ask the Committee to provide scientific advice on certain assumptions or scientific
data underpinning a particular MRL assessment; however, not all PMRA decisions will go to the
Committee for specific scientific advice. PMRA will begin identifying specific scientific questions that
would benefit from the independent advice of the Committee.
• The European Commission renewed the authorization of glyphosate for five years starting in
December 2017, until December 15, 2022. The renewal process is currently underway. France, Hungary,
the Netherlands and Sweden are acting jointly as rapporteurs. On June 15, 2021, a draft renewal
assessment report and a proposal for harmonised classification andlabelling was submitted to EFSA and
ECHA. The draft assessment report is consistent with Health Canada’s re-evaluation decision published
in 2017. A parallel public consultation by both EFSA and ECHA was recently completed in November,
2021. The rapporteurs are currently evaluating comments received. EFSA is looking to finalize their peer
review by July 2023. Luxembourg became the first EU country to completely ban products containing
glyphosate, effective December 31, 2020. France and Germany have announced their intention to ban
or severely restrict the use of glyphosate in the next few years. These plans are contingent on
alternatives to the uses of glyphosate being developed. Austria has notified the Commission of its
intention to ban glyphosate.
• TheUSEPA published an interim registration review decision in January 2020. The EPA uses
interim decisions to finalize enforceable mitigation measures. The EPA has concluded that there are no
risks of concern to human health when glyphosate is used accordingto the label and that it is not a
carcinogen. The EPA released a final biological evaluation (endangered species assessment) for
glyphosate, in November of 2021. The US National Marine Fisheries Service and the Fish and Wildlife
Service will now considerthe report for impacts on species or habitats.
• Mexico has announced that they will gradually reduce the use of glyphosate, towards a total
ban in 2024.
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Health researchers continue to be supportive of the recommendations made in Canada’s
Fundamental Science Review report (2017). Many stakeholders have called for increased funding for
fundamental science and research in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018alone, the federal government committed nearly $4 billion over five years to
support the next generation of Canadian researchers. This included $354.7 million over five years, with
$90.1 million per year ongoing, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its
support for fundamental research.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that investing in research and supporting Canadian researchers is
pivotal to addressing health issues facing Canadians, and the current pandemic has reminded us all of
the importance of having access to research evidence.
• Over the last 5 years, we made historical investments toward research.
• In Budget 2018 alone, we committed nearly $4 billion over five years to support the next
generation of Canadian researchers.
• This included $354.7 million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its support for fundamental research.
• Our government continues to invest in research that is important to the health of Canadians.
Budget 2022 announced $20 million to study long-term effects of COVID-19 infections, and wider
impacts on health and health care systems, and $20 million to increase our knowledge of dementia and
brain health, that will be funded over 5 years through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, or
CIHR.
IF PRESSED ON BUDGET 2022 INVESTMENTS…
• Budget 2022 further committed to funding important research areas including long-term
impacts of COVID-19, and brain health and dementia–to name a few.
• With these continued investments, our Government demonstrates its commitment to support a
vibrant, equitableand diverse research community that will help us address the major health challenges
of tomorrow.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2018
Among other investments to support research, Budget 2018 provided Canada’s federal granting
agencies with investments in fundamentalscience:
o CIHR: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o NSERC: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o SSHRC: $215.5 million over 5 years, $54.8 million ongoing
Support for Canadian Researchers in response to the pandemic
In April 2020, the Government of Canada announced comprehensive support of nearly $9 billion for
post-secondary students and recent graduates. As part of this investment, the government extended
expiring federal graduate research scholarships and postdoctoral fellowships, and supplemented
existing federal research grants, to support students and post-doctoral fellows, by providing $291.6
million to the federal granting councils.
In May 2020, the Government of Canada announced $450 million in funding to help Canada's academic
research community during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Budget 2021
As part of major investments to grow Canada’s bio-manufacturing sector, Budget 2021 invested:
• $250M to create a new Clinical Trials Fund, managed by CIHR, which will support research teams
and infrastructure across the country to conduct clinical trials. These trials will test new drugs,
treatments, and interventions to prevent, detect, treat or manage various diseases or medical
conditions.
• $250M to create a biomedical researchfund to support bio-innovation-related research that
straddles the health and natural sciences and connects these efforts to industrial and health system
partners to enhance key bio-innovation capabilities.
Budget 2021 also committed $20 million over 5 years to support a new National Institute for Women’s
Health Research, as well as $30 million dollars over two years to fund targeted pediatric cancer
research.
Budget 2022
Through the 2021 mandate letters, the Prime Minister tasked all Ministers with using science and
evidence-based decision-making. Therefore, through Budget 2022, the Government continued to invest
in research.
For example, Budget 2022 includes an investment of $20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for
CIHR to support additional research on the long-term effects of COVID-19 infections on Canadians, as
well as the wider impacts of COVID-19 on health and health care systems.
To support the implementation of Canada’s first national dementia strategy, Budget 2022 committed
$20 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, for CIHR to ramp up efforts to learn more about
dementia and brain health, to improve treatment and outcomesfor persons living with dementia, and
to evaluate and address mental health consequences for caregivers and different models of care.
In addition, Budget 2022 committed $40.9 million over five years, starting in 2022-23, and $9.7 million
ongoing to the federal granting councils to support targeted scholarships and fellowships for promising
Black student researchers.
To reinforce Canada’s competitive advantage as a destination choice for world-class research, Budget
2022 announced $38.3 million over four years, starting in 2023-24, and $12.7 million ongoing for the
federal granting councils to add new, internationally recruited Canada Excellence Research Chairs in the
fields of science, technology, engineering, and mathematics.
Finally, through Budget 2022, the federal government also announced $34.6 million over five years,
starting in 2022-23, and $8.4 million ongoing, to enhance Canada’s ability to protect our research, and
to establish a Research Security Centre that will provide advice and guidance directly to research
institutions.
HEALTHY EATING STRATEGY
ISSUE
• In October 2016, Health Canada launched the multi-year Healthy Eating Strategy, which consists
of a suite of initiatives that aim to improve the foodenvironment and help make the healthier choice
the easier choice for all Canadians. Recognizing that a healthy population is key to reducing vulnerability
to health events, the 2021 Minister of Health mandate letter included a commitment to promote
healthyeating by advancing the Healthy Eating Strategy. This includes finalizing front-of-package
nutrition labelling and supporting restrictions on the commercial marketing of food and beverages to
children.
KEY FACTS
• Obesity and diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the Canadian
health care system, and we know now that they increase the risk of COVID-19 severity and mortality.
• Since 2016, our Government has taken a number of steps to help make it easier to choose
heathier foods.
• The food guide is a mobile-friendly web application that provides Canadians with easier access
to information about healthy eating. It provides advice on what to eat and recognizes that healthy
eating is more than food choices, by encouraging healthyeating habits.
• Health Canada has continued to advance work on front-of-pack (FOP) nutrition labelling and
restricting food advertising to children.
KEY MESSAGES
• Obesity and other diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the
Canadian health care system. We now know that they increase the risk of COVID 19 severity and
mortality.
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health of Canadians and creating conditions to
make the healthier choice easier for all.
• Significant progress has been made by improving nutrition labelling, eliminating industrially
produced trans fats in the food supply, releasing a new Canada’s Food Guide, and publishing new
sodium reduction tagets for processed foods.
• Although more remains to be done, we have also continued to advance work on front-of-pack
nutrition labelling and restricting food advertising to children.
IF PRESSED ON FRONT-OF-PACK NUTRITION LABELLING…
• Poor diet, particularly a diet high in sodium, sugars and saturatedfat, is one of the major risk
factors for chronic diseases.
• As stated in the Minister of Health’s December 2021 mandate letter, Health Canada remains
committed to finalizing FOP labelling regulations to promote healthy food choices and is working
towards publishing the final regulations soon, following extensive consultations and consumer research.
IF PRESSED ON ADVERTISING TO CHILDREN…
• As outlined in my Mandate letter, our Government is committed to supporting restrictions on
the commercial marketing of foods and beverages to children, in order to protect them from the risks of
chronic diseases caused by an unhealthy diet.
• In June 2021, four industry associations launched a self-regulatory advertising code, to be
implemented by the summer of 2023.We appreciate their efforts to develop a new code governing
their practices for advertising to children.
• In February 2022, my colleague Ms. Patricia Lattanzio M.P. introduced a Private Member’s Bill,
Bill C-252-Child Health Protection Act, to prohibitfood and beverage marketing directed at children. This
Bill is currently moving through the parliamentary review process.
• Health Canada is actively reviewing the content of the Bill to determine the types of protection
it could offer and what could be required to support it.
• Health Canada continues a range of activities, including reviewing international initiatives, new
evidence as well as the results of its monitoring activities on advertising practices to children, to
determine an appropriate approach to supporting restrictions in Canada.
• As Health Canada moves forward, it remains committed to engaging with all key stakeholders,
including health and industry organizations.
SI ON INSISTE SUR LA RÉVISION DU GUIDE ALIMENTAIRE CANADIEN…
• Le nouveau guide alimentaire a été publié en janvier 2019.
• Le guide alimentaire canadien est fondé sur un processus scientifique rigoureux utilisant les
meilleures preuves disponibles et sur une vaste consultation.
• Le guide alimentaire est une application Web adaptée aux appareils portables qui permet aux
Canadiens d’accéder plus facilement à de l’information sur la saine alimentation. Il fournit des conseils
sur quoi manger et reconnaît qu’une saine alimentation ne se limite pas qu’aux choix alimentaires en
encourageant de saines habitudes alimentaires.
• Santé Canada continue d’élaborer de nouvelles ressources pour divers publics afin d’accroître la
portée et l’utilisation du guide alimentaire.
IF PRESSED ON REVISION OF CANADA’S FOOD GUIDE…
• The new food guide was released in January 2019.
• Canada’s Food Guide is based on a rigorous scientific process using the best available evidence
and extensive consultation.
• The food guide is a mobile-friendly web application that provides Canadians with easier access
to information about healthy eating. It provides advice on what to eat and recognizes that healthy
eating is more than food choices, by encouraging healthy eating habits.
• Health Canada continues to develop new resources for various audiences to increasereach and
use of the food guide.
IF PRESSED ON SODIUM REDUCTION…
• Most Canadians still consume too much sodium, which can lead to high blood pressure, a risk
factor for heart disease and stroke.
• Our Government is committed to protecting the healthof Canadians and to ongoing work with
food industry to further reduce sodium in processed foods, the main source of sodium in the diet.
• Our Government released revised voluntary sodium reduction targets in December 2020. The
goal of these targets is forthe food industry to further reduce the sodium levels in processed foods by
2025.
IF PRESSED ON ELIMINATING INDUSTRIALLY PRODUCED TRANS FAT IN THE FOOD SUPPLY…
• Since September 2020 foods sold in Canada are not permitted to contain partially hydrogenated
oils (PHOs).
• The elimination of PHOs will effectively reduce trans fats in the food supply since PHOs were the
major source of trans fat in the Canadian diet.
• The PHO ban will help achieve the public health objective of reducing total trans fat intake by
the great majority of Canadians to less than 1% of total energy intake, as recommended by the World
Health Organization. Achieving this public health objective is expected to further reduce the risk of
coronary heart disease among the general population.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE…
• Health Canada follows a rigorous scientific process in reviewing pertinent evidence when
developing policies related to the Healthy Eating Strategy.
• Health Canada focuses on the strongest evidence, where there is a well-established evidence
base on public health need, and where the evidence is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future.
IF PRESSED ON OPENNESS AND TRANSPARENCY AND CONSULTATIONS…
• Health Canada remains committed to openness, transparency and meaningfulengagement with
the public and stakeholders on healthy eating initiatives.
• Health Canada has conducted public consultations on the revision of the Food Guide, FOP
nutrition labelling, sodium in processed foods, and restrictions on advertising of certainfoods to
children.
• All stakeholders, including industry and health organizations, will continue to be invited to
submit comments on Healthy Eating.
BACKGROUND
Health Portfolio Initiatives
Unhealthy diet is a major risk factor for many chronic diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and heart
disease, which are becoming more and more common in Canada. This places a significant burden on the
health of Canadians and our healthcare system. Evidence shows that many factors in our food
environment influence our ability to make healthy food choices and to follow a healthy eating pattern.
An increasing number of foods high in calories, saturated fat, sodium and sugars are readily offered in
multiple settings. There is also a constant flow of changing and often conflicting messages creating
confusion about what to eat. Elements of the healthy eating initiatives include:
• Improving nutrition information and literacy by revising Canada’s Food Guide, and the nutrition
information on food labels by updating theNutrition Facts table and list of ingredients and introducing
FOP nutrition labelling.
• Facilitating healthier food options by reducing sodium in processed foods and eliminating
industrially produced trans fats in the food supply.
• Protecting and supporting marginalized and vulnerable populations by restricting the
advertising of certain foods to children.
Improve nutrition information and literacy
Canada’s food guide
• Canada’s new food guide, released in January 2019, is a mobile-friendly web application that
provides Canadians with easier access to dietary guidance.
• The goal of the revision was to strengthen healthy eating recommendations and communicate
guidance in ways that better meet the needs of different users, such as the public, policy makers and
health professionals.
• Canada’s Food Guide is based on a rigorous scientific process using the best available evidence
and extensive consultation.
• The food guide takes a less prescriptive approach to communicating healthy eating guidance to
Canadians. Canada’s Dietary Guidelines for health professionals and policy makers set out Health
Canada’s guidelines and considerations on healthy eating. The food guide snapshot provides a summary
of the dietary guidelines and healthy eating recommendations, and is available in 31 languages,
including nine Indigenous languages, making it more accessible for Canadians.
• New resources and tools will be developed on an ongoing basis to help Canadians apply
Canada’s new food guide where they live, learn, work andplay. This includes expanding the reach of the
food guide to children and youth, developing additional resources for health professionals and policy
makers, supporting publicly funded institutions to adapt their food environments to align with the food
guide, and leveraging existing partnerships with PTs and stakeholders.
• Health Canada continues to work and consult with interested parties and the public to make
sure that new guidance and resources are relevant and useful. This includes integrating a diversity and
inclusion lens into food guide content and supporting the development of healthy eating tools for
Indigenous Peoples.
Improve the Nutrition Facts table and list of ingredients
• In December 2016, Health Canada published final amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations on nutrition labelling and food colours, to make the Nutrition Facts table (NFt) and list of
ingredients (LOI) on packaged foods easier for Canadians to use and understand. Key changes include:
regulating serving sizes to make it easier to compare similar products, providing more information on
sugars in the NFt and the LOI and requiring that all food colours be declared by their common name.
• The transition period for these changes ended on December 14, 2021. However, in responseto
industry feedback related to challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, flexibility will be provided to
support the food industry. For the first year (until December 14, 2022), the CFIA will focus its efforts on
education and compliance promotion.
• As of December 15, 2022, regulated parties must be compliant with the new regulations. CFIA
will verify compliance and apply enforcement discretion in cases where non-compliant companies have
detailed plans showing how they intend to meet the new requirements at the earliest possible time.
Front-of-package (FOP) nutrition labelling
• Since fall 2016, Health Canada consulted extensively and meaningfully on the FOP nutrition
labelling proposal. In February 2018, Health Canada published proposed regulations for mandatory FOP
nutrition labelling on foods that are high in sodium, sugars, or saturated fat in Canada Gazette, Part I.
The final FOP nutrition labelling regulations take into account the feedback received but the publication
in the Canada Gazette, PartII, was delayed due to the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic.
• Evidence shows that obesity and its related health conditions place individuals at increased risk
of COVID-19 severity and mortality.
• The FOP symbol will complement other nutrition information on the label and will help a wider
range of consumers, particularly those vulnerable to poor health outcomes, interpret nutrition
information and make healthier choices.
• Data from countries having implemented mandatory “high in” FOP labelling (e.g. Chile, Israel)
shows that it has resulted in consumers making healthier food purchasing choices.
• As reaffirmed in the December 2021 Minister of Health’s mandate letter, Health Canada
remains committed to finalizing FOP labelling regulations to promote healthy food choices.
Facilitate healthier food options
Reduce sodium in processed foods
• Efforts to reduce sodium have been ongoing. In 2012, Health Canada established voluntary
sodium reduction targets for processed foods and encouraged the food industry to achieve these targets
by the end of 2016.
• In 2018, Health Canada released a progress report that showed that Canadians daily sodium
intake was reduced from 3400 to 2760 mg which remain above the goal of 2300 mg per day.
• In December 2020, Health Canada released revised voluntary sodium targets for processed
foods to encourage the foodindustry to further reduce sodium in foods by 2025.
• Continued efforts are needed for Health Canada to meet the WHO target of achieving a 30%
relative reduction in mean population intake of sodium by 2025. To do so, the current voluntary targets
for processed foods in Canada should be complemented by implementing FOP nutrition labelling.
Eliminating industrially produced trans fats in the food supply
• Health Canada has pursued a multi-faceted approach to help reduce the trans fat intakes of
Canadians,resulting in a significant reduction in Canadians’ intake of trans fat and the availability of
foods high in trans fat on the Canadian marketplace.
• Following extensive consultations in fall 2016 and spring 2017, Health Canada prohibited the use
of partially hydrogenated oils (PHOs), the main source of industrial trans fat, in Canada. The prohibition
took effect on September 17, 2018 with the addition of PHOs to the List of contaminants and other
adulterating substances in foods. The prohibition includeda two year phase-in period; therefore, as of
September 2020 no foods sold in Canada are permitted to contain PHO.
• Health Canada’s prohibition is consistent with global efforts to eliminate industrially produced
trans fat in foods. It will help achieve the public health objective of reducing total trans fat intake by the
great majority of Canadians to less than 1% of total energy intake, as recommended by the World Health
Organization.
Protect and support marginalized and vulnerable populations
Restrictthe advertising of certain foods to children
• The government committed to this file in previous mandate letters as well as in 2021.
• In 2016, Bill S-228 was introduced in the Senate to prohibit advertising of certain foods to
children but did not receive Royal Assent.
• Between 2016 and 2019, Health Canada engaged extensively on a policy proposal to
comprehensively restrict advertising to children of foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium,
sugars and saturated fat.
• In June 2021, a cohort of industry stakeholders publicly announced a new self-regulatory Code
governing food advertising to children, to be implemented by 2023.
• In February 2022, Ms. Patricia Lattanzio, M.P. (Liberal) introduced a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-
252–Child Health Protection Act) to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children. On May
6, 2022, it was debated at second reading. Health Canada is actively reviewing the content of the bill to
determine the ways in which it would offer protection and preparing a government response.
HUMANE USE OF PESTICIDES
ISSUE
• In the interest of seeking Canadians’ views and input on the humaneness of pesticides used to
control predators, Health Canada published a consultation document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest
Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation periodending April 18, 2019.
• Health Canada received over 4000 responses, many of which revealed a lack of awareness of
federal and provincial roles and responsibilities with respect to pesticide regulation, wildlife
management and animal welfare, and the highdegree of restriction placed on the use of these
products.
• On January 29, 2021, Health Canada published a consultation summary outlining the comments
received, as well as an information note to better inform Canadians on the strict label conditions that
must be followed, as well as the federal/provincial/territorial roles and responsibilities regarding
pesticide regulation, wildlife management and animal welfare.
KEY FACTS
• NOT APPLICABLE
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety and theconcerns of citizens very seriously.
• The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by
provincially authorized personnel in Alberta. These products are used as a last resort to protect
endangered species, peopleliving in remote communities, and livestock.
• All uses of sodium cyanide were cancelled in December 2021. Health Canada initiated the re-
evaluation of strychnine and Compound 1080 in January 2021. Health or environmental concerns raised
during consultations on the humaneness of pesticides used to control predators related to the use of
strychnine and Compound 1080 are being taken into consideration in their current re-evaluation. A
consultation on the proposed re-evaluation decisions of these two pesticides is targeted for publication
by August 2022.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, pesticides are regulated under the Pest Control Products Act administered by Health
Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA). Health Canada published a consultation
document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation
period ending April 18, 2019.
The purpose of the consultation was to seek input from Canadians on how the humaneness of pesticides
to control vertebrate predators could be considered during their approval and use.
As communicated in our Consultation Summary, at this time, Health Canada will not take steps towards
incorporating humaneness considerations into the pesticide risk assessment framework. There are
currently no internationally recognized science-based parameters to evaluate the humaneness of
pesticides, and no new information on this topic was brought forward through the consultation process.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for and have measures in place to address both
wildlife management and animal welfare.
To address concerns raised by Canadians through this consultation, Health Canada published an
information note in late January 2021 to improve awareness of federal and provincial/territorial roles
and responsibilities with respect to wildlife management and animal welfare, improve awareness of
predacide use restrictions and scenarios, as well as improve awareness of the legal requirements that
must be followed when using such products, and the systems in place for reporting incidents (such as
non-target animal deaths).
In January 2021, Health Canada initiated a re-evaluation of strychnine and Compound 1080 (sodium
monofluoroacetate) as a cluster, based on the similarity of the use pattern and toxicity profile. All uses
of sodium cyanide were cancelled in December 2021 and will therefore not be included in the re-
evaluation. Information submitted during the humaneness consultation period relevant to the re-
evaluation (i.e., with respect to possible health or environmental risks) arebeing considered. This re-
evaluation is also considering information related to non-target animal incident reports. A consultation
on the proposed re-evaluation decisions on strychnine and Compound 1080 is targeted for publication
by August 2022. Stakeholders and the public will have the opportunity to submit their comments and
data for consideration before PMRA finalizes its decision.
The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by provincially
authorized personnel in Alberta. These products are used as a last resort to protect endangered species,
people living in remote communities, and livestock.
PESTICIDE MAXIMUM RESIDUE LIMITS (MRLs)
ISSUE
• Pesticides are stringently regulated in Canada toensure they pose minimal risk to human health
and the environment. As part of the assessment process before a pesticide can be used on a food
product, Health Canada scientists determine whether the pesticide residues that may be found in or on
food will bea concern to human health, and determine the safe levels of residues, called Maximum
Residue Limits, or MRLs.
• Health Canada sets science-based MRLs to ensure the food Canadians eat is safe. The MRLs for
each pesticide-crop combination are set at levelswell below the amount that could pose a health
concern. If it is determined that a risk exists, the product will not be permitted for sale or use in Canada.
• During the summer of 2021, Health Canada received extensive comments during consultations
for proposed changes to MRLs, in particular for proposals to raise the MRL for glyphosate on certain
crops. Changes to glyphosate MRLs are paused as extensive consultation comments are reviewed.
• The Pest Control Products Act (2002) provides robust protection ofhuman health and the
environment. However, some provisions of the Act now warrant review to ensure the pesticide approval
process meets the expectations of Canadians in the area of transparency and sustainability.
• In addition to the targeted review ofthe Pest Control Products Act announced on August 4,
2021, Health Canada has paused decisions on increases to all MRLs until at least spring 2022. Health
Canada is currently reviewing the extensive comments received during MRL consultations in 2021. The
announcement also included funding that will allow the creation of a new science advisory committee to
provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions onpesticides, including on MRLs.
• By June 30th, 2022, PMRA will complete broad public consultations on key ways to modernize
and strengthen the Pest Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent
scientific evidence and input to the decision-making process. The MRL process will benefit from these
broad public consultations and resulting improvements toPMRA’s policies and practices.
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs). MRL proposals will be published after Health Canada has completed reviewing the extensive
comments received during MRL consultations in 2021.
• Health Canada’s MRL decisions, as for any other pesticide decisions, will remain science-based.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously. Health Canada sets science-based
Maximum Residue Limits to ensure the food Canadians eat is safe. The Maximum Residue Limits are set
at levels well below the amount that could pose a health concern.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes enhanced transparency of decision making to ensure the pesticide review
process meets the expectations of Canadians.
• Health Canada is establishing an independent scientific advisory committee to provide advice as
required, to better inform its decisions, including on Maximum Residue Limits. This committee is
expected to be formed later this spring.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF PAUSING MRL DECISIONS ON CANADIANS, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
A SCIENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
• Recently announced funding by the government will allow the creation of a new expert panel
process to provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions onpesticides, including on
MRLs.
• The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide scientific
advice to Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA).
• PMRA could ask the Committee to provide scientific advice on certain MRL-setting related
scientific questions.
• Health Canada remains committed to timely, evidence-based decisions on pesticides.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF THE FEDERAL COURT OF APPEAL RULING THAT PMRA MUST
RECONSIDER ITS DECISION WITH RESPECT TO A NOTICE OF OBJECTION AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PANEL RELATING TO HEALTH RISKSOF GLYPHOSATE. HOW DOES THIS IMPACT THE 2021 PROPOSAL TO
INCREASE GLYPHOSATE MRLS:
• Health Canada is currently reviewing the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
• The court did not weigh in on the scientific merit of either the notice of objection or the
underlying re-evaluation decision. Rather the court said that Health Canada needed to provide an
interpretation of the legal framework when making its decision.
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs), including those for glyphosate. There will be no increases to MRL levels until after completing
review of extensive comments received during MRL consultations in 2021, and the extension of the
consultation period on the Pest Control Products Act to June 30,2022.
BACKGROUND
• Before a pesticide is approved, it must undergo a rigorous scientific assessment process, which
provides reasonable certainty that no harm, including chronic effects such as cancer, will occur when
pesticides are used according to label directions. Under this registration process, results from more than
200 types of scientific studies must be submitted to determine if the pesticide would have any negative
effect on people, animals (including birds and insects), or plants, including organisms in the soil and
water.
• The results of these studies are evaluated by scientists within Health Canada’s Pest
Management Regulatory Agency, to determine whether a pest control product may cause adverse
effects for the health of Canadians. This assessment takes into consideration sensitive sub-groups, such
as pregnant and nursing women, infants, children and seniors. All pesticides registered in Canada,
including agricultural, forestry and those intended for lawn and garden uses, undergo this level of
scrutiny.
• Aftera pesticide is applied to a food crop, trace amounts of pesticide residues may stay in or on
the food. Pesticides intended for use on food crops must be tested for the safety of these residues. As
part of the assessment process before a pesticide can be used on a food product, Health Canada
scientists must determine whether the pesticide residues that may be found in or on food will be a
concern to human health, and determine the safe levels of residues, called Maximum Residue Limits, or
MRLs.
• CanadianMRLs are set for each pesticide and crop combination, for an approved pesticide use.
Canadian MRLs are; legally established as the highest amount of allowable residue, are set at levels far
below the amount of pesticide residue that could cause health concerns, take into account all of the
population including infants, children, and pregnant women, are set for all foods sold in Canada,
whether produced locally or imported, apply to fruits, vegetables, meat, dairy products, grains, and
some processed foods.
• In May 2019, the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health
Organization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticides Residues (JMPR) recommended use of new glyphosate
MRLs for consideration by the World Health Organization's Codex Alimentarius Commission. Bayer
CropScience submitted an application requesting to align certain MRLs with those being proposed. In
response to the application, Health Canada launched a public consultation on MRLs relating to the
import of dry beans, dry peasand tree nuts in May 2021 on the proposed change.
• As announced on August 4, 2021, Health Canada is pausing decisions on increases to MRLs until
at least spring 2022. Health Canada is currently reviewing the extensive comments received during MRL
consultations in 2021. This announcement also includes funding that will allow the creation of a new
expert panel process to provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions on pesticides,
including on MRLs.
• On January 27, 2022, Health Canadaofficially launched a call for nominations to create a new
Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. Nominations closed March 11, 2022
and the committee membership will be announced when the assessment process is complete. The role
ofthe Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide independent scientific advice
in response to targeted questions from the PMRA related to specific technical aspects of assessments or
scientific reviews. PMRA could ask the Committee toprovide scientific advice on certain assumptions or
scientific data underpinning a particular pesticide assessment; however, not all PMRA decisions will go
to the Committee for specific scientific advice. This committee is expected to be operational laterthis
spring.
• To allow more time for fulsome consultations on the Pest Control Products Act, the consultation
period has been extended to June 30, 2022.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the glyphosate Notices of Objection in January
2019, an application for judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in
respect of part of the glyphosate re-evaluation was filed. On February 2, 2022, the Federal Court of
Appeal allowed Safe Food Matters’ appeal of the Federal Court decision, set aside the decision of the
Federal Court and quashed PMRA’s decision dated January 11, 2019. PMRA must now reconsider its
decision with respect to the notice of objection filed by Safe Food Matters on whether to strike a review
panel relating to the health risks of glyphosate. Health Canada is currently reviewing the Federal Court
of Appeal decision.
• Global interest in maximum residue levels (MRLs) and regulation of glyphosate remains high
following the classification of the chemical as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer in 2015 (IARC). However, it should be noted that this assessment did not take real-
world exposures into account.
• Contrary to the IARC findings, and consistent with Health Canada’s review, the U.S.
Environmental Protection Agency’s January 2020 decision concluded that glyphosate is not likely to be
carcinogenic to humans. The European Commission also renewed the authorization of glyphosate for
five years starting in December 2017 based on its own science-based risk assessments. The EU renewal
assessment is currently underway, and in June 2021, the EU Rapporteur State Members (France,
Hungary, the Netherlands and Sweden) submitted its draft assessment of glyphosate to the European
Food Safety Authority (EFSA) and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) for preparation of consultation
documents to begin in September 2021. Currently, a decision from the EFSA is expected in July 2023.
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs). MRL proposals will be published after Health Canada has completed reviewing the extensive
comments received during MRL consultations in 2021.
MENTAL HEALTH SUPPORTS FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH
ISSUE
• The Canadian Government is committed to supporting the mental health and substance use
needs of children and youth, particularly as they have been disproportionately impacted by the
pandemic.
• This commitment is reflected in ongoing, pandemic-related andfuture initiatives, which aim to
increase access to services so that children and youth can get the help they need, when and where they
need it.
•
KEY FACTS
• Two thirds or more of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that
mental health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually.
• Children and youth are among the highest users of Emergency Department (ED) for mental
health and substance use services.
• In 2019, suicide was the second leading cause ofdeath among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children and youth.
For example, the percentage of youth reporting that their mental health was “somewhat worse” or
“much worse” now compared to before the pandemic rose from 14% in September 2020 to 35% in
March/April 2021.
• Before the COVID-19 pandemic, the prevalence of psychological symptoms and low life
satisfaction among adolescents in grades 6 to 10 in Canada increased from 2002 to 2018. A greater
percentage of girls than boys reported experiencing psychological symptoms and low life satisfaction,
and these gender gaps increased from 2002 to 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada is committed to supporting the mental health/substance use needs
of children and youth. This commitment is reflected in ongoing, pandemic-related and future initiatives.
• This builds on work by the government to increase access to mental health and addictions
services for children and youth, including through 2017 commitment of $5 billion in funding to provinces
and territories over 10 years through bilateral agreements, with one of the funding priorities expanded
access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth (age 10-25).
• In addition, in response to the pandemic, in April 2020 Health Canada launched Wellness
Together Canada, an online mental health and substance use support portal, which received $140
million in Budget 2022 for two more years of funding starting in 2022-23. This Portal provides access for
children and youth (ages 5 to 29) to mental health and substance use resources, including Kids Help
Phone.
• Recognizing the ongoing importance of supporting the mental health of Canadians the
government appointed the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions. Her mandate includes
working cross-departmentally to ensure children and youth have access to mental health supports as
they recover from the pandemic as well as in the long-term.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR CHILDREN AND YOUTH …
• In addition to Wellness Together Canada, which provides online, phone and text based support
to young people who are in crisis or dealing with mental health issues, additional resources are being
invested in Kids Help Phone ($14.8M over 36 months from April 2020 to March 2023) so it can continue
to provide mental health support to youth in need during the pandemic.
• Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those
most affected by the pandemic, including youth.
• Other investments include:
o $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective factors to promote mental
health for children, youth and other populations experiencing mental health inequities.
o The Government is also investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with their
partners. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support over the
phone to everyone Canada.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE COMMITMENTS …
• Minister Bennett remains committed to ensuring that mental health is treated as full and equal
part of the universal healthcare system. To this end, she will continue to engage with partners and
stakeholders and Canadians of all backgrounds, including individuals with lived and living experience.
BACKGROUND
Mental illness health issues can impact any population and children and youth are no exception. In fact,
two thirds or more of mental health disorders emerge before the age of 25. It is estimated that mental
health issues affect over 800,000 Canadian children and youth annually.
Youth disproportionately visit the Emergency Department (ED) seeking mental health/substance use
services. For example, between 2008-2009 and 2018-19 there was a 61% increase in visits made by
youth to the ED for such services. Duringthis time, hospitalizations for mental health disorders also
increased by 60%.
This cohort is also affected by suicide. In 2019, suicide was the second leading cause of death among
individuals aged 15 to 34, behind unintentional injuries. In 2019, among individuals aged 10 to 14 years,
males accounted for 46% of suicide deaths; and among individuals aged 15 to 19 years, males account
for 64% of suicide deaths.
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on the mental health of children and youth.
Concerns about the virus itself have been compounded by impacts on school and routines, social
activities, isolation, and decreased access to services and supports.
Results from 2020 showed that youth were less likely to report excellent or very good mental health as
compared to older Canadians. While most Canadians were less likely to report excellent or very good
mental health during the COVID-19 period, the difference between 2018 and 2020 was particularly
evident for younger adults. Only 42% of thoseaged 15 to 24 reported excellent or very good mental
health during the pandemic compared to 62% before the pandemic in 2018.
More recent survey results from early 2021 showed that younger Canadians persistently indicate the
highest anxiety and depressionof all age groups. For example, almost 30% of 16 to 17 year olds
reported high levels of anxiety and depression, and one in three reported suicidal ideation in the past
year. Conversely, this group reported a lower incidence of diagnosis of a mental health issue, suggesting
they do not have access to diagnostic services and care.
These findings are consistent with the percentage of youth reporting that their mental health was
“somewhat worse” or “much worse” now compared to before the pandemic-35% in March/April 2021.
Additionally, in a Statistics Canada survey of perceptions of personal safety, 11% of Youth aged 15 to 24
reported that harassment or attacks on the basis of race, ethnicity, or skin colour have increased in their
neighbourhood since the start of the pandemic.
Government Actions and Investments to Support the Mental Health Needs of Children and Youth
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments and Integrated Youth Services
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improveCanadians’ access to mental
health services (2017-2027). The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via
negotiated bilateral agreements, informed by the 2017 Common Statement of Principles on Shared
Health Priorities agreed to by FPT Ministers of Health. In it, Ministers of Health agreed to prioritize
expanded access to community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth as
one of three priorities for the federal funding.
Eleven out of thirteen provinces/territories have identified youth focused initiatives, which could include
integrated youth services, as part of their bilateral agreement action plans. Three provinces have
specifically identified integrated youth services as part of their action plans.
Integrated Youth Services (IYS) models of care provide locally relevant, effective, youth-focused and
integrated services for mental health/substance use within the community. One example of this model
is the integrated youth hub. These hubs are easily accessible community-based “one stop shops” that
provide an integrated suite of services, which can include peer support, mental health and primary care
support and employment counselling, as well as support for navigating these systems of care. Each hub
leverages existing services so the suite of available services varies by hub. There are currently 50
operational integrated youth hubs across Canada and 60 under development.
In addition, nine out of ten provinces have or are developing a provincial networks to implement and
advance the integrated youth services model through the sharing of best practices. In some cases, this is
done through the leveraging of a learning health system approach, where data is collected to
continuously inform and improve equitable health outcomes by focusing on practices relating to
equitable access to mental health services. Three of the most established networks are in British
Columbia (Foundry), Ontario (Youth Wellness Hubs Ontario), and Quebec (Aire Ouverte) with BC and
Ontario specifically identifying the use of bilateral funding to support these networks.
Integrated youth services is also a priority area of National Mental Health and Substance Use Service
Standards, which will be developed to improve access to services,and address domains of quality,
including safety, effectiveness, patient-centredness, cultural appropriateness, and equity. Standards will
equip healthcare providers, policy makers and other stakeholders with an evidence-based framework
for delivering high-quality mental health and substance use services. Standards will also serve to
formalize what Canadians can reasonably expect in terms of the services available to them, including
timeliness, consistency and quality.
On March 14th, the Government of Canada announced that it is working with the Standards Council of
Canada-a Federal Crown Corporation with demonstrated expertise in developing national standards-
to develop a suite of a national standards for mental health and substance use services, leveraging
significant work done to date in this field.
Mental Health Promotion and Teen Dating Violence
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
PHAC also funds programming to prevent teen and youth dating violence, including community and
school-based initiatives that teach skills for healthy and safe relationships based on respect and consent.
In addition, PHAC funds initiatives to support the health of survivors of family violence, including
trauma-informed physical and mental health promotion for youth.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is also investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service with its partners. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides suicidecrisis support
over the phone to everyone in Canada. By 2023, this service will provide people across Canada with
access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from trained responders, using the technology of their choice
(voice, text or chat). The FederalFramework for Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It
focused on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating information and data, and
promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are
available onCanada.ca, with the next report planned for release in December 2022. In response to
motion M-174, which called on the Government of Canada to establish a national suicide prevention
action plan and was unanimously supported by parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of
Canada is developing an action plan that aligns with the Framework.
Funding to the Mental Health Commission of Canada
The Government of Canada provides $14.25 annually to the Mental Health Commission of Canada
(MHCC), which was created in 2007 to act as a catalyst for improving the mental health system in
Canada. The MHCC leads the development and dissemination of programs and tools to support the
mental health and wellness of all Canadians by bringing together federal, provincial, and territorial
governments as well as leading mental health organizations.
In 2020, the MHCC developed the National Standard of Canada for Mental Health and Well-Being for
Post-Secondary Students, a set of flexible guidelines to help post-secondary institutions create
environments that foster student mental health and well-being. The Standard can help post-secondary
institutions better design their mental health policies and programs based on evidence, to share
experience and knowledge, while simultaneously improving mental health literacy, building resilience
and addressing student mental health issues before they worsen.
To date, around 47 post-secondary institutions are in the process of implementing the standard with
another 22preparing for implementation.
Pandemic-Response Initiatives
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-2022 in Wellness Together Canada, an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years, beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in bothofficial languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access.
There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide immediate access to
support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that can assist with
finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial and territorial
services, and does not replace them. In January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched PocketWell,
which is a companion app to the online Portal.
Through the Portal and the app, children and youth (ages5 to 29) are able to access mental health and
substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone, which provides online, phone and text based
support to young people who are in crisis or dealing with mental health issues.
Additional resources are being invested in Kids Help Phone ($14.8M over 36 months from April 2020 to
March 2023) provide mental health support to youth in need during the pandemic.
As of May 23, over 2.4 million individuals across all provinces and territories have accessed the Wellness
Together Canada portal in over 6.9 million web sessions. The new PocketWell mobile app has been
downloaded a total of 25,731 times. Additionally, over 45% of registered clients of the portal are under
30, an age group that tends to underutilize traditionalmental health services.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 announced $100 million over three years to promote the mental health of those most
affected by the pandemic, including youth. Funded projects are expected to begin in Spring 2022 and to
reach diverse populations across Canada. Projects will support mental health promotion and mental
illness prevention interventions, in addition to initiatives that build the capacity of service providers to
deliver programming in safe, effective and trauma-informed ways.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence to Underpin Initiatives
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $333
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research. This represents more than 1700 projects
led by experts across the country.
CIHR is also leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101 research projects, representing a total
investment of $13.5 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel
composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated
through these projectswill be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
CIHR provided the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse with a $1 million directed grant to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providers in light
of COVID-19. This includes the creation of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of
the challenges faced by people who use drugs during the COVID-19 crisis to guide future policy
decisions.
Statistics Canadadeveloped and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health to better understand the wider impacts of the
pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of research articles based on the first cycle of
data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention Journal on September 27,
2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020. The Canadian
Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of mental health indicators, and has beencollected
for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for ongoing measurement of changes in mental
health of the Canadian population as the pandemic continues and as Canada recovers.
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCEUSE TOOLS
ISSUE
• The Government remains committed to supporting Canadians with their mental health and
substance use challenges as well as increasing access to services so that Canadians can get the help they
need, when they need it.
KEY FACTS
• Canada’s current range of community, private and hospital-based mental health services can be
difficult to navigate and are not always well integrated to support the mental health care needs of
Canadians.
• These gaps have been exacerbated during the pandemic and certain populations and groups
have been disproportionately impacted due to a lack of timely and appropriate care. For example:
- While rural populations have historically reported higher self-rated mental health than
Canadians overall, and lower levels of diagnosis with mental disorders, mental health services and
supports are less frequently available.
- Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significant public health issues, increasing the risk of
poor mental and physical health outcomes for mothers, along with potential impacts for children and
families.
• The Government of Canada has committed to a suite of measures to improve access to quality
and timely mental health supports. These include:
- $45 million over two years to develop nationalstandards for mental health, in collaboration
with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders.
- $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and
Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians.
- $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.
- $10 million for the Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund to support community-based projects
across Canada.
- $13.5 million through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and partners for the COVID-19
and Mental Health Initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and
substance use responses in the context of COVID-19.
- The Government has allocated an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for the Wellness Together
Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support mental
health and well-being.
• The Government of Canada has also made significant investments in programs that support the
mental health of pregnant and postpartum individuals, including funding for improving community-level
access to supports, and $26.5 million annually for the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP).
• Through Budget 2022, the Government committed $140 million for two more years of funding
for Wellness Together Canada starting in 2022-23.
• Budget 2022 also proposes to provide $227.6 million over two years, starting in 2022-23, to
maintain trauma-informed, culturally-appropriate, Indigenous-led services to improve mental wellness,
and to support efforts initiated through Budget 2021 to co-develop distinctions-based mental health and
wellness strategies.
• As of May 23, 2022, over 2.4 million individuals across all provinces and territories have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 6.9 million web sessions since launch.
Approximately 39% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than usual male
engagement.Over 45% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an age
group that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services. For phone sessions, 88% felt
better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 84% of texters were highly satisfied with the
service. Based on a client feedback survey, 41% indicated they have no other options for support, if not
for the portal.
KEY MESSAGES
• In response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create WellnessTogether
Canada, providing 24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance-use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed in excess of $280 million for a suite of
measures to support the mental health needs of marginalized and disproportionately impacted
Canadians, while also investing in health systems improvements.
• Moving forward, our Government is committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of our universal health care system. This reflected in B2022’s reaffirmation of
engaging provinces and territories on the development of a Canada Mental Health Transfer, which
would provide a permanent and ongoing source of funding for mental health services.
IF PRESSED ON POCKETWELL …
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government. In
January 2022, Wellness Together Canada launched a companion app called PocketWell, which will help
increase awareness and accessibility of available mental health and substance use resources.
• Through PocketWell, individuals can link to the portal to access resources ranging from self-
assessment to customized support based on their assessment. Via the app, individuals can connect
seamlessly to WTC for free and confidentialvirtual sessions with social workers, psychologists and other
professionals.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH…
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to set
national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the support
they need, when they need it.
• The Government of Canada is working with the Standards Council of Canada–a Federal Crown
Corporation with demonstrated expertisein developing national standards–to develop a suite of
national standards for delivering mental health and substance use services, leveraging significant work
done to date in this field.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO CHILDREN, YOUTH ANDFAMILIES…
• The pandemic is particularly challenging for families.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, children and youth (ages 5 to 29) are able to access mental
health and substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone which provides online, phoneand text
based support to young people.
• The Federal Government is currently funding Kids Help Phone a total of approximately $15
million over 36 months (2020-23).
• We are also investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON SUBSTANCE / OPIOID USE IN YOUTH …
• Substance use prevention in youth is an important priority for the Government of Canada.
• We know that the pandemic has exacerbated mental health and substance use concerns for
young people.
• That is why the Government of Canada continues to invest in helping youth understand the risks
associated with alcohol, cannabis, tobacco and vaping use. Wehave also invested in the Know More
Tour to engage teens and young adults on the facts surrounding the overdose crisis and health risks
associated with opioid use.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDESUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS…
• Health care and frontline personnel are an important population for Wellness Together Canada.
That is why the portal features a dedicated text line and targeted mental health and substance use
supports.
• Frontline workers can access free counselling, peer support groups, anda range of anonymous,
self-guided programming. This includes co-designed mindfulness sessions for health care workers to
reduce stress and support coping with work/life demands.
• The portal also features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers in accessing portal
resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDESUPPORTS TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal to ensure inclusivity.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported byinstantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, including 24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness (for Indigenous peoples), and
supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote areas, facing stigma or
financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON BARRIERS TO ACCESS CARE INRURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES …
• Our government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health services.
• Wellness Together Canada (WTC) has been providing rural and remote communities with free
mental health and substance use resources available 24/7, in both official languages. In addition, for
Canadians who do not have reliable internet access, many of the WTC supports can be accessed by
phone and text, and via PocketWell, a companion app to the Portal.
• The Government will explore pathways to increase the accessibility of mental health services in
rural areas, including virtual options.
IF PRESSED ON SUICIDE …
• In 2019, suicide was the second leading cause of death among youth and young adults aged 15
to 34. The Government of Canada recognizes the importance for all Canadians to have access to critical
mental health resources and suicide prevention services.
• We support the implementation of a three-digit number for suicide prevention that is easier to
remember and therefore improves access to crisis support for people across Canada.
• The Government is also investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
MentalHealth (CAMH) to implement and sustain a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with its
partners. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support over the
phone to everyone in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON PREVIOUS INVESTMENTS…
• Our Government has made significant investments in mental health, including:
o $50 million for distress centres;
o $500 million, as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, for mental health and substance use needs;
o $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone;
o $4.9 million annually for the Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund;
o $21 million for a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service; and,
o $5 billion over ten years, through Budget 2017, to provinces and territories to increase access to
mental health and addictions services.
IF PRESSEDON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS …
• Mental Health remains a key priority for the Government. This Government appointed the first
ever Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and has made unprecedented investments,including a
commitment to implement a Canada Mental Health Transfer.
• The Government has engaged in a cross-country series of consultations and roundtables to hear
from Canadians and remains committed to ensuring that mental health is treated as a full and equal part
of the universal healthcare system. To this end, we will continue to engage with partners and
stakeholders and Canadians of all backgrounds, including individuals with lived and living experience.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESSTOGETHER CANADA…
• As of May 23, 2022, over 2.4 million individuals have accessed the portal in over 6.9 million web
sessions.
• Approximately 39% are men.
• Approximately 45% are under the age of 30.
• For phone sessions, 88% felt better after speakingwith a counsellor. For text sessions, 84% of
texters were highly satisfied.
• 41% indicated they have no other options for support.
• Health Canada will continue to monitor the portal by supporting data collection, reporting, and
evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA...
• The portal strictly adheres to all applicable privacy and health information standards to maintain
the security and confidentiality of personal information. Vendors are bound by the privacy protective
terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
• The Government of Canada does not collect or store any personal information through the WTC
portal or the PocketWell app.
• Personal information is kept private and confidential and is not sold or disclosed to other
parties.
• Users can choose whether or not to register with WTC to use certain features of the Website or
certain Services. Users can also delete their account and associated data at any time.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
• For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling byphone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals with the grief
they face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
IF PRESSED ON UNMET MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS IN THE DRR …
• Increased mental health literacy and reduction in stigma have improved knowledge, attitudes,
and help-seeking behavior, contributing to an increased demand for services. This demand has been
compounded during the pandemic with increased levels of anxiety and depression along with a
reduction in available supports.
• Despite progress that may have been achieved, these changes have made it challenging to
reduce unmet mental health needsof Canadians.
• As Minister, I will also work to ensure that mental health care is treated as a full, equal part of
our universal health care system.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools to self-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviate their stress, fear andanxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada invested $130 million from 2020-22 in Wellness Together Canada,an online mental
health and substance use support portal, and received $140 million in Budget 2022 to support the portal
for two more years beginning in 2022-23. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mentalhealth and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational content and
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supportsare provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text lines for youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing ProgramNavigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• SteppedCare Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in the areas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government has allocated $45 million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop national standards for mental health, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so that
Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support. This language was interpreted broadly to
include standards for substance use due to its close relationship with mental health.
Support forthe Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22,to support projects that promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and
Métis, and Black andother racialized Canadians.
• $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have beenexacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment services and
programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental HealthPromotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk and protective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demandduring the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding willsupport the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $333
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research. This represents more than 1700 projects
led by experts across the country.
CIHR is also leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101 research projects, representing a total
investment of $13.5 million from CIHR and partners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel
composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated
through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
CIHR provided the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse with a $1 million directed grant to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providers in light
of COVID-19. This includes the creation of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of
the challenges faced by people who use drugs during the COVID-19 crisis to guide future policy
decisions.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health to better understand the wider impacts of the
pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of research articles based on thefirst cycle of
data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention Journal on September 27,
2021. The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020. The Canadian
Community Health Survey provides data on a variety ofmental health indicators, and has been collected
for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for ongoing measurement of changes in mental
health of the Canadian population as the pandemic continues and as Canada recovers.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Associationand Crisis Services Canada. By 2023,
this service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from
trained responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for
Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing
stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based
practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next report planned
for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the Government of Canada
to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously supported by
parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan that aligns
with the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuant to the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of its release (by February 2025).
HC’s 2020-21 Departmental Results Report
Health Canada advanced the development of national standards for access tomental health services to
gain insight on practical approaches to developing and implementing these standards. As part of this
work, Health Canada has entered into an agreement with the Standards Council of Canada to lead the
development of standards in the following priority areas, in alignment with the Common Statement of
Principles on Shared Health Priorities developed by federal, provincial and territorial governments:
• Children and youth:
o Integrated Youth Services: increase access to youth mentalhealth and substance use supports
that are integrated with physical health, sexual health and social services
• Primary Health Services Integration:
o Primary Care Integration: increase access to quality, integrated mental health and substance use
supports in primary care settings
o Digital Mental Health and Substance Use Apps: improve access to high-quality, safe and
effective apps to help Canadians make better-informed app choices
• People with complex needs:
o Substance Use Treatment Centres:improve access to high-quality, evidence-based care and
promote an integrated and coordinated treatment system
o Substances Use Workforce: increase substance use workforce capacity to provide evidence-
based care and stepped-care approaches
o Integrated Services for Complex Health Needs: improve integrated treatment approaches for
individuals with concurrent mental health and substance use disorders and complex health needs
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research–Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
ISSUE
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
KEYFACTS
• Our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from donating blood
by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral
period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration with
Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research
specific to reducing barriers to the donation of plasma.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• On September 15, 2021, Health Canada authorized Canadian Blood Services to implement
behaviour-based criteria for MSM in the collection of source plasma. The change to behaviour-based
criteria will initially be implemented at two sites (Calgary, Alberta and London, Ontario) with the
intention of further roll-out to other locations.
• On December 15, 2021, Health Canada received a submission fromCanadian Blood Services
seeking authorization to remove the current three-month waiting period for men who have sex with
men who want to donate blood. The submission proposes using sexual behaviour-based screening for all
donors, regardless of gender or sexuality.
• The submission is being reviewed, and an expert advisory panel is being convened for this
purpose. As such, the review period will take longer than the normal target of 90 days.
• On December 20, 2021, a regulatory submission was received fromHéma-Quebec, which
proposes a transition to a gender-neutral screening questionnaire that focusses on risk behaviours for
donors of source plasma for use in the manufacture of therapeutic products. The submission is currently
under active review, and Health Canada’s decision is expected to occur within the 90-day target.
IF PRESSED …
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor
screening requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without
this evidence, the current screening policies cannot be changed.
• Héma-Québec has indicated that the implementation of more flexible donor screening criteria
for plasma could lead to a submission in the future to change the screening criteria for all types of blood
donations.
IF PRESSED ON THE KARAS’ HUMAN RIGHTS COMPLAINT …
• The Attorney General of Canada filed an application for judicial review of the September 25,
2019 decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission, which was dismissed by the Federal Court on
June 10th, 2021.The purpose of the judicial review thatHealth Canada had requested was not to stop or
pre-empt the inquiry in the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal from proceeding, but rather to correctly
establish the proper parties in the case. As the matter is presently before the Tribunal, any further
details of Health Canada’s position will be provided to the Tribunal.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA ORDERED A 2-YEAR WAIT BETWEEN BLOOD BAN POLICY
CHANGES …
• The blood establishments were required to monitor and report on the safety of the blood
system following the implementation of each change to their MSM donor deferral policies; however, a
2-year minimum monitoring period prior to filing subsequent changes was not a condition of Health
Canada’s authorizations
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
CBS and H-Q werecreated as arm’s length organizations responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s
blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they are required to make submissions to HC for any
changes to their policies, such as changes to donor deferrals. These submissions must include scientific
data that support the safety of the proposed changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before
they can be implemented, but has no authority to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed,
except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing eighteen (18) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questionsand criteria are
under evaluation for MSM. To date, twelve (12) projects have been completed, while six (6) projects are
on track to achieve expected results.
On September 16, 2021 HC authorized CBS to implement behaviour-based criteria for MSM for
collection of source plasma. CBS intends to implement behaviour-based criteria at two sites (Calgary,
Alberta and London, Ontario) prior to further roll-out. Part of the evidence used by CBS to support the
plasma submission comes from results of the studies funded by HC.
On December 15, 2021, HC received a submission from CBS seeking authorization to change its
approach to blood and plasma donor screening. The submission proposes to move away from the
current three month donor deferral period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and to
instead screen all donors, regardless of gender or sexuality, for high-risk sexual behaviour. The
submission is being reviewed and an expert advisory panel has been convened for this purpose. As such,
the review period will take longer than the normal target of 90 days. The tentative target for completing
the review of the CBS submission is now May 31, 2022. Pending approval, CBS expects the
implementation of the new screening processes would take up to six months, which is based on the UK
experience.
On December 17, 2021, H-Q submitted an authorization amendment to change their rules for source
plasma donations in Quebec with the goal of making them more inclusive. They also reported that the
implementation of more flexible methods of screening plasma donors, based on sexual behaviour, could
lead to a subsequent submission to extend those rules to blood donation in order to promote greater
inclusion of donors.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other countries,
including Austria and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain and Italy there is no MSM
deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as having sex with more than
one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have adopted a 3-month deferral
including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and Australia (January 2021). In
June 2021, the UK implemented changes that lift the MSM blood donation deferral and move to
behavioural screening based on evidence-based recommendations. The Netherlands also moved
towards behavioural-based screening, by starting to allow MSM in monogamous relationships to donate
blood in September 2021.
NEONICOTINOID PESTICIDES–AQUATIC ORGANISMS AND BEES
ISSUE
• On May 19, 2021, Health Canada released the final re-evaluation decision for the neonicotinoid
pesticide, imidacloprid. This followed the recent special review decisions related to aquatic organisms
for two neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam, released by Health Canada on March
31, 2021. Previously, Health Canada had consulted publicly on a proposal to cancel all outdoor uses of
these pesticides.
• Over 47,000 comments were received during neonicotinoid consultations, as well as a
substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data. In order to
protect the environment, in this final decision, Health Canada cancelled some uses of imidacloprid, and
introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered,
which is consistent with the recent Special Review decisions for clothianidin and thiamethoxam.
• On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluation decisions for the
neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. All required mitigation measures
have been implemented. On February 24, 2022 the Special Review Decision SRD2022-02 on the
potential environmental risk related to squash bee exposure to clothianidin, thiamethoxam and
imidacloprid used on cucurbits, was published. The Special Review did not result in a change to the risk
conclusions described in the 2019 pollinator re-evaluation decisions of these pesticides.
• During spring 2022, preliminary reports ofhigh over-wintering losses were received from
Alberta, Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba. Initial information suggests that high losses are likely related to
weather. 2021 had an early spring with good weather, leading to high bee numbers in hives but also
high varroa mite levels. High varroa levels and early fall weather in 2021 led to poor varroa control since
weather affects varroa miticide treatment effectiveness. Consequently, the overwinter bees had higher
than normal varroa levels, and the later spring arrival in 2022 has led to poorer bee health.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada received over 47,000 comments in a public consultation on a proposal to cancel
all outdoor uses of neonicotinoid pesticides.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions.
• Health Canada reviewed more than 47,000 comments, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data that were received onthe environmental
risks of neonicotinoids.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of neonicotinoids, and
introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered.
Health Canadawill continue to monitor the situation and take action if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA–WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES–IS TAKING
A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSUREFROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR …
• Health Canada has concluded that a complete ban on neonicotinoid pesticides is not warranted.
• As part of the public consultation on its proposed decisions, Health Canada received more than
47,000 comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces.
As well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from
various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were
reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these
neonicotinoid insecticides in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE ISSUE OF BEE OVER-WINTERING LOSSES IS RELATED TO THE USE OF
PESTICIDES …
• Bee health is a complex issue that could be impacted by many potential factors including:
diseases, pests, climate, diet and pesticides.
• Preliminary reports this spring of high overwinter losses in honeybees have been received from
some provinces. These informal reports from some beekeeper associations, members, and provincial
apiculturalists indicate that losses are likely weather-related, resulting in difficulty in controlling varroa
mites, a major pest of honeybees.
• Provinces are gathering information from beekeepers regarding over-winter losses and will
submit this data to the Canadian Association of Professional Apiculturists (CAPA). Health Canada awaits
further information on these losses and bee health through the Provinces,CAPA and Agriculture and
Agri-food Canada.
• Bee health and high overwintering losses are a concern for the bee industry and agriculture as
well as Canadians. PMRA will take into consideration additional information from the Provinces and
Agriculture and Agri-food Canada on bee health as it becomes available.
BACKGROUND
NEONICS AND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
On November 23, 2016, Health Canada proposed to phase out all agricultural uses of imidacloprid due
to unacceptable aquatic risk. This proposed decision led to a special review on the aquatic risks of two
other neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. At the time, concerns were identified by
Health Canada from available scientific information that these two pesticides were frequently being
detected in aquatic environments in Canada at concentrations that could pose a risk to aquatic insects.
Health Canada consulted on proposed special review decisions on risks to aquatic insects for clothianidin
and thiamethoxam in the fall of 2018. This review proposed the cancellation of all outdoor uses based
on risks to the aquatic environment, similar to the previous consultation on imidacloprid. Health Canada
then reviewed the more than 47,000 comments that were received via the consultation, as well asa
substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data from various
sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities. Approximately 65% of
the water monitoring information considered in the special reviews was new since the publication of the
proposed decisions.
The final special review decisions related to aquatic insects for clothianidin and thiamethoxam, and the
general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, originally targeted for fall 2020, were delayed until
March 31, 2021 and May 19, 2021 respectively, due to the unprecedented volume of information
received during consultation and the challenges of COVID-19.
In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some usesof clothianidin, thiamethoxam
and imidacloprid, and introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses
that remain registered.
NEONICS AND BEES
In 2012 and 2013, beekeepers in corn-producing regions of Canada reported an unusually high number
of incidents of bee losses that coincided with the planting of seed treated with neonicotinoid
insecticides. The bees were likely exposed to dust containing insecticide residues that were generated
during the planting of treated corn seed with modern air seeding equipment.
In 2014, based on bee mortality incidents, Health Canada implemented additional restrictions when
planting corn and soybean seeds treated with neonicotinoids in order to protect pollinators from dust
generated during planting of treated seed.
These additional protective measures contributed to a reduction in the number of incident reports
associated with neonicotinoid pesticide use during the corn and soy planting period by 70 percent in
2014 and 80 percent in 2015, compared to 2013. Incidents reported for the 2016 planting season
followed similar trends as compared to 2015. Health Canada continued to monitor and investigate
incidents over the 2016 season in collaboration with various provincial ministries.
The numberof bee incidents submitted to the PMRA has remained low since 2014 when mitigation
measures were implemented.
Health Canada's risk assessment framework for bees was developed and published in 2014 in
cooperation with the United States Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA) and the California
Department of Pesticide Regulation. The pollinator risk assessment framework and guidance represents
an advancement in how Health Canada assesses the risks posed by pesticides to bees, and allows
improved pollinatorprotection in the department's regulatory decisions and risk mitigation measures.
On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluation decisions for the
neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. Theimplementation timelines
outlined in the thiamethoxam decision were challenged by several organizations in proceedings against
the Minister of Health. The Federal Court dismissed the application in December of 2019. All required
mitigation measures have now been implemented.
On February 24, 2022 the Special Review Decision SRD2022-02 on the potential environmental risk
related to squash bee exposure to clothianidin, thiamethoxam and imidacloprid used on cucurbits, was
published. All comments received on the proposed decision were considered. Based on the comments,
an additional environmental risk assessment to address potential risk to squash bees that could be
exposed to persistent neonicotinoid residues from seed treatments was conducted as part of the Special
Review. Ultimately, the Special Review did not result in a change to the risk conclusions described in the
2019 pollinator re-evaluation decisions of these pesticides. Risks are considered acceptable when
applied according to the existing mitigationmeasures.
Health Canada applies a science-based approach to regulating pesticides and will continue to review
new scientific information as it becomes available. If the science warrants, Health Canada will take
additional regulatory action at any time, tofurther protect bees and other pollinators.
BEE HEALTH
Bee health is a complex issue that could be impacted by many potential factors including: diseases,
pests, climate, diet and pesticides.
During spring 2022, preliminary reports of high over-wintering losses were received from Alberta,
Quebec, Ontario, and Manitoba. These informal reports from beekeeper associations, members, and
provincial apiculturalists indicate that high losses are likely related to weather. 2021 had an early spring
with good weather, leading to high bee numbers in hives but also high varroa mite levels. High varroa
levels and early fall weather in 2021 led to poor varroa control since weather affects varroa miticide
treatment effectiveness. Consequently, the overwinter bees hadhigher than normal varroa levels, and
the later spring arrival in 2022 has led to poorer bee health.
Provinces are gathering information from beekeepers regarding over-winter losses and will submit this
data to the Canadian Association of Professional Apiculturists (CAPA). Health Canada awaits further
information on these losses and bee health through the Provinces, CAPA and Agriculture and Agri-food
Canada.
In the case of high over-wintering losses of honeybees, or other bee incidents, initial investigations (if
required) will be conducted by provincial ministries responsible for honeybee health. Incident reports
will be shared with Health Canada’s PMRA for further assessment.
Honeybees are actually considered livestock and their overall health falls under the purview of
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada. In addition to Health Canada’s registration of several pest control
products to control varroa mites in honeybee hives, Health Canada has participated in a number of
initiatives to better understand thestate of bee health in Canada, including: Agriculture and Agri-Food
Canada’s Bee Health Forum; the FPT Committee on Pest Management and Pesticides; the OECD working
group on pesticides: Pesticide Effects on Insect pollinator (PEIP); and the International Commission for
Plant-Pollinator Relationships Working Group.
Bee health and high overwintering losses are a concern for the bee industry and agriculture as well as
Canadians. PMRA will take into consideration additional information from the Provinces and Agriculture
and Agri-food Canada on bee health as it becomes available.
NEONICS AND HUMAN HEALTH
Based on data reviewed for the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, the assessment did not
identify human health concerns. This included additional data received following publication of the
proposed decision, along with consideration of the proposed interim decision on neonics by the United
States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
All available information will be considered in Health Canada’s ongoing cyclical re-evaluations of
clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Health Canada is expecting to publish the proposed cyclical re-
evaluation decisions of clothianidin and thiamethoxam in 2023.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
The US EPA expressed similarconcerns regarding aquatic insects in their preliminary ecological risk
assessments of the neonicotinoids in 2017. The EPA published a proposed interim decision for
acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, imidacloprid, and thiamethoxam on January 30, 2020.It contains
new measures to reduce potential ecological risks, particularly to pollinators, and to protect public
health. A final biological evaluation (i.e., endangered species) is expected in June 2022. EPA has
indicated that a further registration review interim decision is expected in late 2022.
The European Union voted to prohibit all agricultural uses of neonicotinoids except in greenhouses. This
measure came into effect on December 19, 2018. This decision was driven by unacceptable risks to bees
and other pollinators. Emergency use is permitted in some European countries.
Health Canada cannot speak to the decision-making process in other countries with regards to
neonicotinoids. Each country takes into account its own legislative requirements, policies, and scientific
analysis before making a decision. In Canada, pesticides are allowed on the market only after a full
scientific analysis is completed based on Canadian use, and the risks are found to be acceptable as per
the requirements of the Pest Control Products Act.
OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened long-standing challenges regarding substance use and
the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose deaths and harms.
• In addition, people who use drugs are also facing additional barriers and risks related to the
toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to health and social services, including life-saving
harm reduction and treatment.
KEY FACTS
• Most recent national data indicates that 26,690 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred
between January 2016 and September 2021. Toxicity of supply continues to be a major driver of the
crisis with as many as 86% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2021 (January to September)
involving fentanyl.
• Our commitment to this crisis has seen us commit over $800 million, including $282 million over
four years to community organizations.
• This includes $150 million through the Emergency Treatment Fund for provincesand territories
to improve access to evidence-based treatment services, which, when cost-matched by provinces and
territories, will result in an investment over $300 million.
• In addition, since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have receivedmore than 3.3
million visits, reversed almost 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 148,000
referrals to health and social services.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s history.
• Substance use is a public health issue, not an issue for the criminal justice system.
• The pandemic has highlighted the gaps that exist in our health system and social safety net.
• We remaincommitted to a whole-of-society approach to address the opioid overdose crisis to
ensure that Canadians receive the life-saving substance use and health supports they need.
IF PRESSED ON BUDGET 2022 COMMITMENTS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS…
• The Government of Canada has announced new federal investments through Budget 2022 to
address the overdose crisis. These investments will support harm reduction, treatment and prevention
at the community level.
• Funding from Budget 2022 will provide $100Mto expand Health Canada’s Substance Use and
Addictions Program for community-based interventions.
• The Government has committed over $800 million to address the opioid overdose crisis. We
remain committed to working with all levels of government, directservice providers, and people with
lived and living experience to save lives.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEW NUMBERS DISCLOSED IN THE OPIOID REPORT …
• Our Government remains deeply concerned over the tragic loss of so many lives to the overdose
crisis. The lackof available treatment, safer supply, and other services remain challenging.
• That is why our Government remains committed to addressing the overdose crisis through a
comprehensive approach, including naloxone access and training, supervised consumptionsites and
safer supply programs. Without these, the number of deaths would be exponentially worse.
• Our Government remains committed to working with all our partners to end this complex public
health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our Government recognizes that improved access to treatment services for substance use is
critical.
• We have approved the use of new medications for treatment, removed barriers to prescribing
and dispensing, and supported the development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist
treatment.
• We provided $150 million to provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based
treatment services.
• In March, our Government announced that, in partnership with the Standards Council of
Canada, we are developing national standards for mental health and substance use.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• Evidence shows that harm reduction measures work. Our Government will continue to support
life-saving initiatives.
• The Government has funded innovative projects, such as providing medication as an alternative
to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• Supervised consumption sites save lives. Since 2017, federally authorized supervised
consumption sites have reversed nearly 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site.
• We have provided the authority for provinces and territories to establish temporary urgent
public health need sites, otherwise known as overdose prevention sites, to address rising overdoses.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention and awareness.
• We have invested in prevention campaigns that include engaging youth and young adults on
risks and harms of substance use and the impact of stigma on people who use drugs.
• We supportedschool-based approaches that enhance student well-being in order to prevent
substance use related harms for this important population.
• We are also funding projects that promote changes in the health system to help enhance the
pathways to care for peoplewho use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our Government understands the pandemic has led to an increasingly dangerous and
unpredictable illegal drug supply.
• We have taken action by funding, through the Substance Use and Addictions Program, projects
that provide people who use drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug
supply and offer services that support people who use drugs.
• Since 2019, the Government has committed over $63 million in funding for 17 safer supply
projects in British Columbia, Ontario, Quebec and New Brunswick, and one national community of
practice.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• Evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save lives.
• Since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received more than 3.3 million visits,
reversed almost 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 148,000 referrals to
health and social services.
• These sites also provide access to other health and social services, including opportunities to
access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces, territories, and stakeholders so that Canadians
continue to have access to these lifesaving services.
IF PRESSED ON THE 6-YEAR ANNIVERSARY OF BC DECLARING A PUBLIC HEALTH EMERGENCY
• As of April 14, 2022, it has been six years since BC first declared a public health emergency due
to a significant increase in drug-related overdoses and deaths.
• As we mark this anniversary, we recognize that this complex issue continues to worsen.
• Despite this, the federal Emergencies Act is not an appropriate mechanism to address the
ongoing opioid overdose crisis, which requires a longer-term, sustained, and multi-jurisdictional effort to
address the complex, interrelated health, social and economic factors driving opioid-related deaths and
harms.
IF PRESSED ON MOMS STOP THE HARM (MSTH) LITIGATION REGARDING ALBERTA’S RECOVERY
ORIENTED OVERDOSE PREVENTION SERVICES GUIDE (NEW MEASURES FOR SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION
SITES) …
• The Government of Canada is committed to a comprehensive public health approach to the
overdose crisis that includes evidence-based harm reduction activities, such as supervised consumption
sites and services.
• The evidence is clear-supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save lives. I intend to
continue to engage and work with provinces and territories, as well as municipalities, to enable access
to evidence based services.
• We will continue to follow the litigation closely and consider its impact on federal policy and
legislation.
IF PRESSED ON SUAP FUNDING FOR MOMS STOP THE HARM (MSTH)
• MSTH is receiving $344,935 over 24 months (March 2021–March 2023) to establish a network
of volunteer and paid peer facilitators with lived andliving experience of addiction to offer support
services that will provide families with information on evidence-based services and resources.
• They will also offer harm reduction education to families on how to help keep their loved ones
safe, as well as grief support to families that have lost loved ones to overdoses.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXPERT TASK FORCE ON SUBSTANCE USE …
• We are committed to a comprehensive public health approach to substance use that is focused
on reducing harms, saving lives, andgetting people the supports they need.
• We are studying the Expert Task Force on Substance Use recommendations on how we can
better treat substance use as a health issue. These recommendations are publicly available on the
Health Canada website.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• In May 2021, the Canadian Pain Task Force published their final report with recommendations
to ensure people with pain are recognized and supported, and that pain is understood, prevented, and
effectively treated.
• We have invested over$175M in research through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and close to $19M in funding for 12 initiatives through the Substance Use and Addictions Program
(SUAP) focused on improving opioid prescribing practices and pain management.
• We will continue to work with our partners to explore implementing the recommendations.
IF PRESSED ON DIACETYLMORPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE (DAM) …
• On February 16, 2022, Health Canada authorized Diacetylmorphine Hydrochloride (DAM) as a
supervised injectable opioid agonist treatment.
• Diacetylmorphine has already been approved in a number of European countries. Evidence
shows that it can help stabilize and improve the health of some people who are living with an addiction,
including increasing their retention in treatment programs.
• As with all authorized drugs, Health Canada will monitor its safety and effectiveness and will
take prompt action should concerns arise.
IF PRESSED ON SUAP FUNDING …
• Budget 2022 committed $100 million over three years, to the Substance Use and Addictions
Program (SUAP) to support harm reduction, treatment, and prevention at the community level.
• Through Budget 2021, $116M over two years was provided to SUAP to support a range of
innovative approaches. To disperse these funds the department launched a national call for proposals
seeking new efforts to reduce, prevent, and address the harms from substance use. Applicants were
notified of funding decisions and the Department is currently negotiating funding agreements.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTHCANADA REGULATORY ACTIONS
• Pharmaceutical companies have a role to play in addressing the opioid overdose crisis.
• In June 2018, following a call to action by the Government of Canada, numerous pharmaceutical
companies committed to suspending all promotional and advertising activities related to prescription
opioids.
• The Food and Drugs Act was amended to strengthen the penalties for misleading advertising.
The maximum penalty is now up to $5 million per offence.
• Health Canada has further restricted the marketing and advertising of opioids by imposing
additional Terms and Conditions for prescription opioid-containing products.
BACKGROUND
On April 14, 2016, BC first declared a public health emergency due to the rise in opioid-related deaths.
Since then, two other PTs have also declared emergencies: Alberta declared a public health crisis in May
2017 and the Yukon declared a substance use health emergency in January 2022.
Most recent national data indicates that 26,690 apparent opioid toxicity deathsoccurred between
January 2016 and September 2021. Toxicity of supply continues to be a major driver of the crisis with as
many as 86% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2021 (January to September) involving
fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with death most
common among males and individuals aged 20 to 59 years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing higher risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Several jurisdictions have observed unprecedented numbers
and rates in relation to the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be
highly impacted. In 2021, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 2,232 illegal drug toxicity
deaths, a 26% increase from 2020 and a 127% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally,
the crisis in BC has continued into 2022 with 548 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths between January
and March 2022, equating to approximately 6 deaths a day in the province. This represents a slight
increase over the same time period in 2021 (535 deaths).
Data released by Alberta in March 2022 indicated that in 2021 the province reported 1,758 deaths from
all substances, the highest number per year since the province began tracking such deaths in 2016. Of
these deaths, 1,602 were related to opioids. The highest opioid-related death count was in Edmonton
(618) followed by Calgary (498).
Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people have also surged. First Nations people in BC died
of an overdose at 4.8 times the rate of other BC residents from January to June of 2021. In Alberta, First
Nations people died of an accidental opioid overdose at seven times the rate of other residents between
January and June of 2020. In Saskatchewan, almost three times asmany First Nations females died from
accidental deaths involving opioids than Caucasian females did in 2021.
COLLECTION OF NATIONAL OPIOID-AND STIMULANT-RELATED DATA
The Public Health Agency of Canada publishes quarterly data on opioid-and stimulant-related harms on
behalf of the Special Advisory Committee (SAC) on the Epidemic of Opioid Overdoses. Data on opioid-
and stimulant-related deaths is provided by Chief Coroners and Chief Medical Examiners. The time
required to complete an investigation into the cause of death for someone suspected of an overdose
can range from approximately three to 24 months.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made commitments of over
$800M toaddress the overdose crisis and substance use-related harms. Additional actions to date
include: improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products andtools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statement to help supportcommunity-based organizations responding
to substance use issues address the additional challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In March
2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of naloxone kits and opioid
overdose response training to support communities that have been particularly affected by the opioid
overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving health outcomes of their residents. Budget
2021 also committed an additional $116 million to fund projectsthrough the Substance Use and
Addictions Program (SUAP). A portion of the funds is already being used on the ground. For example,
additional funding has been announced for four safer supply pilot projects in Ontario and British
Columbia. Budget 2022 proposes to provide $100 million over three years, starting in 2022-23 to Health
Canada for the Substance Use and Addictions Program to support harm reduction, treatment, and
prevention at the community level.
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action to make it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and for direct service providers
to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
The Minister of Health establishedan Expert Task Force on Substance Use in March 2021 that provided
expert advice on Canada’s federal drug policy, including examining potential alternatives to criminal
penalties for personal drug possession. The Task Force provided its final advice on alternatives to
criminal penalties in May 2021, and on federal drug policy in June 2021. Both reports of the Task Force
have been made publicly available and can be found online at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-
force-substance-use/reports.html.
USE OF THE FEDERAL EMERGENCIES ACT TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
The Emergencies Act can grant temporary additional and necessary powers to the federal government
whenprovincial, territorial and federal tools are no longer sufficient to deal effectively with the serious
issues being faced.
There are four types of emergencies that can be declared under the Emergencies Act:
• A public welfare emergency;
• A public orderemergency;
• An international emergency; and
• A war emergency.
The Emergencies Act includes a suite of stringent, built-in protections that ensure democratic oversight
and accountability with respect to the way in which the Government exercises its powersunder the Act.
Given the rigorous criteria that must be met to invoke the Emergencies Act, the Act is intended to serve
as a tool of last resort to ensure the safety and security of Canadians in cases of temporary, critical
national emergencies thatcannot be addressed with existing laws.
CHALLENGE TO THE PROVINCE OF ALBERTA’S RECOVERY ORIENTED OVERDOSE PREVENTION SERVICES
GUIDE
On August 13, 2021, Moms Stop the Harm Society (MSTH) and Lethbridge Overdose Prevention Society
(LOPS) commenced a legalaction in the Court of Queen’s Bench of Alberta against Her Majesty the
Queen in Right of Alberta seeking an Order declaring the provincial Recovery Oriented Overdose
Prevention Services Guide to be constitutionally invalid and inoperable, and of no forceand effect on
the basis that it is outside of provincial jurisdiction, and violates Charter rights. Alberta’s Recovery
Oriented Overdose Prevention Services Guide imposes new measures on supervised consumption
services in Alberta, including the creation ofa licencing regime for these services and includes an
obligation that supervised consumption service providers ask for a client’s personal health number at
initial intake.
DIACETYLMORPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE DRUG AUTHORIZATION
On February 16, 2022, Health Canada authorized Diacetylmorphine Hydrochloride (DAM) as a
supervised injectable opioid agonist treatment (siOAT) for adult patients with severe opioid use disorder
(OUD) who use injectable opioids and have been unsuccessful with previous attempts at opioidagonist
therapy, including methadone maintenance therapy.
DAM is available only by prescription. Health care professionals who meet the definition of ‘practitioner’
under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act can prescribe controlled substances. Prescribing ability is
further controlled by provincial/territorial scope of practice and any regulatory college requirements for
the prescribing of DAM.
As with any other form of care, a practitioner’s decision to prescribe medications for safer supply
dependson:
• their professional judgement
• the unique needs of each patient
• the rules and regulations in their province or territory
Diacetylmorphine has been approved as a treatment option for severe OUD in a number of countries,
including Switzerland, theUnited Kingdom, Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. Prior to this
authorization, internationally-produced DAM was only available on an emergency basis through the List
of Drugs for an Urgent Public Health Need.
At this time, only one company has applied for the authorization of DAM in Canada. Should additional
companies wish to apply for authorization, Health Canada would review their submissions. The company
receiving the authorization, Pharmascience Inc., expects to initially provide DAM supply onlyfor the
province of British Columbia.
The new authorized indication for DAM is as an evidence-based treatment option for severe OUD; this
Health Canada authorization adds a new tool for practitioners to care and prevent harms for people
with severe opioiddisorder, including overdose.
On February 9, 2018, Purdue Pharma in the United States (U.S.) committed to stop marketing opioids to
physicians. This commitment was well-received and a strong example of how the pharmaceutical
industry can support a “re-centering of the pendulum” of prescribing opioids.
In June 2018, the Minister of Health issued a letter to Canadian manufacturers and distributors of
opioids, seeking their commitment to respond to the opioid crisis by immediately ceasing any and all
marketing and advertising of opioids to health care professionals.
Following the call to action by the Minister of Health, Ginette Petitpas Taylor, Purdue Pharma responded
to the Minister of Health and indicated that as of June 20, 2018 it had “suspended allpromotional and
advertising activities relating to our prescription opioids, pending the outcome of your consultation and
the implementation of new regulations.”
LITIGATION AND RELATED CHANGES TO THE FOOD AND DRUGS ACT
US: In 2007, Purdue (US) reached asettlement of $634.5M and acknowledged misleading marketing
practices.
Canada: In March 2018, a Saskatchewan judge rejected the proposed $20M Purdue Pharma Canada
class-action settlement, including $2M to provinces. The settlement had previously been approved by
courts in Ontario, Quebec and Nova Scotia.
BC filed a class action lawsuit in August 2018 against approximately 50 Opioid manufacturers and
distributors for allegedly making false or misleading representations on the effects and consequences of
prescription opioids.
The Government of Canada continues to support and work collaboratively with the provincial and
territorial governments in British Columbia’s proposed legal action against opioid manufacturers and
distributors.
The Government of Canada has not closed the door on taking legal action in Canada against opioid
manufacturers for past inappropriate marketing practices.
The Government of Canada is exploring all appropriate options to hold industry accountable for its role
in the opioid crisis.
While we have not closed the door on pursuing legal action for past wrongdoing, the reality is that the
strong penalties on the books today were not in place when the inappropriate marketing of opioids was
alleged to have occurred. The maximum penalty for past offences under the Food and Drugs Act was
$5,000 per offence. This means that the Government of Canada could spend millions of dollars and
years building a case for criminal charges, with the prospect of only a small fine as a penalty.
Since that time, however, the Food and Drugs Act has been amended to dramatically strengthen the
penalties available. Should a similar situation arise today, the maximum penalty is now up to $5 million
per offence. In addition, if the offence involves “knowingly or recklessly causing a serious risk of injury to
human health,” the fine is left entirely to the discretion of the court, with no cap on the financial
penalty.
These penalties could not be applied to situations that arose before the changes in the law. Hence, our
focus is on enforcement of the laws as they exist today and preventing improper marketing practices in
the future.
Health Canada has further restricted the marketing and advertising of opioids by imposing additional
Terms and Conditions forprescription opioid-containing products. The additional Terms and Conditions
restricts all advertising materials of Class B opioids provided to health care professionals to only
statements that have been authorized by Health Canada in the Product Monograph.
Health Canada has also launched a web-based platform titled Stop Illegal Marketing of Drugs and
Devices to raise awareness about illegal marketing of drugs and medical devices, educate health care
professionals on the rules governing health product advertising in Canada, as well as provide a quick and
easy tool to report suspected misleading marketing practices to Health Canada. A page of this platform
is dedicated to the advertising of controlled substances, including opioids.
As part of our commitmentto openness and transparency, we’re making more information available to
the public, including records of our meetings and correspondence with stakeholders.
PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUE
• Perinatal mental illness is a significant complication of pregnancy and the postpartum period
and refers to mental health conditions experienced during this time, including major depressive disorder
and anxiety disorders.
• Addressing perinatal mental health includes more than identifying and treating mental illness
during the perinatal period. Mental health promotion and mental illness prevention activities, such as
improving the mental health literacy of pregnant and postpartum individuals, are a critical part of
addressing perinatal mental health needs.
KEY FACTS
• According to a 2018 Government of Canada survey, almost one quarter (23%) of mothers
reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety disorder. These reports
varied across provinces, ranging from 16% in Saskatchewan to 31% in Nova Scotia. Covid-19 has
exacerbated the problem; as the rates of perinatal mental health issues and the need for services has
increased, the availability of services has decreased due to shutdowns.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to promotingthe mental health and wellbeing of mothers and
children.
• We have made significant investments in programs that support the mental health of pregnant
and postpartum individuals, including funding for improving community-level access to supports, and
$26.5 million annually for the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP), which serves 236 projects with
over 45,000 participants.
• Through such investments and the development of health promotion resources, we are
ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, when and where needed.
IF PRESSED ON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS …
• The mandate of the Minister of Mental Health and Addictions is to ensure that mental health
care is treated as a full and equal part of our universal health care system, working in close collaboration
with provinces and territories, and to lead a whole-of-society approach to address problematic
substance use in Canada.
• Our Government is committed to ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, and
establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer to help expand the delivery of high
quality, accessible and free mental health services, including for prevention and treatment.
IF PRESSED ON SUPPORTS CURRENTLY AVAILABLE TO ADDRESS PERINATAL MENTALHEALTHAND
SUBSTANCE USE CHALLENGES …
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government.
• In April 2020, our Government launched an online mental health and substance use support
portal, Wellness Together Canada(WTC), which provides free, credible information and supports
available 24/7 to individuals across Canada in both official languages to help address their mild to
moderate mental health and substance use issues
• In addition, via PocketWell, the WTC companion app, individuals can link to the portal to access
resources ranging from self-assessment to customized support based on their assessment.
IF PRESSED ON PROGRESS MADE TOWARDS 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS …
• Health Canada has been working closely with Canada’s leading experts in the field to gain a
better understanding of wise practices, gaps and opportunities with respect to perinatal mental health
services in Canada.
• On March 9th, 2022, a roundtable was held with a range of different stakeholder groups, to
encompass multiple perspectives, including clinical experts and practitioners, individuals with lived and
living experience, policy-makers and researchers/academics.
• This session will help inform further policy development and stakeholder engagement by the
Health Portfolio as we considers approaches to make progress in this important policy area.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONALSTANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH …
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to
develop national standards for mental health and substance use services so Canadians can get fast
access to the support they need, when they need it.
• On March 14th, the Government of Canada announced a partnership with the Standards Council
ofCanada–a Federal Crown Corporation with demonstrated expertise in national standardization
initiatives–to develop a suite of national standards for delivering mental health and substance use
services, leveraging significant work done to date in this field.
BACKGROUND
The perinatal period includes both pregnancy and the postpartum period. Perinatal mental health is a
state of well-being in which a pregnant or postpartum person realizes their own abilities, can cope with
the normal stresses of life andwork productively, care for themselves and their newborn, and is able to
make a contribution to their community and society.
Perinatal mental illness refers to mental health conditions experienced “around” pregnancy. This
includes pre-existing mental health conditions, but can also refer to new or different mental health
concerns arising around this period.
Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significant public health issues, increasing the risk of poor
mental and physical health outcomes for mothers along with potential impacts for children and families.
If untreated, consequences include prolonged maternal depression, paternal depression, partner
relationship dissatisfaction and conflict, impaired parent-infant interactions and attachment, risk for
impaired cognitive or psychosocial development for the child (and increased risk of later child
psychopathology) and, in extreme situations, maternal suicide or infanticide. Maternal deaths with a
mental health component, by suicide or drug toxicity,are increasingly recognized as making up a
significant proportion of all maternal deaths.
In recent years, some stakeholders have called for greater federal action in the area of perinatal mental
health. On May 13, 2020, a petition was brought forward tocreate a national perinatal mental health
strategy that would provide direction, policy, and funding to develop specialized, comprehensive
perinatal mental health care services. This includes universal screening and timely access to treatment
for all people during pregnancy and the postpartum period.
On May 5, 2021 (World Maternal Mental Health Day), various MP’s offices sent a request to the former
Minister of Health’s Office on behalf of their constituents regarding a National Perinatal Mental Health
Strategy. It was brought forward by MP Heather McPherson (Edmonton-Strathcona).
On June 3, 2021, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-306, which calls for a National
Perinatal Mental Health Strategy that includes mental health screening andtreatment services during
the full perinatal period. This Bill died on the order paper when Parliament was dissolved in August
2021.
On March 31, 2022, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-265, which again called for
a National PerinatalMental Health Strategy Act that includes measures to provide perinatal mental
health screening and services and reduce barriers to care, as well as measures to increase perinatal
mental health awareness, training and research.
Perinatal Surveillance
ThePublic Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System monitors and
reports on maternal, fetal and infant health determinants and outcomes while conducting targeted
epidemiological research to address emerging issues. This program has focused largely on indicators of
physical health, some of which can be associated with maternal mental health (e.g., fetal/infant
mortality, maternal chronic diseases, smoking, and alcohol use during pregnancy). However, formal
indicators concerning risk and protective factors for maternal mental health have yet to be established,
as there are presently no routine national sources of data on maternal mental health or maternal access
to/use of mental health services.
PHAC Policy and Program Activities
The Health Portfolio undertakes a number of activities to promote maternal and child health, which
includes supporting positive maternal mental health during the perinatal periods. PHAC makes
significant investments to support perinatal mental health through programs aimed at improving
community-level access to supports for prenatal and recently postpartum people, new parents and
young children facing health inequities. In particular, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program provides
$26.5 million annually to improve the health of at-risk pregnant individuals, with a focus on mental
health, nutrition, and the promotion of positive health behaviours during pregnancy. Through 236
funded projects, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program serves more than 45,000 participants across
Canada each year.
PHAC also supports the development of several resources promoting the positive mental health of
pregnant/postpartum individuals. These resources provide guidance and advice for both healthcare
professionals and individualsthat may face poor mental health during the perinatal period, including
Family-Centred Maternity and Newborn Care National Guidelines; the Mothers’ Mental Health Toolkit;
and ‘Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy’.
To provide rapid support for new parents during the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada and PHAC have
recently developed resources to support the mental health of those who are pregnant or have recently
had a baby.
PLASMA COLLECTION
ISSUE
• Many Canadians rely on plasmato treat life-threatening conditions. During the COVID-19 crisis,
global demand, prices, and shortages have increased. The federal government recognizes that increasing
domestic plasma sufficiency will help to provide security of supply. Budget 2021 funding will allow
Canadian Blood Services to construct and start-up six plasma collection sites across the country by 2024.
KEY FACTS
• At the end of 2020-21, Canadian Blood Services (CBS) was only able to supply 15% of the plasma
needed to make plasma-derivedproducts used by Canadians outside of Québec. Québec operates its
blood system, through Héma-Québec, separately from the other Provinces and Territories (PTs) and has
already attained a greater percentage of domestic plasma supply at 22%. Prior to the pandemic, PTs,
except Québec, approved three new proof-of-concept sites–CBS opened these sites in 2020-21. CBS is
also on track to open two further sites to the public, in Orleans and Brampton, by spring 2022, in
addition to the six plasma collection sitesplanned with federal investments by 2024.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the security of Canada’s
supply of plasma-derived products.
• Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with thenational blood and plasma agency
is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area for the health and safety of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 provides $20 million, which allows Canadian Blood Services to build six new
dedicated plasma collection sites across Canada to achieve a greater domestic supply.
BACKGROUND
Plasma-derived products (PDPs) are needed by thousands of Canadians to treat immune deficiencies,
rare blood disorders, and other conditions. PDPs are manufactured from plasma through multiple
processing steps. Most plasma products used worldwide are made from paid plasma donations and
collected by the commercial sector. As the federal regulator, Health Canada is responsible for
maintaining the safety of Canada’s blood supply andthe plasma used in the production of drugs. Any
establishment that collects plasma must hold a HC authorization and license, as well as meet the strict
safety requirements under the Food and Drugs Act.
The need to enhance domestic plasma collection has been a long-standing issue given Canada’s
dependence on paid-donor plasma from the United States. In 2019-20, Canadian Blood Services (CBS)
was only able to supply 14% of the plasma needed to make PDPs used by Canadians outside of Québec.
By the end of 2020-21, three new proof-of-concept plasma collection sites, opened by CBS over that
year, raised this value to 15%.
Before federal funding was announced, PTs decided to provide CBS with start-up and operational funds
for two new plasma collection sites. CBSremains on track to open these sites to the public by spring
2022.
The $20M in funding described in Budget 2021 is no longer sufficient to construct eight sites due to large
COVID-19-related cost increases for labour, materials, and other necessary items/services. Given new
financial realities, federal investments will only support the construction of six new plasma collection
sites over 2022-24. CBS is currently determining locations for these sites.
However, with PT investments for two sites and federalinvestments for six sites, there will still be a total
of eight new plasma collection sites. Together these sites are projected to increase domestic plasma
sufficiency to 22% by 2027-28.
Québec operates its blood system, through Héma-Québec, separately from the other PTs and has
already attained that value of domestic plasma supply.
The Budget 2021 investment in CBS provides opportunities for Canadians, including for construction of
site enhancements and necessary refurbishments, as well as high qualityjobs staffing the centres. The
investment will also increase domestic plasma collection capacity and security of critically important
therapeutics for Canadians, and has the potential to help mitigate rising healthcare costs for PTs within a
decade.
PESTICIDE PROGRAM TRANSFORMATION AND TARGETED REVIEW OF THE PEST CONTROL PRODUCTS
ACT
ISSUE
• On August 4th, 2021, the Federal Government announced that it would begin consulting on
specific provisions of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) to consider ways to balance how pesticide
review processes are initiated in Canada and increase transparency. In addition, the Federal
Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's Pest Management Regulatory
Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest management research, to be
supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
• This includes $42 million over three years to be invested in the PMRA to further strengthen its
oversight and protection of human health and the environment. A further $7 million will be invested to
AAFC, and $1 million to ECCC in supporting work, to accelerate the research, development and adoption
of alternative pest management solutions.
• This investment supports HealthCanada’s commitment set forth in the Prime Minister’s
Mandate letter: To ensure Canadians are protected from risks associated with the use of pesticides and
to better protect human health, wildlife and the environment, modernize and strengthen the Pest
Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent scientific evidence and
input to the decision-making process.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada's Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) is undergoing a transformation
process that will strengthen its oversight and its protection of human health and the environment. The
transformation process will ensure the pesticide review process meets the expectations of Canadians in
the areas of transparency and sustainability.
• Transformation will beundertaken in four major areas: improved transparency; increased use of
real-world data and independent advice; strengthened human health and environmental protection
through modernized business processes; and a targeted review of the Pest Control Products Act.
• The targeted legislative review will help the PMRA determine the legislative changes to the
PCPA required to modernize and strengthen the regulatory system on issues like transparency,
modernized business processes and the use of real world data.
• On March 21, 2022, Health Canada launched consultations on specific elements of the Pest
Control Products Act (PCPA) through the discussion paper: Further Strengthening Protection of Health
and the Environment: Targeted Review of the Pest Control Products Act.
• This consultation will run until June 30, 2022 and seeks input to inform the targeted review of
specific elements of the PCPA. The consultation is designed to help identify potential legislative changes
that could strengthen human health and environmental through modernized review processes,
improved transparency and stakeholder accessibility, and increased use of real-world and independent
data in decision-making.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making
evidence-based scientific decisions. Pesticides are only registered in Canada after being thoroughly
assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the environment will result from their use.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes improving access to independent data, modernized business processes, and
improving transparency of the regulatory process and decision-making on pesticides.
• In 2021, theFederal Government promised results for Canadians by modernizing and
strengthening the Pest Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent
scientific evidence and input to the decision-making process. To fulfil these objectives, Health Canada
started extensive public consultations on March 21, 2022, including engagement with Indigenous
communities, partners and other stakeholders, on ways the Government of Canada can increase
transparency and strengthen human health and environmental protections when reviewing pesticides.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER DETAIL OF THE FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT
• The 42 million dollars announced on August 4, 2021 for the PMRA will allow the generation of
additional independent data (including new water and agricultural monitoring information) and create
an expert panel to provide advice, when appropriate, on pesticides.
• On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new
Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. Nominations closed March 11, 2022
and the committee membership will be announced in the coming weeks. The committee is expected to
hold its first meeting later this spring.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, all pesticides are subject to the federalPest Control Products Act (PCPA) administered by
Health Canada. Under the Act, pesticide products must be registered, or otherwise authorized, before
they may be sold or used in Canada.
Before pesticides are approved, they must undergo a rigorous scientific assessment process, inclusive of
hundreds of types of scientific studies, that provides reasonable certainty that no harm to human health
and the environment will occur when it is used according to label directions.
In 2021, the Federal Governmentpromised results for Canadians by modernizing and strengthening the
Pest Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent scientific evidence and
input to the decision-making process. To fulfil these objectives, Health Canada started extensive public
consultations on March 21, 2022, including engagement with Indigenous communities, partners and
other stakeholders, on ways the Government of Canada can increase transparency and strengthen
human health and environmental protections when reviewing pesticides.
The Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest management research,
to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
This includes $42 million over three years for the PMRA to further strengthen its oversight and
protection of human health and the environment. This includes improving the availability of
independent data to further support pesticide review decisions, and the transparency of decision-
making. A further $7 million will be invested in AAFC to accelerate the research, development and
adoption of alternative pest management solutions and $1 million to ECCC to support the work.
Health Canada's Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) is undertaking a transformation process
that will strengthen its oversight and its protection of human health and the environment. The
transformation process will ensure the pesticide review process meetsthe expectations of Canadians in
the areas of transparency and sustainability.
Transformation will be undertaken in four major areas: improved transparency; increased use of real-
world data and independent advice; strengthened human health and environmental protection through
modernized business processes; and a targeted review of the Pest Control Products Act.
This new funding will support development of opportunities for external parties such as non-
government organizations, universities, and governments to provide independent data for consideration
in the pesticide approval process, as well as allow Health Canada to increase independent data
generation. It will allow the modernization of business processes for pesticide reviews to ensure they
strengthen environmental and human health protection, and improve transparency and stakeholder
accessibility. It will also allow the creation of a new expert panel process to provide advice, as
appropriate, prior to certain evidence-based decisions of the PMRA on pesticides.
On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new Science
Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. Nominations closed March 11, 2022 and the
committee membership will be announced in thecoming weeks. The Committee will provide expert,
independent scientific advice to support Health Canada in evidence-based decision making on pesticides
to better protect human health, wildlife and the environment.
The Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada will provide independent scientific
advice in response to targeted questions from the PMRA related to specific technical aspects of
assessments or scientific reviews. For example, PMRA could ask the Committee to provide scientific
advice on certain assumptions or scientific data underpinning a particular pesticide assessment;
however, not all pesticide decisions will go to the Committee for specific scientific advice.
On March 21, 2022, Health Canada launched consultations on specific elements of the Pest Control
Products Act (PCPA) through the discussion paper: Further Strengthening Protection of Health and the
Environment: Targeted Review of the Pest Control Products Act.
This consultation will run until June 30, 2022 and seeks input to inform the targeted review of specific
elements of the PCPA. The consultation is designed to help identify potential legislative changes that
could strengthen human health and environmental through modernized review processes, improved
transparency and stakeholder accessibility, and increased use of real-world and independent data in
decision making.
PSYCHEDELICS
ISSUE
• There is significant interest in the potential use of psychedelics, particularly psilocybin(“magic
mushrooms”) and MDMA, for the treatment of a variety of serious mental health conditions including
major depressive disorder, treatment-resistant depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. At
present, there are no drugs containing psilocybinor MDMA approved for sale in Canada or
internationally. Patients, practitioners and researchers are asking Health Canada to consider increasing
access to psychedelics so they can explore their potential use as therapeutic products.
• Sexual misconduct allegations on clinical trials sponsored by the Multidisciplinary Association for
Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) have also drawn recent media attention. The Department is reviewing
information from a related complaint received in March 2022, along with any new information that
becomes available, and will not hesitate to take appropriate enforcement action, should non-
compliance with federal requirements be identified.
KEY FACTS
• In Canada, psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy is being tested in clinical trials to treat patients
with selected mental health disorders.
• Health Canada has authorized several clinical trials with psilocybin and we are encouraging
further research in this area.
• On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments were made to allow health care practitioners, on
behalf of patients, to request access to restricted drugs, including psilocybin and MDMA, through Health
Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP).
• Health Canada has also granted exemptions under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to patients with serious or life threatening illnesses, when conventional treatments have
failed, to allow them to possess psilocybin while undergoing psychotherapy as well as to a small
number of health care professionals for professionaltraining purposes.
KEY MESSAGES
• We are deeply concerned about the burden of mental illness on Canadians, their families, and
their communities.
• While psychedelics like MDMA and psilocybin [sai·luh·sai·bn] have shown promise in clinical
trials for thetreatment of some illnesses, further research is still needed.
• Clinical trials are the most appropriate and effective way to advance research with unauthorized
drugs, like psilocybin and MDMA, because they have safeguards in place to protect the healthand safety
of patients.
• I'm very happy to report that the number of authorized clinical trials with these substances has
increased significantly over the past year-a trend our government is hoping will continue.
IF PRESSED ON PSILOCYBIN EXEMPTION REQUESTS FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS …
• Health Canada is aware that psilocybin is being studied by researchers in Canada and
internationally.
• At this time, there are no approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin or MDMA in
Canada or elsewhere.
• Health Canada has undertaken further consultations and concluded that clinical trials are the
most appropriate mechanism for health care professionals who wish to improve their knowledge of
psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
• Clinical trials ensure that the interests of patients are protected and that a product is
administered in accordance with national and international ethical, medical, and scientific standards.
IF PRESSED ON RECENT CBC ARTICLE AND THE RELATED COMPLAINT OF MISCONDUCT AT MAPS
CLINICAL TRIAL …
• Protecting the health and safety of patients, including those in clinical trials, is of the utmost
importance to Health Canada.
• Health Canada is aware of the serious allegations related to the Multidisciplinary Association for
Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) clinical trial recently reported in the media, and received a related complaint
on March 4, 2022, from a group of scholars and journalists in the field of psychedelics.
• The complaint reported potential issues of research integrity, ethics and safety in five MDMA
trials conducted by MAPS. The complainants requested greater safeguards to ensure the safety of study
participants, especially to address the risk of suicide. The complainants noted that allegations related to
investigator misconducthad been reported to law enforcement and to the College of Physicians and
Surgeons of British Columbia.
IF PRESSED ON THE ACTIONS BY HEALTH CANADARELATED TO THE MAPS COMPLAINT…
• Health Canada has determined that of the trials referenced in the complaint, one was not
conducted in Canada, two of the trials conducted in Canada are completed, and of the two other
approved trials, one does not have any sites in Canada, and the other has two active sites that are open
to enrollment.
• One of the completed trials was inspected in 2019 and was found compliant.
• The Department has completed its review of the complaint information and all previously
authorised Clinical Trial Applications involving the use of MDMA. The review has not indicated a need
for additional compliance and enforcement action.
• The Department will be prioritizing onsite inspections for any active trial sites involving MDMA.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT PROTECTION IN CLINICAL TRIALS …
• Health Canada recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to safe clinical trials.
• Health Canada’s role includes a rigorous, science-based review of all clinical trial applications in
Canada, and subsequent inspection activities to help ensure compliance with Good Clinical Practices.
• Research Ethics Boards ensure the protection of participants, while Colleges of Physicians and
Surgeons ensure quality care is provided by their members.
• When clinical trials include psychedelics, additional safeguards are implemented to protect
patients.
• Together, these measures offer layers of protection to minimize and address risks throughout a
clinical trial.
IF PRESSED ON SECTION 56(1) EXEMPTIONS FOR PSILOCYBIN …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that many Canadians with terminal and chronic illness
are suffering.
• The safety and well-being of Canadians is the paramount concern. At this time, there are no
approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin in Canada or elsewhere.
• This means there is no product containing psilocybin that has been assessed for its safety,
efficacy and quality.
• Clinical trials remain the best method to advance our knowledge about products with a possible
medical benefit, such as psilocybin. Clinical trials protect patients by providing a framework so that a
potential treatment is administered in accordance with national and international ethical, medical and
scientific standards.
• For emergency treatment purposes or by exception, and on compassionate grounds, there are
pathways to access thesesubstances.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program (SAP) permits health care practitioners to request
access to drugs that have shown promise in clinical trials, or been approved in other countries, but that
have not yet been approved for sale in Canada.
• By exception, and on compassionate grounds, patients can seek an exemption under subsection
56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to possess and use psilocybin.
• Health Canada continues to prioritize exemption requests from terminally ill patients to treat
end-of-life psychological distress.
IF PRESSED ON HOW EXEMPTIONS ARE REVIEWED…
• Each request for an exemption is carefully reviewed on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
all relevant considerations, including evidence of potential benefits and risks or harms to Canadians.
• In the case of psilocybin, Health Canada’s review includes consideration of the individual’s
medical condition, whether conventional therapies and other regulatory pathways have been
considered, and the scientific evidence available to support the request.
• The Department continues to process requests for exemptions, while prioritizing requests from
patients who are terminally ill.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM AND ACCESS TO A “SECURE SUPPLY” OFPSILOCYBIN …
• Health Canada has not evaluated the efficacy and safety of psilocybin, nor has it approved its
sale for therapeutic use under the Food and Drug Regulations.
• As of January 5, 2022, health care practitioners can request access, on behalf ofpatients with
serious or life-threatening conditions, to restricted drugs such as psilocybin, through the Special Access
Program. All requests are assessed on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the patient’s
condition, availability of other treatment options, and available evidence of the safety and efficacy of
the drug.
BACKGROUND
USE OF PSYCHEDELICS FOR THERAPEUTIC PURPOSES IN CANADA
Canadians are increasingly seeking novel approaches for the treatment of mental health issues. As such,
interest in the potential therapeutic use of psychedelics for the treatment of mental health disorders is
on the rise.
Psilocybin is one of the active ingredients in magic mushrooms, while MDMA is a synthetic compound
made in laboratories. There are many different kinds of psychedelics including LSD (acid), DMT
(ayahuasca), mescaline (peyote), etc. Many psychedelics are being studied as an adjunct therapy
alongside conventional psychotherapeutic techniques in clinical settings. This is also known as
psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
Most psychedelics (also known as hallucinogens) are controlled as “restricted drugs” under the
Controlled Drugs andSubstances Act (CDSA). Restricted drugs generally have no approved therapeutic
uses and can only be used for research or scientific purposes, including in authorized clinical trials. No
products containing psilocybin have been approved in the US, Canada, or internationally.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has designated psilocybin as a “breakthrough-
therapy” for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression/Major Depressive Disorder. Similarly,
MDMA has received “breakthrough-therapy” designation for the treatment of PTSD by the FDA. A
“breakthrough-therapy” designation is a process designed to fast track the drug review and approval
process for drugs that are intended to treat a serious condition where preliminary clinical evidence
indicates that the drug may be a substantial improvement over existing therapeutic options for a
particular medical condition.
ACCESS TO PSILOCYBIN
Psychedelics are subject to legal controls under the Food and Drugs Act and the CDSA. This means that
access to psilocybin and other psychedelic restricted drugs must be authorized by Health Canada. At this
time, there are three possible options for individuals to access restricted drugs, namely through
participation in an approved clinical trial, throughthe Special Access Program, and through a subsection
56(1) exemption under the CDSA.
Clinical trials
Health Canada has taken a number of steps to encourage further clinical research on psychedelics.
Health Canada has hosted two Clinical Trials 101 information sessions (in July 2021 and March 2022) to
provide an overview of the clinical trial application process to researchers interested in conducting
clinical trials with psychedelics. Health Canada also published a Notice to Stakeholders outlining the
general requirements to conducting clinical research with psilocybin and has met with numerous
researchers to clarify data requirements.
Health Canada has also approved several clinical trials with psilocybin and MDMA since 2018. These
include clinical trialsto assess the efficacy of psilocybin in patients with depression or treatment-
resistant depression, the safety of low-doses of psilocybin, and the safety of psilocybin for health care
providers enrolled in a psychedelic training program. In Spring 2022, the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research will be launching a funding opportunity that will provide up to $3 million to support clinical
trials looking at the safety and early efficacy of using psilocybin in combination with psychotherapy for
the treatmentof substance use and mental health disorders.
Safety Requirements for Clinical Trials
Organizations at the federal and provincial/territorial levels have different roles with respect to the
regulation and oversight of clinical trials. Together, they offerlayers of protection to Canadians, using
various measures to minimize and address risks before, during and after a clinical trial.
Under the Food and Drugs Act (Act) and related regulations, Health Canada conducts rigorous, science-
based reviews of all clinical trial applications in Canada, in accordance with the objectives of the Act, to
protect the health and safety of clinical trial participants. In general, for all clinical trials, sponsors must
demonstrate that appropriate measures are in place to mitigate risks to participants; that potential risks
are communicated to and accepted by participants; and that approval by a Research Ethics Board has
been obtained. In clinical trials involving MDMA, known for potentially inducing emotional vulnerability,
additional safeguards have been implemented. These safeguards have included, for example in the case
of the Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) clinical trials, that MDMA trials must
be video recorded to minimize the risk of abuseand to verify that the therapy was properly conducted.
Although complaints have been rare, when the Department becomes aware of a complaint or possible
misconduct related to a clinical trial that could put the physical and mental health of the subjects atrisk
or affect the integrity of the clinical data, steps are taken to verify whether the requirements of the Act
and related regulations are being met.
Should non-compliance be identified, the Department has a number of compliance and enforcement
options available to correct non-compliance or mitigate the risk to Canadians, including requiring
corrective actions, trial suspension or cancellation.
Multidisciplinary Association for Psychedelic Studies (MAPS) Clinical Trial
MAPS is a non-profit research and educational organization conducting international clinical trials on
MDMA-assisted therapy as a treatment for Post Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) andother conditions.
MAPS has sponsored a multitude of clinical studies over more than a decade; over that period, MAPS
has received five complaints.
Complaint Received by Health Canada in 2019:
The MAPS clinical trial that was the object of sexual misconduct allegations was authorized in March
2009. A complaint from a participant in this clinical trial was submitted to Health Canada in 2019, after
the clinical trial was closed (October 2016).
Following receipt of the complaint, in 2019 Health Canada conducted a compliance verification as well
as a full inspection of a related MAPS clinical trial. During the inspection, the Department confirmed that
the unlicensed therapist, who was the subject of the original complaint, was no longer working at the
site. The Department observed that adequate steps related to Good Clinical Practices requirements had
been taken by the sponsor and the site, with regards to the complaint, including:
• notification of the Research Ethics Boards,
• modification to the consent form to include emotional vulnerability as a risk,
• development and implementation of MAPS MDMA Therapy Training on Code of Ethics,
• continuation of the standard model of 2 facilitators per study visit, with video recording of all in-
person psychotherapyand all telemedicine visits, and,
• continuation of the requirement for night attendants at the site to be licensed mental health
practitioners.
On January 7, 2020, the complainant was informed of Health Canada’s findings and was advised that the
Collegeof Physicians and Surgeons of British Columbia should be consulted regarding any concerns
related to the conduct of the therapists and physicians involved in the study.
Complaint received by Health Canada in 2022:
In March 2022, Health Canada received acomplaint from a group of scholars and journalists who
claimed to be experts in the field of psychedelics. Allegations included inadequate eligibility and
withdrawal criteria, inadequate disclosure of risks in the informed consent form, and inadequate
duration of follow-up related to MDMA trials conducted by MAPS. The complainants requested greater
safeguards to ensure the safety of study participants, especially to address the risk of suicide.
The Department has reviewed the adequacy of the protocol design and informed consent documents of
previously authorised trials, in light of these allegations. Additional information has been requested
from sponsors, regarding adverse events, efficacy data, complaints from participants and actions taken
by the sponsor. While no concerns have been identified, to date, Health Canada will not hesitate to take
appropriate compliance and enforcement action should non-compliance with the Food and Drugs Act
and its associated regulations be identified.
Status and Next Steps
On April 27, the Department participated in its quarterly trilateral meeting with the U.S. FDA and the UK
MHRA and discussed the MAPS complaint received by HC and the FDA. Health Canada will meet with the
U.S. FDA again on May 16, to discuss Health Canada’s participation in the FDA’s planned inspection of
MAPS in June (note that this is not for public disclosure).
On May 4, Health Canada met with the BC College of Physicians and Surgeons to discuss the information
received as part of the MAPS clinicaltrial complaint and the publication of its inspection findings.
In June 2022, ROEB will be conducting two MDMA clinical trial inspections to verify that the trials are
being conducted in accordance with Good Clinical Practices requirements, per Division 5 of the Food and
Drug Regulations. One trial is sponsored by theRemedy Institute and the other by MAPS (not for public
disclosure at this time).
Health Canada has assessed this situation. The Department has concluded that its own regulations are
appropriate to manage clinical trials with psychedelics and that protocols and informed consent forms
address potential risks. We will also ensure that all sponsors wishing to conduct clinical trials with
MDMA have adequate risk management measures in place to minimize the risks of emotional
vulnerability. Health Canada will continue to work with its national and international partners on this
file, and would be supportive of measures taken by Research Ethics Boards and provincial and territorial
Colleges of Physicians and Surgeons, to develop and implement more safeguards to help avoid
repetition of this situation in the future, in particular around professional standards.
Special Access Program
On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations and Narcotic
Control Regulations allowing practitioners, on behalf of patients with serious or life-threatening
conditions, to request access to restricted drugs through the Special Access Program when other
therapies have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable in Canada. All requests will continueto be
assessed on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the patient’s condition and the level of
evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of the drug. These regulatory changes were shared with all
interested parties, including organizations thatrepresent patients seeking to possess and use psilocybin
for therapeutic purposes. As of May 2022, Health Canada has authorized 9 requests for psychedelics
through SAP for a total of 14 patients. None of these authorisations were for MDMA.
Individual subsection 56(1) exemptions
As for exemptions, Health Canada continues to receive a high volume of requests pertaining to
psilocybin, and, more recently, MDMA. Health Canada continues to prioritize exemption requests from
terminally ill patients seeking access to psilocybin for the treatment of end-of-life distress.
Many factors are considered when reviewing and making a decision on a request for a subsection 56(1)
exemption to use psilocybin in relation to a medical condition. These factors may include but are not
limited to (as per Health Canada web page):
• The availability of clinical trials or other regulatory pathways, such as the Special Access
Program, to request access to the substance
• The medical condition for which the psilocybin is requested to be used
• The existing scientific evidence to support the use of psilocybin for the treatment of the
condition
• Whether other conventional therapies have been considered
• Whether the use of the substances is supported by a health care practitioner
• Public health and public safety objectives of the CDSA
• Other federal, provincial, and/or municipal laws or regulations that may apply to the proposed
activity
• Risks, including risk of diversion
Number of Patient-Requested Exemptions Approved
Health Canadahas granted exemptions under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances
Act to patients with serious or life threatening illnesses, when conventional treatments have failed, to
allow them to possess psilocybin while undergoing psychotherapy, as well as to a small number of
health care professionals for professional training purposes. Total subsection 56(1) exemptions issued
for possession and use of psilocybin included below.
Psilocybin subsection 56(1) exemptions issued-total as of February28, 2022:
Patients
Issued: 81 exemptions
Health care professionals
Issued: 19 exemptions
SECTION 56(1) REQUESTS TO ALLOW FOR PERSONAL POSSESSION /
ISSUE
• In response to the ongoing overdose crisis, the Government of Canada is receiving increasing
interest from stakeholders and multiple jurisdictions across Canada to use section 56 of the Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act as the fastest mechanism to allowfor the possession of small amounts of
controlled substances for personal use.
• Three jurisdictions–the Province of British Columbia, the City of Vancouver, and Toronto Public
Health–have formally requested exemptions from federal drug laws to allowfor the personal
possession of small amounts of controlled substances in those jurisdictions.
• On May 31, 2022, Minister Bennett announced that she granted British Columbia’s request for
an exemption under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). This
exemption means that people aged 18 and older in B.C. will not be subject to criminal charges under s.
4(1) of the CDSA for possessing small amounts of certain illegal drugs for personal use.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada received requests for an exemption from federal drug laws to allow for the
possession of small amounts of controlled substances for personal use from the City of Vancouver (May
28, 2021), the Province of British Columbia (November 1, 2021), and Toronto Public Health(January 4,
2022). Several other municipalities have reached out to Health Canada for information on the
exemption process (Calgary and Edmonton). The requests from the City of Vancouver and Toronto
Public Health are under review.
• A number of other municipalities are calling on the Government of Canada to allow for the
personal possession of controlled substances at a national level.
• Section 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act gives the Minister of Health broad
powers to exempt people or controlled substances or precursors from the application of any of the
provisions of the Act or its regulation for medical or scientific purposes, or if otherwise in the public
interest.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is deeply concerned about the devastatingimpact of the overdose crisis on
communities all across Canada.
• Substance use is shaped by complex factors. It is clear that solutions to the overdose crisis must
consider broader health and social issues.
• At the request of the province of B.C., a three-year exemption has been granted so that adults in
the province will not be subject to criminal charges for personal possession of small amounts of certain
illegal drugs.
• This time-limited exemption, which will come into effect on January 31, 2023, is one part of BC’s
and the federal government’s broader responses to the overdose crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE RATIONALE FOR THE DECISION
• The toll of the overdose crisis and the toxic drug supply continue to devastate communities. Too
many lives have been lost and countless others have been forever altered.
• British Columbia requested an exemption related to the personal possession of small amounts
of certain illegal drugs as one part of the province’s comprehensive approach to address the overdose
crisis.
• Canada is treating substance use as a health issue, not as a criminal one. Stigma related to
substance use can lead people to hide their drug use, use in riskier ways, and prevent them from
accessing services and supports.
• Throughout the exemptionperiod, the federal government will work with the province to
analyze the data and evidence, and assess impact to ensure this exemption continues to be the right
decision for the people of B.C.
IF PRESSED ON THRESHOLDS
• In assessing this exemption request, the dual objectives of the CDSA-to protect public health
and maintain public safety–must be considered.
• This is a novel approach in Canada and data and evidence on the impact of effective threshold
amounts is limited, especially in the context of the increasingly toxic drug supply in Canada and
internationally.
• As the first exemption of its kind in Canada, its implementation will be rigorously monitored and
evaluated to measure progress toward objectives and intended outcomes, and to identify unintended
consequences and other potential risks.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE AND EVALUATION
• This is a novel approach for B.C. This time-limited exemption will be supported by rigorous
monitoring and third party evaluation to gather evidence and data on the impact of the exemption and
to measure:
o Progress towards objectives,
o intended outcomes,
o unintended consequences and other potential risks,
• The data gathered will help to inform Canada’s comprehensive approach to addressing
substance use harms.
• Throughout the exemption period, the federal government will work with the province to
analyze the data and evidence, and assess impact to ensure this exemption continues to be the right
decision for the people of B.C.
IF PRESSED ON NEW REQUESTS FOR EXEMPTIONS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• Health Canada will carefullyand thoroughly review any request for an exemption to allow for
the personal possession of controlled substances on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential
benefits and risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
• The request from the Cityof Vancouver and Toronto Public Health is under review.
• The Department will continue to work with provincial and municipal officials on options that
address regional needs and help people who use substances get the support they need.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL C-216
• We recognise that more needs to be done to address the worsening overdose crisis.
• Through the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, we are supporting a comprehensive
public health-focused approach. This includes commitments ofover $800M to address the overdose
crisis and substance use-related harms since 2017.
• We are also supporting measures to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice
system and towards health and social services, as in Bill C-5, An Act toamend the Criminal Code and the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
BACKGROUND
The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) generally prohibits activities (e.g. possession,
production, sale) with controlled substances and precursors (including chemicals used to make illegal
drugs), unless those activities have been specifically authorized through regulations or an exemption
under the Act. Current criminal penalties for simple possession of some controlled substances can
include imprisonment up to seven years and/or fines.
Section 56 of the CDSA allows the Minister of Health to exempt any person or class of persons or any
controlled substance or precursor or class thereof from the application of all or any of the provisions of
the Act or the regulations if, in the opinion of the Minister, the exemption is necessary for a medical or
scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest.
As the overdose crisis continues to worsen, there have been increasing calls from stakeholders,
including healthprofessionals, law enforcement and people with lived and living experience, for the
removal of criminal penalties for the possession of small amounts of drugs for personal use in order to
treat substance use as a health issue, reduce stigma around substance use and help connect people who
use drugs with health and social services.
Calls from jurisdictions across Canada to allow for personal possession of controlled substances are
increasing. To date HC is aware of over fifty-five municipalities who have publicly expressed interest in
decriminalization of personal possession. Severalmunicipalities are studying or have advocated for the
federal government to decriminalize the possession of drugs for personal use, including Regina,
Saskatoon, Montreal and Ontario’s Big City Mayors (mayors from the province’s 29 largest cities).
On May 28, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted its application with respect to its request for a
section 56 exemption under the CDSA to allow for the personal possession of certain amounts of
controlled substances. On November 1, 2021, British Columbia submitted an application with respect to
its request for a section 56 exemption under the CDSA to allow for the personal possession of certain
controlled substances commonly associated with overdose deaths in the province. On January 4, 2022,
Toronto Public Health submitted its request for a section 56 exemption under the CDSA to decriminalize
personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances within the city’s boundaries. During a
December 6 Board of Health (BoH) meeting, the Toronto BoH also reiterated its call to request the
Federal Minister of Health to use their authority under the CDSA to develop a national framework to
permit the possession of certain amounts of controlled substances for personal use; and support the
immediate scale up of prevention, harm reduction and treatment services. The requests from British
Columbia, Vancouver, and Toronto Public Health are currently under review. Several other
municipalities have reached out to Health Canada for additional information on the exemption process
for such requests including Calgary (December 18, 2021) and Edmonton (January 25, 2022). In response,
Health Canada has provided the type of information that could be helpful in informing the Department’s
review.
The requests received propose different ways to define personal possession. BC proposed one
cumulative threshold for opioids, cocaine, methamphetamine, and MDMA. Vancouver is proposing
specific thresholds for commonly used substances, including those associated with the overdose crisis as
well as others such as psychedelics and diverted marketed products. Toronto Public Health has not yet
submitted details on how it would define possession.
As part of the federal government’s urgent response to the overdose crisis, on May 31, 2022, at the
request of British Columbia’s Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, Canada’s federal Minister of
Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health granted a 3-year exemption under the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) for adults in the province of British Columbia (BC) to
possess small amounts of certain illegal drugs for personal use.
This means is that from January 31, 2023 to January 31, 2026, adults 18 years and older, in the province
of BC, will not be subject to criminal chargesfor the personal possession of up to 2.5 grams of opioids,
cocaine, methamphetamine, or MDMA, or any combination thereof. Instead, these individuals will, at
minimum, be provided with information on local health and social services. They can also be provided
with assistance to connect with those services, if requested. This exemption is very specific as it covers
possession for personal use only and does not allow possession with the intent to traffic, produce or
export. To maintain public safety, the exemption does not apply in certain locations and situations (e.g.
the premises of daycares and schools, airports, to minors operating a motor vehicle or watercraft, etc.).
In addition to requests from jurisdictions to decriminalize simple possession, the Canadian Association
of People who Use Drugs (CAPUD) and four individual plaintiffs filed a Notice of Civil Claim on August 31,
2021 in the British Columbia Supreme Court that aims to decriminalize possession of all drugs, as well as
drug trafficking activities that are connected to subsistence, supporting personal drug use, or providing a
safe supply of drugs to other people who use drugs (“necessity trafficking”). The Government of Canada
filed a Response to Civil Claim on November 30, 2021, which sets out the facts and basic legal arguments
of the Government of Canada’s defence. The plaintiffs filed a reply to the Government of Canada’s
response on December 23, 2021. The litigation generated some media attention in September, and
continued interest is anticipated.
Under the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, the Government of Canada has taken a number of
steps to help create pathways away from the criminal justice system toward appropriate health services
and social supports for people who use drugs. This includes:
• In May 2017, the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act became law. It provides some legal
protection related to personal possession for individuals who seek emergency help during an overdose.
• On August 18, 2020, the Public Prosecution Service of Canada issued public guidance to
prosecutors stating that alternatives to prosecution should be considered for personal possession
offences, except when there are serious aggravating circumstances.
On December 15, 2021, Gord Johns, Member of Parliament for Courtenay-Alberni, BC (NDP), introduced
Private Member’s Bill C-216, an Act to amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act and to enact the
Expungement of Certain Drug-related Convictions Act and the National Strategy on Substance Use Act,
in theHouse of Commons. The Bill is divided into three parts:
• Part 1 would repeal sections 4 and 4.1 of the CDSA, thereby removing the prohibition on
possession of controlled substances (i.e. subsection 4(1) of the CDSA) and other provisions;
• Part 2 wouldestablish a procedure for expunging convictions related to possession of controlled
substances through the Parole Board of Canada; and
• Part 3 would require the Minister of Health to develop a national strategy to address substance-
related harms.
Thefirst hour of debate at second reading took place on March 2, 2022.
In February 2021, the Minister of Justice and Attorney General introduced Bill C-22 in Parliament, An Act
to amend the Criminal Code and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Amongstother measures, the
Bill would have police and prosecutors consider alternative measures–including diverting individuals to
addiction programs, giving a warning or taking no further actions–instead of laying charges or
prosecuting individuals for simple drug possession. Bill C-22 died on the order paper with the calling of
the 2021 federal election. These proposed measures were reintroduced in the House of Commons on
December 7, 2021, through Bill C-5.
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. The Government has an ambitious target to
reduce tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035.
KEY FACTS
• Approximately 4.2 million Canadians smoke cigarettes–about 13% of the population over the
age of 15.
• Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330M investment
over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and non-smokers.
• Cigarette smoking is the leading preventable cause of disease and premature death, and we are
working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Health Canada is updating the labelling requirements to reflect the latest scientific evidence. We
will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and non-smokers from becoming addicted and
to provide Canadians with information on the health hazards of tobacco use.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR SMOKERS…
• We urge Canadians who smoke to consider quitting. When you give upcigarettes, your body
starts to renew itself as early as the first day, reducing your chance of developing heart disease, cancer,
breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help.
• Canadians can contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
them develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community where available.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW …
• Subsection 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review
of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The first review will assess the operation of theAct and whether it is achieving its vaping-related
objectives, particularly those related to protecting young people.
• In March and April 2022, Health Canada sought input from Canadians to inform this review and
is reviewing the feedback received.
• Thefinal report will be tabled in Parliament in 2022 and will be made public onCanada.ca.
BACKGROUND
Tobacco use in Canada
Data released on September 8th 2021, from the 2020 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), show
the largest annual smoking declinein the survey’s history, decreasing from 4.7M to 4.2M Canadians 12
years of age and older. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a national
average rate of 13% (4.2M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. Daily smoking also declined to 9% (2.9M)
from 10% (3.2M) in 2019. A reliable estimate on daily smoking for youth aged 15-19 cannot be
determined for 2020.
While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking, reminding us that, despite
decades of effort todeter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public health problem in Canada.
Tobacco use is still the leading preventable cause of premature death in Canada, killing half of all
Canadians who smoke daily for a long time. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations
and Inuit are higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015–2017”. The report identifies the enormous
burden tobacco use places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use
to society was approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the
deadliest and most costly substance by far accounting for 47% of all attributable health care costs from
substance use and approximately 48,000 premature deaths in 2017 (over 128 deaths per day or 17% of
all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, thePublic Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Tobacco Cost Recovery/Levy
Minister Bennett’s mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobacco manufacturers to pay for
the cost of federal public healthinvestments in tobacco control. Health Canada is working closely with
other Government of Canada partners to examine options and determine next steps.
Both the Conservative Party of Canada and the New Democratic Party made similar commitments in
their election platforms.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
Issue
Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgrounds across Canada.
The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides people across Canada with suicide crisis
support from trained responders via phone, in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Key Facts
• In 2019, suicide was the 9th leading cause of death among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading
cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34,behind unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada).
• Between 2017 and 2019, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada.
This is equivalent to 12 suicide deaths, on average, every day.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting the implementation of a fully operational pan-
Canadian suicide prevention service, which provides 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance for all Canadians to have access to
critical mental health resources and suicide prevention services.
• Budget 2019 announced $25 million over five years, starting in 2019–20, with $5 million per
year ongoing, to develop and sustain a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service, in order to provide
people across Canada with access to bilingual, 24/7, crisis support from trained responders, using the
technology of their choice: voice, text or chat.
• The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently makes available suicide crisis support over the
phone to anyone in Canada, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
• The Government of Canada also supports the implementation of a three-digit number for
suicide prevention that is easier to remember and improves access to crisis support. We are working to
ensure that this service will have the capacity to route callers appropriately and connect people to the
crisis support they need, once it is launched.
If pressed on timing for the Implementation of a three-Digit Number for Suicide Prevention Crisis
Support
• The Government of Canada is closely following the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) proceeding on the introduction of a three-digit suicide
prevention number.
• The public consultation closed on March 17, 2022, and will build a comprehensive public record,
which forms the basis on which the Commission will issue determinations on this matter.
• As part of this proceeding, the CRTC is analyzing the technical and infrastructural requirements
to make sure that calls will be routed properly, meaning calls will not be dropped, and callers can
reliably get through to the services they are seeking during times of crisis.
• The Government of Canada looks forward to reviewing the CRTC’s decision when it is rendered
later in 2022.
• In parallel, the Public Health Agency of Canada is undertaking an examination of service delivery
elements, including understanding anticipated demand and assessing the capacity of service delivery
providers to respond to increased call volumes.
• This work will help determine the resources required to implement a new three-digit number.
• The Government’s goal is to be ready for a seamless rollout once a three-digit number is
launched, building on learnings from international partners with a focus on thesafety of all Canadians.
If pressed on why Budget 2022 did not announce funding to support a three-digit number
• Budget 2021 highlighted the Government’s commitment to support a three-digit number for
suicide prevention.
• We are looking forward to the CRTC’s decision on this matter, which will help to determine
technology requirements.
• While 3-digit crisis line support is in development, we will continue to support the Canada
Suicide Prevention Service and surge capacity for distress lines and Kids Help Phone to meet demands
for services.
If Pressed on COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
• The Government is providing over $14.8 million over 36 months to Kids Help Phone to provide
crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• Inaddition to investments in suicide crisis services, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement
announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres across the country, which
are experiencing a surge in demand for crisis support during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• This includes new investments of $2 million to the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health to
support resources for distress centres and $1,775,000 towards 13 distress centres in Canada, announced
on April 25, 2022.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing additional funding for the Canada Suicide
Prevention Service to support the increased demand for crisis support at this time.
Background
Between 2017 and 2019, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which is
equivalent to 12 people dying by suicide every day. In 2019 suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries. According to preliminary data, there were 3,839 deaths by suicide reported in
2020. The 2020 data is provisional and incomplete, and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the
next year. This delay is due to the length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes
require to complete their investigations. At this time, caution should be used to arrive at any conclusions
regarding suicide trends during the pandemic (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully
explains or predicts suicide; a combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness,
physical health, personal issues and loss, childhood abuse and neglect, and exposure to trauma.
Three-Digit Number for Suicide Prevention
In the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction’sMandate Letter, the Prime Minister asks the Minister
to deliver on the commitment of implementing a three-digit suicide prevention number.
This initiative builds upon the Government’s current support of a pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is currently investing $21 million over 5 years ($4.2
million per year) for the Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), with their partners, to
implement and sustain this service. In addition, $800,000 per year is allocated to PHAC to cover the
oversight, administration, reporting and evaluation activities associated with the Contribution
Agreement with CAMH. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service provides people across Canada with
suicide crisis support from trainedresponders via phone (1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24
hours a day, seven days a week. Calls to the service are answered by trained responders from a network
of 11 community-based distress centres across Canada and a back-up hub of responders.
OnDecember 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of a motion sponsored by MP
Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia) calling on the federal government to act immediately to
set up a national 988 number to consolidate all existing suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) is responsible for
establishing any three digit abbreviated codes. The CRTC launched a regulatory proceeding on June 3,
2021 to consult on a proposed three-digit hotline. Following a procedural request from stakeholders
representing persons with disabilities, the CRTC published key portions of the notice of consultation in
sign language and reopened the consultation in November 2021 to allow for new interventions in
accessible formats, such as video. The public consultation closed on March 17, 2022. These
interventions and replies form part of the public record that the Commission will examine to make its
determinations.
At the core of this proceeding is ensuring thata three-digit number is implemented quickly and
correctly, despite the complexity of modifications to telecommunications networks required, to ensure
that every call to this three-digit number is efficiently and appropriately routed. The CRTC intends to
issue a decision on this matter in 2022.
In parallel, PHAC is looking at various service delivery aspects, including by gathering estimates on
expected call volumes and demand, and building on international learnings. For example, the US is
estimating a fourfold to tenfold increase in call volume for their service which is expected to fully launch
in summer 2022, after over 4 years of preparation. PHAC is also assessing the capacity of potential
service providers to respond to expected increases in call volumes. PHAC will be engaging with
provincial and territorial governments, Indigenous organizations, international governments, and other
stakeholders to inform next steps in relation to service delivery, such as the scope of the service and
coordination with other services.
As highlighted in Budget 2021, the government is committed to ensuring funds are available to support
the creation of this three-digit number.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports: Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of
Canada announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC is
administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021-22 and additional
grants to 13 distress centres in 2022-23 following asecond solicitation reaching organizations not
included in the first round of funding. In addition, $2 million of this funding is supporting CAMH as it
curates resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of priority populations.
Motion 174–A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-
James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the Government to establish a national suicide
prevention action plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174,
though it is non-binding. The proposed actions in the plan are aligned with the Framework. The Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) will facilitate coordination and collaboration on elements of the action
plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders through its convening role on the
Framework. An update on M-174 was included in the December 2020 Progress Report on the Federal
Framework for Suicide Prevention. Efforts to develop the Action Plan will be included in theDecember
2022 Progress Report as part of legislated reporting of the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events: PHAC is
currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and mental health.
The Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health showed that during the pandemic, 2.4% of adults in Canada
reported suicidal ideation since the COVID-19 pandemic began in fall 2019, which is not significantly
different from the 2.7% before the pandemic in 2019; but the percentage increased significantly in
spring 2021 to 4.2%. Risk factors of reporting suicide ideation during the pandemic included being under
65, Canadian-born, a frontline worker, reporting pandemic-related income/job loss or
loneliness/isolation, experiencing a highly stressful/traumatic event during one's lifetime, and having
lower household income and educational attainment. Continued surveillance of suicide and
risk/protective factors is neededto inform suicide prevention efforts.
YOUTH VAPING
ISSUE
• Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of
measures to address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increasedcompliance and
enforcement of existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
KEY FACTS
• According to results from the 2021 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS), vaping rates
among Canadian youth have stabilized. Previously, youth vaping rates had doubled over a two year
period (2017-2019).
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping. To date, Health
Canada has invested more than $14 million.
• Health Canada has also taken significant regulatory action to help address youth vaping.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is pleased to see that vaping rates among Canadian youth have stabilized,
according toa recent survey.
• Nonetheless, our Government remains concerned about substance use, including youth vaping,
and is taking comprehensive action.
• Regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can
be seen or heardby youth.
• New regulations are also now in force setting a maximum nicotine concentration for all vaping
products, and Health Canada has consulted Canadians on proposed regulations to restrict flavours in
vaping products to make them less attractive.
IFPRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
• In 2019, Health Canada launched the Consider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign, investing more than $14 million to date.
• The campaign has included in-print and online advertising, as well as an interactive learning tour
in schools and community venues or virtually. Vaping awareness kits were provided to all middle and
high schools, and information resources sent to health care professionals.
• The interactive learning tour has reached over 156,000 youth in over 937 schools across the
country, and will continue to reach more.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and promotions.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to remove lifestyle advertising from
television and in-store displays, and online content from social media influencers.
• In 2019, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000 retailers and seized more than 80,000 units
of non-compliant vaping products. Between July 2020 and March 2021, over 300 online inspections of
Canadian vaping retailers’ Instagram accounts were conducted and approximately 160 warning letters
issued.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW …
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of
the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• The first review will assess theoperation of the Act and whether it is achieving its vaping-related
objectives, particularly those related to protecting young people.
• In March and April 2022, Health Canada sought input from Canadians to inform this review and
is reviewing the feedbackreceived.
• The final report will be tabled in Parliament in 2022 and will be made public onCanada.ca.
IF PRESSED ON FLAVOURS REGULATIONS …
• On June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the proposed order to amend the Tobacco and
Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes
Regulations.
• The proposed regulations would implement a complementary three-pronged approach to
restricting the flavours of vaping products.
• The consultations closed on September 2, 2021. Health Canada received over 25,000
submissions and is currently reviewing the input it received from Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to
address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and enforcement of
existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth andtheir parents about the risks and harms associated with vaping through advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. To date, Health Canada has invested more than $14
million.
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established underthe Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important part of the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
The Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping product promotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On July 8, 2021, new Nicotine Concentration in Vaping Products Regulations came into force, which set a
maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products sold to 20 mg/ml, down from 66 mg/ml. As of July
23, 2021, it is prohibited to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than 20 mg/ml
in Canada.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, on June 19th, 2021, Health Canada publishedthe
proposed Order Amending Schedules 2 and 3 to the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the
proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes Regulations. The proposal is a three-
pronged approach to restricting flavoured vaping products. The proposal would restrict the promotion
of flavours in vaping products to tobacco, mint, and menthol; prohibit all sugars and sweeteners and
most flavouring ingredients; and prescribe sensory attributes standards to prevent a sensory perception
otherthan one that is typical of tobacco or mint/menthol. The consultation period for the proposed
regulations closed September 2, 2021 and the department is reviewing feedback on this proposal.
On April 19, 2021, Finance Canada announced its intention to implement a tax on vaping products in
2022, through the introduction of a new excise duty framework. Budget 2022 proposed to implement
the excise duty, effective as of October 1, 2022. The proposed federal excise duty rate would be $1.00
per 2 mL, or fractionthereof, for containers with less than 10 mL of vaping liquid. For containers with
more than 10 mL, the applicable federal rate would be $5.00 for the first 10 mL, and $1.00 for every
additional 10 mL, or fraction thereof. The federal government also invited its provincial and territorial
counterparts to join a coordinated vaping taxation framework, under which an additional duty equal to
the proposed federal rate would be applied.
Smoking is the leading preventable cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-related
disease is caused by the toxic and carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping products expose users to far
fewer toxic chemicals and substances than conventional cigarettes, and are less harmful alternatives to
tobacco products if users quit smoking and switch completely to vaping.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical dependence and
youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. Moreover, the long-term health
effects of vaping are unknown. For these reasons, the TVPA seeks to protect the health of youth and
non-users from exposure to and dependence on nicotine, and help ensure that Canadians are not misled
with regard to the health hazards of using vaping products and/or nicotine.
Results from the 2021 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS) indicate that vaping rates among
Canadian youth have stabilized; the rate of vaping was 13% among Canadians aged 15-19. Previously,
results from the CTNS survey in 2019 had shown a rapid increase in youth aged 15-19, with 14%
reporting past 30 day use compared to 6% in 2017. Health Canada has not seen a corresponding
increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to be at all-time lows.
Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires that the Minister perform a
legislative review of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
The US Food and Drug Administration, under its Premarket Tobacco Product Application process, has
reviewed the applications of over 6 million vaping products to determine whether any meet the criteria
of protecting public health, taking into account the risks and benefits to the population as a whole.
While the review process has notbeen completed, on October 12, 2021 and on March 24, 2022, the
United States Food and Drug Administration announced it had authorized the marketing of certain
tobacco-flavoured vaping products. For these products, the FDA determined that the potential benefit
to smokers who switch completely or significantly reduce their cigarette use would outweigh the risk to
youth, provided the applicant follows post-marketing requirements aimed at reducing youth exposure
and access to the products (e.g., regular reporting to the FDA, marketing restrictions for digital, radio
and television advertising).
In Canada, the Food and Drugs Act applies to vaping products that make health claims, such as help to
quit smoking. These products must be authroized under this act before they can be advertised, sold, or
commercially imported. To date, no vaping products have been authorized under this Act and no
applications have been received.
