Created: 2023-09-01T13:12:16.699844
Name: APPEARANCE_BEFORE_THE_STANDING_COMMITTEE_ON_HEALTH_(HESA)_–_PATENTED_MEDICINE_PRICES_REVIEW_BOARD_(PMPRB)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/a3481db5-0898-4d12-8743-21d203fb62f3/resource/a6398871-52cb-4586-b70c-81adedf2288f/download/hesa-pmprb-proactive-discloser-eng.pdf
Package ID: a3481db5-0898-4d12-8743-21d203fb62f3
Keywords: ['Patented Medicine Prices Review Board', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: •	This will be the 64th (TBC) time that HESA has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the 44th Parliament. They are currently conducting the following two studies concurrently:
1.	Children’s Health (drafting a report)
2.	Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of COVID-19 

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Appearance before the Standing Committee on Health (HESA)
Minister Duclos
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Thursday April 27, 2023
Table of Contents
1. Scenario Note and Key Messages
a. Scenario Note and Committee Bios
b. Key Messages
c. Qs & As
d. QP Note
e. Media lines
f. Pharmaceutical Industry Investments in R&D
2. Foundational Documents
a. Ministerial Roles and Responsibilities Related to Patented Medicines/Patented Medicines Prices
Review Board
b. Background on Patented Medicines Regulations
c. Litigation Summary
d. Key features – October 2022 Guidelines
3. Communication related to PMPRB
a. PMPRB News Release – Executive Director
4. PMPRB Board Member
a. Government of Canada Announcement – New PMPRB Board Chairperson
b. GIC – Vice-chairperson, PMPRB
c. GIC – Member, PMPRB
5. Other Initiatives
a. Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy
b. Canadian Drug Agency
c. Drugs for Rare Diseases Strategy
d. Pharmacare
e. Agile Licensing for Health Products
f. Heath Care Plan and Transfers
g. Recent Developments in US Pharmaceuticals Space
SCENARIO NOTE
APPEARANCE BEFORE THE STANDING COMMITTEE ON HEALTH (HESA) – PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES
REVIEW BOARD (PMPRB)
April 27, 2023
MEETING SCENARIO
• You will be supported by the following officials, who will appear with you at the meeting:
Deputy Minister Dr. Stephen Lucas
Associate Assistant Deputy Minister Eric Bélair – Strategic Policy Branch
Counsel T. Nessim Abu-Zahra – Health Legal Services Unit, Department of Justice.
• The Committee meeting will begin with your opening remarks, which you will have 5 minutes to
deliver. When statements are concluded you will then take questions from Committee members for the
remainder of the hour.
o The first round of questions is generally 6 minutes in length and is asked in the following order:
Conservative Party (CPC), Liberal Party (LPC), Bloc Québécois (BQ), and New Democratic Party (NDP).
o In the second and subsequent round(s), the order and time of questioning is as follows:
Conservative Party (5 minutes), Liberal Party (5 minutes), Bloc Québécois (2.5 minutes), NDP (2.5
minutes), Conservative Party (5 minutes), and Liberal Party (5 minutes).
• The second hour of the meeting will see the Committee hear from Mélanie Bourrassa Forcier,
former Vice-Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB.
COMMITTEE CONTEXT
• NDP Health Critic Don Davies filed a motion with the Standing Committee on Health (HESA)
following the February resignations of two PMPRB board members and of the organisation’s executive
director. The motion, placed on notice on February 24, called on the Minister of Health to appear, as well
as the former PMPRB representatives. On March 9, the Committee adopted the motion, also calling for a
comprehensive government response.
• This will be the 64th (TBC) time that HESA has met since the beginning of the 1st session of the
44th Parliament. They are currently conducting the following two studies concurrently:
1. Children’s Health (drafting a report)
2. Emergency Situation Facing Canadians in Light of COVID-19
• HESA has three other orders of reference under consideration that have not been undertaken
yet. These include:
1. Oversight of Medical Devices (Breast Implants),
2. National Three-digit suicide Prevention hotline (988) and,
3. Women’s Health.
• HESA conducted a study on the PMPRB Guidelines during the 2nd Session of the 42rd Parliament
(2020-2021). The Committee heard from 19 witnesses over the course of five meetings. The study was
interrupted by the Dissolution of Parliament and the 2021 federal election and thus there was no
Committee report. HESA has not studied the PMPRB or met on it since that time.
• The New Democratic Party presence is led by Don Davies, the party’s health critic and a long-
standing member of the Committee. The NDP have historically been supportive of government efforts to
reduce drug prices. During the Committee’s 2020-2021 study on PMPRB guidelines, Mr. Davies was
critical of delaying drug pricing reforms as the NDP strongly believes that they will lower the cost of
drugs in Canada.
• The Bloc Quebecois presence is led by BQ Health Critic, Luc Theriault. The BQ has taken the
position that drug pricing policies should have no negative impacts on the pharmaceutical industry in
Quebec and should not impede innovation. The Quebec wholesaler, distributor and pharmacy sectors
have adopted the position that the proposed pricing framework will lead to drug shortages. In recent
years, the Government of Quebec has also written to request a delay in moving ahead with regulatory
reform, due to the challenges of the pandemic. This context is reflected in Mr. Theriault’s interventions,
including a proposal to adopt a phased-in approach. The Quebec government was an intervener in
Merck Canada inc. et al. v. Canada (Quebec Court of Appeal). In the case, the province expressed
concern that certain elements of the proposed regulatory amendments crossed into its jurisdiction.
• The Conservative Party has placed several key critics, “shadow ministers,” on the Committee. Dr.
Stephen Ellis is the Shadow Minister for Health, Laila Goodridge is the Shadow Minister for Addictions,
and Matt Jeneroux is the Shadow Minister for Supply Chain Issues. Mr. Jeneroux was previously Shadow
Minister for Health during the first months of the COVID-19 Pandemic. The CPC has disagreed with the
government’s attempts to amend the Patented Medicines Regulations, stating that the proposed
changes will have a negative impact on access to drugs by patients and could cause further drug
shortages in Canada.
NEXT STEPS
• The study will consist of a minimum of two meetings. The Minister and officials will open the
study in the first hour of the meeting on the 25th. The second hour will see the Committee hear from
Mélanie Bourrassa Forcier, former Vice Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB. The next
meeting on the study is scheduled for May 2nd. At the May 2nd meeting, the Committee will hear from
former PMPRB member Matthew Herder, and current PMPRB Executive Director, Douglas Clark.
• The terms of the motion require the Chair to report the Committee’s findings back to the House
and pursuant to Standing Order 109 the Government will be required to table a response 120 days
following the Chair’s report.
• If follow-up commitments are made at the meeting, the Department endeavours to respond to
these commitments within 2-3 weeks of the appearance.
KEY MESSAGES (OVERVIEW)
HIGH DRUG PRICES
STEPS TAKEN IN THE AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTED MEDICINES REGULATIONS (PMR)
MINISTER’S ROLE
WHY I WROTE TO THE PMPRB
MEDIA LINES
HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S
DECISION:
BOARD LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB:
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF BOARD MEMBERS OF THE PMPRB:
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIALS:
PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF PATENT MEDICINES:
GUIDELINES:
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB:
PATENTED MEDICINES PRICES REVIEW BOARD
KEY MESSAGES
HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S
DECISION…
LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB…
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL…
PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF PATENT
MEDICINES…
GUIDELINES…
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB…
CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
STATUS OF DOMESTIC BIOMANUFACTURING CAPACITY
KEY MESSAGES
DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES…
MODERNA FACILITY…
MITSUBISHI TANABE PHARMA CORPORATION’S DECISION TO CEASE OPERATIONS AT MEDICAGO INC.,
VACCINE INVESTMENTS …
PANDEMIC VACCINE PREPAREDNESS …
VACCINE TASK FORCE AND COUNCIL OF EXPERT ADVISORS…
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
KEY MESSAGES
ONGOING WORK
NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
RESULTS TO DATE
RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
KEY MESSAGES
LAUNCH DATE OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
RESEARCH ...
PHARMACARE
KEY MESSAGES
GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
KEY MESSAGES
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL)
NEW FUNDING FOR MENTAL HEALTH & SUBSTANCE USE HEALTH…
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC…
NEXT STEPS FOR PRE-EXISTING BILATERAL AGREEMENTS…
KEY MESSAGES (OVERVIEW)
HIGH DRUG PRICES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• The Government of Canada respects the role of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
(PMPRB) as an independent, quasi-judicial body that aims to protect Canadian consumers by ensuring
that the prices of branded (patented) medicines are not excessive.
• In July 2022, the amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force. These
amendments were designed to provide the PMPRB with modernized tools to carry out its mandate of
protecting Canadians from excessive prices for patented medicines and improve access for Canadians to
quality medicines.
• Our government continues to work towards improving access and affordability to quality
medications for Canadians. We have made progress in key areas including streamlining regulations for
drug approvals and clinical trials, launching the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, working with
provinces and territories to establish the Canadian Drug Agency and proceeding with an ambitious
biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
• We have taken steps to support the growth of Canada’s biomanufacturing and life sciences
sector and to position Canada as a global leader in health research and new technology platforms
through new partnerships.
• These efforts will enable access for Canadians to quality medicines. And the PMPRB will continue
to play its important role in exercising its authority as an independent body to oversee the prices of
patented medicines in Canada and ensure Canadians are not paying excessive prices.
STEPS TAKEN IN THE AMENDMENTS TO THE PATENTED MEDICINES REGULATIONS (PMR)
• In July 2022, amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force. These
amendments were designed to provide the PMPRB with new tools to carry out its mandate of protecting
Canadians from excessive prices for patented medicines and improve access for Canadians to quality
medicines.
• The amendments comprise the new 11-country basket of comparator countries, which removes
the United States and Switzerland and includes countries that are more like Canada economically and
from a consumer price protection standpoint, and also provides for decreased reporting requirements
for medicines at low risk of excessive prices, such as generic drugs, over-the-counter drugs and
veterinary drugs.
• The initial publication of the proposed amendments to the Regulations included two other
elements:
o additional price regulatory factors to consider the price of patented medicines relative to their
value and impact of the Canadian health care system, and
o requiring patentees to report Canadian price information net of all adjustments (i.e. rebates and
discounts, including third party rebates).
• The validity of the Amendments was challenged in the Federal Court and the Quebec Superior
Court, and these two elements were found to be unconstitutional in the Quebec Court of Appeal.
• Since the coming-into-force of the amended Regulations on July 1, 2022, patentees have been
reporting their list prices for the new country basket. Given that reporting periods under the Board’s
guidelines are January-June and July-December, the PMPRB has received the reporting of prices vis-à-vis
the new basket for a full year (all of 2022).
MINISTER’S ROLE
• Under sections 79 to 103 of the Patent Act, as the Minister of Health, I am responsible for the
patented medicines pricing provisions of the Patent Act, including responsibility for the Patented
Medicines Regulations. These sections of the Act also establish the PMPRB and my responsibilities with
respect to the Board. While the PMPRB is part of the Health Portfolio, it carries out its mandate at arm’s
length from the Minister of Health.
• I am named in the Patent Act as a party with whom the Board must consult before the issuance
of any guidelines. The Act provides that the PMPRB must also consult with the provincial ministers of the
Crown responsible for health, representatives of consumer groups and representatives of the
pharmaceutical industry before it issues any guidelines.
• Under the Patent Act, the PMPRB is required to submit an annual report on pricing trends in the
pharmaceutical industry and its activities for the preceding year to the Minister of Health. I then table
the report before Parliament.
• I also have the authority, under the Patent Act to:
o Refer matters to the PMPRB, which is required to inquire into the matter and report its findings
back to me,
o convene a meeting with the Chairperson, PT representatives and representatives of various
stakeholder groups to consider matters related to the patented medicine pricing provisions of the Patent
Act
• Additionally, I am responsible for making recommendations to the Governor-in-Council on any
changes to the Patented Medicines Regulations, which form a key part of the PMPRB’s regulatory
framework.
WHY I WROTE TO THE PMPRB
• The Patent Act (s. 96(4)) gives the PMPRB the authority to issue non-binding guidelines, after
consultation. The Act further states in s. 96(5) that the PMPRB must consult with various parties,
including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that context that I wrote to
the former Chairperson on November 28, 2022, to share my views with respect to the proposed
Guidelines.
• In this letter, I respectfully asked that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to
allow time for stakeholders, including provinces and territories, to fully understand the short and long-
term impacts of the proposed guidelines. In the interest of transparency, this letter has been made
public.
• Health Canada also provided a written submission to the PMPRB on December 5, 2022, as part
of the Guidelines consultation process, which was published online by the PMPRB on December 16,
2022 alongside other stakeholder submissions.
• My letter was written in accordance with the roles and responsibilities that have been laid out in
the Patent Act, for the Minister of Health. I simply made a request, as a party with whom the Board is
required to consult, that the Board consider pausing the consultation.
MEDIA LINES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR)
came-into-force. These amendments, including the new basket of comparator countries, were designed
to provide the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) with new tools to protect Canadians
from excessive prices for patented medicines.
• To operationalize the amendments and modernize other aspects of its existing Guidelines, the
PMPRB proposed new Guidelines, which were published on October 6, 2022 for a 60-day consultation
period, ending December 5, 2022.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S
DECISION:
• PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his views with respect to the
proposed Guidelines.
• Health Canada also provided a submission to the PMPRB as part of the consultation process on
December 5, 2022.
BOARD LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB:
• On February 1, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, Thomas
J. Digby was appointed as the Chairperson of the PMPRB for a term of five years.
• The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve
the interests of Canadians.
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF BOARD MEMBERS OF THE PMPRB:
• Health Canada would like to thank [Name] for their work as a member of the Board during their
term over the past nearly five years.
• Members of the PMPRB are Governor-in-Council appointments. For more information about the
appointment process please contact PCO media relations at 613-957-5420 or by email at
mediacentre@pco-bcp.gc.ca.
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIALS:
• Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to PMPRB
Media Relations.
PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF PATENT MEDICINES:
• The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are
not paying excessive prices.
• The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical pricing and
reimbursement landscape and the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB
and its role in protecting consumers against excessive prices.
• The Government of Canada continues to advance pharmaceutical management policies and
initiatives, including agile regulation for clinical trials and drug approval, a national strategy for rare
diseases, a Canadian Drug Agency and an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
GUIDELINES:
• Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB Media Relations.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB:
• As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees
charge for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price
is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
PATENTED MEDICINES PRICES REVIEW BOARD
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S
DECISION…
• PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his views with respect to the
proposed Guidelines.
• As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking it to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including PTs, to understand fully the short
and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB…
• On February 1, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, Thomas
J. Digby was appointed as the Chairperson of the PMPRB for a term of five years.
• The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve
the interests of Canadians.
• Health Canada would like to thank Mélanie Bourassa Forcier and Matthew Herder for their work
as members of the Board during their terms.
• Members of the PMPRB are Governor-in-Council appointments.
IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL…
• Officials working as staff within the PMPRB are public servants, and the PMPRB is responsible for
its own staffing. Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to
PMPRB.
PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF PATENT
MEDICINES…
• The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are
not paying excessive prices.
• The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical landscape, and
the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting
consumers against excessive prices of patented medicines.
GUIDELINES…
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
• Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB…
• As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees
charge for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price
is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian economy,
innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation ecosystem in
Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector.
STATUS OF DOMESTIC BIOMANUFACTURING CAPACITY
KEY MESSAGES
• The government continues to work to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19.
• Canada is investing to establish world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity –
from research and development to fill and finish.
• Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy is focusing on growing our domestic life
science ecosystem to prepare Canada for future pandemics and other health priorities.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES…
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and they
represent an alternative to traditional vaccines, with potential for rapid development and scaling of
production.
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development and preparedness for future pandemics, outside of the COVID-19
context.
• This includes partnerships with leading mRNA vaccine developers like Moderna who is building a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec.
MODERNA FACILITY…
• Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events.
• In 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna is building a state-
of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. When completed, it will produce up to 100
million pandemic vaccine doses annually.
• Moderna’s new facility will not only strengthen Canada’s preparedness for future pandemics but
will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence.
MITSUBISHI TANABE PHARMA CORPORATION’S DECISION TO CEASE OPERATIONS AT MEDICAGO INC.,
• Our Government was disappointed to learn of Mitsubishi’s decision to begin the process to
winddown its support for Medicago’s operations.
• Medicago remains the only Canadian-based company to have received market authorization for
its COVID-19 vaccine.
• Medicago’s innovative, Canadian developed, plant-based vaccine platform technology remains
highly regarded by experts.
• Canadians can be assured that we are in contact with both Medicago and Mitsubishi to ensure
an orderly transition process, and make sure Canadian interests are protected.
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is our government’s top priority, including
ensuring we have sufficient domestic vaccine production capacity to protect against future infectious
disease threats and pandemics.
• Thanks to our efforts, Canada has attracted major investments from leading global companies,
such as Sanofi and Moderna, as well as advancing breakthrough Canadian science and innovation by
supporting domestic champions such as Vancouver’s Abcellera.
VACCINE INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working to re-establish domestic capacity across key vaccine platforms, to be better
prepared for future health emergencies.
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre in Montreal,
which has partnered with Novavax to produce its COVID-19 vaccine, and investments in companies like
Biovectra and Sanofi Pasteur.
• It also includes partnering with Moderna, who is building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
manufacturing facility in Quebec, and significant investment to Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
PANDEMIC VACCINE PREPAREDNESS …
• The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the importance of strengthening domestic capacity to
rapidly develop vaccines to protect all people in Canada against pandemics and other health
emergencies.
• Through strategic investments and partnerships, the Government of Canada is working to grow
Canada’s domestic life sciences sector and biomanufacturing capacity. These include those with
Moderna who is in the process of building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine production facility in Quebec,
and Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
VACCINE TASK FORCE AND COUNCIL OF EXPERT ADVISORS…
• We thank the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force for their critical role in advising on the Government
of Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine response efforts.
• As the scope of the Task Force’s work has expanded, the Council of Expert Advisors was
established to transition from the Vaccine Task Force and assume a long-term advisory function.
• The expertise on the Council of Expert Advisors is broad – advising on scientific, health, public
health, and industrial matters –supporting the Government’s goal of a revitalized Canadian life-science
sector and improved pandemic preparedness.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
KEY MESSAGES
• Prescription drug prices in Canada are among the highest in the developed world. High prices
and a patchwork of drug coverage leaves many Canadians facing significant barriers to getting the
prescription drugs they need.
• The Government of Canada is considering options for a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA).
• Since 2021, the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) has received thoughtful advice
from provinces, territories, partners and stakeholders on the potential scope and functions of a future
CDA.
• The CDATO has also received insights from patients, pharmaceutical companies, insurers,
prescribers and academics and many others through over 300 meetings and roundtables.
• Over the course of these consultations, CDATO has learned of pharmaceutical system gaps –
including inadequate infrastructure, poor return on investment, and fragmentation.
ONGOING WORK
• CDATO is scoping opportunities for a CDA to provide the structure and pan-Canadian system
coordination required to address those gaps, and support efforts to make Canada’s drug system more
sustainable and prepared for the future.
• Engagement with provinces, territories, partners and stakeholders will continue to be an
important part of the CDA’s path forward. Based on insights from engagement, the CDATO is scoping
activities to pave the way for greater collaboration as the Agency is built:
o Data and analytics – working with partners to determine how the CDA can support drug plans, as
well as helping to standardize and improve access to drug and treatment data and analysis.
o Appropriate use – collaborating with leaders in the appropriate use field to improve health
outcomes and ensure patients are prescribed the safest and most effective treatments for their
conditions.
o Coordination – partnering to build a CDA that is well-positioned to adapt and evolve to address
the ever-changing pharmaceuticals landscape.
NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
• Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
• The CDA will focus on the system as a whole to address gaps, remove duplication, improve
system coordination and enhance access and equity.
• The CDA will also provide the dedicated leadership and capacity that is needed to implement
national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
• The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations.
RESULTS TO DATE
• The Government of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories and key
stakeholders as we consider options for establishing the Canadian Drug Agency.
• We have held over 300 meetings and roundtables to obtain advice from PTs and stakeholders on
the potential scope and functions of a CDA, including input from patient organizations, pharmaceutical
companies, insurers, healthcare professionals, academics, and others.
• This has informed the development of options for establishing the Agency, including its mandate
and functions.
• We will continue to communicate as work progresses towards launching the Agency.
RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
• Provincial and territorial healthcare systems, including public drug plans, are facing mounting
pressure, exacerbated by the pandemic.
• Our approach will focus on filling gaps, improving access, and system sustainability.
• The CDA will respect provincial and territorial jurisdiction and will not duplicate well-performing
functions and organizations.
• Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration is the cornerstone of our approach for establishing
the CDA, and we will continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward its launch.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes that many Canadians with rare diseases require
prescription drugs that are often astronomically high cost and therefore difficult to access.
• In order to help Canadians with rare diseases get better access to effective treatments, the
Government of Canada will continue to work with provinces, territories and other partners to launch a
national strategy for drugs for rare diseases in the near future.
• This Strategy will be the first step towards ensuring Canadians with rare diseases have access to
the drugs they need regardless of where they live. It will also aim to support patient outcomes and
system sustainability by broadening treatments and services for rare diseases, build national governance
with a supporting data infrastructure to collect and use evidence, and invest in critical research and
innovation in the area of rare diseases.
LAUNCH DATE OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY …
• Our government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and affordability of treatments
for rare diseases. We also recognize the need for collaboration with willing provinces, territories and
other partners to launch a successful strategy.
• This is why we have consulted extensively with stakeholders, developed a draft framework, and
sought targeted feedback on how stakeholders could contribute to achieving the strategy objectives and
their preferences for involvement and engagement in implementation. All of these details are available
on our website, where we have shared our discussion paper and our What We Heard report. The
Government will launch this Strategy in the near future.
RESEARCH ...
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canada is playing an important
role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
PHARMACARE
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We are making progress with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve access to
medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
• Through this partnership, the Government of PEI is aiming to make further improvements to
their drug programs, such as increasing coverage and simplifying access. Under the Improving Affordable
Access to Prescriptions Drugs Program, those who experience the most vulnerability, including uninsured
Island residents, seniors, and families with high burden of medication cost will benefit from improved
access to medications.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to reduce the copay eligible Islanders spend
on many prescription medicines, expand access to the Catastrophic Drug Program and increase access to
the provincial High Cost Drug Program.
GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following broad consultations, a
multidisciplinary national panel established to develop a draft formulary framework released its final
report in June 2022. The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
• Drug coverage and the health system should respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
• As part of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs initiative supported by the
Government of Canada, PEI is adding new medications to its provincial formulary under their growing
public pharmacy program.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis. This builds on previous formulary additions
made by PEI to improve access to medications, as well as changing requirements on dozens of
medications to allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking to provide these medications to
Islanders.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to improve access and affordability. This
includes reducing the copays for eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in the Seniors Drug
Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program.
• PEI will also lower the cap on the amount of money a household spends on eligible medications
under the Catastrophic Drug Program. Finally, under the High Cost Drug Program, PEI will remove
barriers for those in the lowest income brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the
exclusion of households earning over $150,000 from coverage.
• This partnership between the Governments of Canada and Prince Edward Island will significantly
reduce the out-of-pocket costs of eligible PEI residents to access a wide range of medication.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians and their families deserve timely access to the health services they need, when and
where they need them.
• We are providing $198.6 billion, nearly $200 billion over 10 years, for health care, including $46
billion in new funding that will be provided directly to provinces and territories.
• The federal government will continue to work with provinces and territories, in the best interest
of Canadians, their families and health workers, to deliver concrete results for Canadians and
improvements to the health care system.
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL)
• We still have more work to do to achieve better outcomes for patients, but we agree that all
Canadians deserve a system that includes:
o access to high-quality family health services when they need it, including in rural and remote
areas and for underserved communities;
o a resilient health workforce that provides them high quality, effective and safe health services
when they need it;
o access to their own health information electronically that is shared between health professionals
they see; and
o access to timely, equitable and quality mental health, substance use and addictions services to
support their wellbeing.
• We are providing $196.1 billion over 10 years, including $46 billion in new funding to provinces
and territories to address immediate pressures on the health care system and to transform it for the
long-term.
• This includes $25 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories to support shared health
priorities through tailored, flexible bilateral agreements.
• To access their share of federal funding, including the CHT increase, provinces and territories are
asked to commit to improve how health information is collected, shared, used, and reported to
Canadians.
• In 2021-22, the Government of Canada provided $43.1 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and by over 9%
to $49.3 billion in 2023-24.
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
NEW FUNDING FOR MENTAL HEALTH & SUBSTANCE USE HEALTH…
• There is no health without mental health. That is why access to mental health and substance use
health supports, including at the community level, are integral pieces of work we want to undertake with
the provinces and territories to improve the health system in Canada.
• An inclusive approach to investments in health services, including health workers and data and
digital tools, is required to meet the mental health and substance use care needs of Canadians.
• Investments include an increase in the Canada Health Transfer and bilateral funding for tailor-
made agreements. The tailor-made agreements total $25 billion over ten years and cover all areas of
investment, including mental health and substance use health.
• These tailor-made agreements with provinces and territories will help expand the delivery of
timely, high-quality, and accessible mental health and substance use health services, as well as reduce
substance use harms, prevent overdose, reduce stigma, and help save lives and provide key data and
information to inform future decision-making at all levels of government.
• It is incremental to the existing $11 billion funding provided over ten years to support improved
access to home and community care, mental health, and addiction services.
• Canada’s health workforce has demonstrated its desire and commitment to move away from
stand-alone, siloed mental health and substance use health services. A collaborative health system will
allow for a better flow of patient information and reinforce the full continuum of care service that
Canadians deserve.
• Our response to mental health and substance use health is stronger when it is provided as part
of integrated care.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC…
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of Quebec,
and continues to work with the Quebec government to strengthen public health care.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreements will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support
home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our Government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec also received $1.35 billion as part of its share of the previous CHT top-ups, and a further
$225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
NEXT STEPS FOR PRE-EXISTING BILATERAL AGREEMENTS…
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to transfer $5 billion in targeted funding
for home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021 22.
• In 2021-22, these agreements were amended to accommodate a $1 billion for Safe Long-term
Care Fund.
• Our Government is working with provinces and territories to negotiate new agreements to
enable access to the remaining 5 years of funding.
• In addition, as per the Budget 2021 commitment a further $3 billion over five years is available
to support provinces and territories in applying LTC standards and making permanent changes.
• Our meeting with the premiers on February 7, 2023, provided an opportunity to discuss how,
collectively, we can achieve better results for Canadians and improve access to care.
• We are making significant progress in our discussions with provincial and territorial counterparts
to achieve better outcomes for Canadians. Collaborative work with our counterparts is already underway
which, we hope, will soon lead to the conclusion of new bilateral agreements.
Qs & As
Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) and Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
Table of Contents
Overarching Questions Related to the Patented Medicines Regulations and the Patented Medicines
Prices Review Board (PMPRB) Guidelines
Q1. Why did you write to the former acting Chairperson of the PMPRB about the Guidelines?
Q2. Why didn’t the government defend, more actively, the regulations in courts when they were
challenged?
Q3. Is the government still committed to implementing the regulations that came into force on July 1,
2022?
Q4. Do you still have confidence in the PMPRB?
Q5. How was the delay in moving ahead with these reforms affected by the pandemic?
Regulatory Amendments
Q6. The government launched the amendments to the PMR in 2017. What has changed since these
amendments were introduced?
Q7. Is the government still committed to expanding the list of comparator countries to reduce drug
prices, initially proposed in 2017?
Q8. Was the decision to not proceed with those two changes due to the court decisions? Why did the
government choose to not pursue an appeal rather than cancel long promised changes?
Q9. Most other regulators look at factors beyond comparing prices paid in other countries – like value for
money and market size. Why are we no longer taking value and overall affordability into account?
Q10. Who did Health Canada consult with regarding the regulatory amendments?
Q11. What is the process for the PMPRB guidelines? How do the amendments impact them? Why did
you and the Department send letters to PMPRB about the guideline process?
Q12. How will vaccines and treatments for COVID-19 be impacted by the PMR and PMPRB Guidelines?
Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
Q13. What is the relationship between the Government and the PMPRB?
Q14. Is the government planning to resume consultations on PMPRB guidelines that were paused last
year? If so, when?
Q15. What is the process for filling vacancies on the PMPRB Board?
Pharmaceuticals Management Agenda, Drug Prices, Accessibility
Q16. What are the anticipated impacts of the PMR amendments on access to medicines?
Q17. Do you expect lower medicine prices will result in less investment by industry in research and
development (R&D) in Canada?
Q18. Is the pharmaceutical industry meeting its commitment to invest 10% of its sales to R&D in
Canada?
Q19. What is the anticipated trend with drug prices – are they expected to increase or decrease?
Overarching Questions Related to the Patented Medicines Regulations and the Patented Medicines
Prices Review Board (PMPRB) Guidelines
Q1. Why did you write to the former acting Chairperson of the PMPRB about the Guidelines?
Although part of the Health Portfolio, the PMPRB carries out its mandate at arm’s length from the
Minister of Health. It operates independently of other bodies, such as Health Canada. As set out in the
Patent Act, the PMPRB, after consultation, can issue guidelines.
To operationalize the amendments of the Patented Medicines Regulations that came into force on July 1,
2022, and to modernize other aspects of its existing guidelines, the PMPRB proposed new guidelines on
October 6, 2022, and posted them for a 60-day consultation ending December 5, 2022.
In addition to the new schedule of 11 comparator countries, the draft guidelines contained several
substantive changes as part of the Board’s modernization efforts.
For instance, the guidelines included a pivotal change from a long-standing practice of including price
tests and price ceilings, to instead including investigation criteria.
Given the shift in the proposed guidelines, and in accordance with the requirement of the Patent Act for
consultations, on November 28, 2022, I wrote to the former Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB. In this
letter, I respectfully asked that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to allow time for
stakeholders, including provinces and territories, to fully understand the short and long-term impacts of
the proposed guidelines. In the interest of transparency, this letter has been made public. Health Canada
also provided a submission to the PMPRB as part of the consultation process, which was published
online by the PMPRB alongside other stakeholder submissions.
As I noted in my opening remarks, there was nothing outside the roles and responsibilities of my
function as Minister of Health, as laid out in the Patent Act, or that of the Department of Health in the
provision of those two documents to PMPRB.
Q2. Why didn’t the government defend, more actively, the regulations in courts when they were
challenged?
I will answer your question by providing some context and considerations. I do, however, want to note
that considerations regarding legal matters, including decisions to seek leave to appeal, are done in
consultation with the Department of Justice. In the case of the PMR, this decision to seek leave or not
rested with my colleague, the Attorney General of Canada, Minister David Lametti.
For a bit of context, since 2017, when these amendments were first proposed, the pharmaceutical
landscape had changed. The COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the progression of various federal
initiatives seeking to improve accessibility and affordability for needed medicines (e.g. Canadian Drug
Agency, national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy,
regulatory modernization, Pharmacare), were all important considerations that changed the
pharmaceuticals management context.
The PMR amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. On
June 29, 2020, the Federal Court upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the
reporting of price information that is net of third party rebates. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the
Quebec Superior Court ruled against that same element of the amendments. Following this, the Court of
Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the
validity of the updated basket of comparator countries, but found the three new price regulatory factors
in addition to the collection of price information that is net of third party rebates to be invalid.
As mentioned, the amendments to the PMR were initially proposed in 2017, and since then, the
pharmaceutical context has changed. Many stakeholders were looking for stability and predictability in
the pharmaceutical sector and were wanting to move ahead with the new basket of countries. This was
reflected in what I heard when I consulted with stakeholders in March 2022. Following on these
consultations, I issued a statement on April 14, 2022 so that the direction to be taken by the government
would be known as soon as possible.
Q3. Is the government still committed to implementing the regulations that came into force on July 1,
2022?
The amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR) were originally set to come-into-force on
July 1, 2020, but were delayed to January 1, 2021, due to the COVID-19 pandemic.
On April 14, 2022, I issued a statement that the Government of Canada would proceed with the
amendments related to the new basket of countries. Companies are now required to report against the
new basket of countries, which excludes the United States and Switzerland, and includes Australia,
Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Spain, along with France, Germany, Italy, Sweden and the UK,
which have always been included in the basket of countries.
On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the PMR came into force. The amendments comprise
the new 11-country basket of comparator countries and decreased reporting requirements for medicines
at low risk of excessive prices (i.e., generic drugs, over-the-counter drugs and veterinary drugs). Since the
coming-into-force, patentees have been reporting their list prices for the new country basket. In practice,
given that reporting periods under the Board’s guidelines are January-June and July-December, the
PMPRB has received the reporting of prices vis-à-vis the new basket for a full year (all of 2022).
Our government continues to work towards improving access and affordability to quality medications for
Canadians. As indicated, we have made progress in key areas including streamlining regulations for drug
approvals and clinical trials, launching the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and working with
provinces and territories to establish the Canadian Drug Agency.
Q4. Do you still have confidence in the PMPRB?
I support and respect the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent, quasi-judicial body that protects the
interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in Canada are
not excessive.
The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister of
Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an independent
body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are not paying
excessive prices.
The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical pricing and
reimbursement landscape and the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB
and its role in protecting consumers against excessive prices of patented medicines.
Q5. How was the delay in moving ahead with these reforms affected by the pandemic?
Many, many stakeholders across the pharmaceutical management system were involved in our
successful response to the pandemic. In order to ensure that this focus could be sustained, the coming
into force of the regulations was delayed.
In partnership with provinces, territories, and Indigenous communities, Canada rolled out the largest
immunization campaign in the country’s history – effectively securing vaccines; establishing new
domestic infrastructure; and, implementing unique, evidence-based approaches, in the context of
staggered arrival of vaccines. As a result, Canada was one of the first countries to achieve high levels of
vaccine coverage for both first and second doses, despite the limited global supply. Canada also had the
most diversified vaccine portfolio in the world, with investments of more than $1B in procurement
agreements to secure a domestic supply for all Canadians.
Companies in the biomanufacturing space from coast to coast mobilized to respond to the COVID-19
pandemic. We partnered with Canadian industry and businesses to protect Canadians from COVID-19,
including through investments in the development of Canadian medical countermeasures in response to
COVID-19. We also strengthened Canada’s emergency preparedness for future pandemics by increasing
capacity to produce, fill-finish and distribute vaccines and therapies for the Canadian population.
I would also point out that the PMPRB had adopted a policy exception for vaccines. On September 17,
2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19
diagnosis, treatment, or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating that special
consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. As
such, the prices of patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim
Orders were not subject to review or an investigation by the Board unless a complaint was received from
either the federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts.
Regulatory Amendments
Q6. The government launched the amendments to the PMR in 2017. What has changed since these
amendments were introduced?
The amendments were first proposed in 2017 and the regulatory changes were published in Canada
Gazette II in August 2019. At that time, the amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The amendments were intended to give the PMPRB new tools, including a new basket of comparator
countries, as well as new factors that the Board could have to consider when assessing if a price of a
patented medicine was excessive.
The amendments included three main elements:
• Updating the basket of comparator countries: to exclude countries like the US and Switzerland
and include countries that are more like Canada economically and from a consumer price protection
standpoint (e.g. Australia, Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway, and Spain)
• New economic factors: to enable the PMPRB to consider the price of patented medicines
relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system when establishing whether a
medicine is being sold at an excessive price
• Updated reporting requirements: requiring drug companies to report price information net of all
price adjustments (e.g., rebates, discounts), including third party rebates, and decreasing reporting
requirements for drugs at low risk of excessive pricing (i.e., veterinary drugs, over-the-counter drugs and
generic drugs)
The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six
months, due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic:
• On June 1st, 2020 the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from July 1st,
2020 to January 1st, 2021
• On December 29th, 2020, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from
January 1st, 2021 to July 1st, 2021
• On June 29th, 2021, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from July 1st,
2021 to January 1st, 2022
• December 23rd 2021, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from January
1st, 2022 to July 1st, 2022
These delays provided additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and
allowing them to continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic. The most recent delay to
the coming-into-force date of the amendments acknowledged the continuing challenges presented by
the pandemic, but also the evolution of the pharmaceutical landscape since the amendments were first
introduced, signaling the government’s openness to further discussion with stakeholders.
Since 2019, the pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically, a new context has developed brought
on by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the progression of various initiatives seeking to improve
accessibility and affordability for needed medicines (e.g. Canadian Drug Agency, national strategy for
drugs for rare diseases, Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, national pharmacare)
The PMR amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court, Federal Court of Appeal, Superior
Court of Quebec and in the Court of Appeal of Quebec. Over the period of a couple of years, the
decisions in these proceedings found the new basket of comparator countries to be within the authority
of the Patent Act and the Federal Government. The other elements of the amendments (i.e., new
economic factors and the requirement to file information net of all price adjustments]) were found to be
unconstitutional by the Quebec Court of Appeal. The Federal Court found that the collection of
confidential rebate information was beyond the authority of the Patent Act.
Health Canada took the opportunity in March 2022 to consult with stakeholders, including provincial and
territorial health ministries on a way forward, in light of the changed pharmaceutical landscape. Further
to these consultations, the Government announced on April 14, 2022, it was moving forward with the
coming-into-force on July 1, 2022, of the new basket of comparator countries and decreased reporting
requirements for medicines at low risk of excessive pricing (e.g., generic drugs, over-the-counter drugs,
and veterinary drugs). The Government did not proceed with the Amendments related to the new price
regulatory factors, nor with the requirements to file information net of all price adjustments.
Since the coming-into-force, patentees have been reporting their list prices for the new country basket.
In practice, given that reporting periods under the Board’s guidelines are January-June and July-
December, the PMPRB has received the reporting of prices vis-à-vis the new basket for a full year (all of
2022).
Q7. Is the government still committed to expanding the list of comparator countries to reduce drug
prices, initially proposed in 2017?
On April 14, 2022, I issued a statement that the Government of Canada would proceed with the
amendments to the PMR to provide the PMPRB with new tools to protect Canadians from excessive
prices for patented medicines. The Government moved forward with the implementation of the
amendments related to the new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting requirements for
those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing. As a result of coming-in-to-force, on July 1st, 2022,
United States and Switzerland were removed form the comparator countries, and Australia, Belgium,
Japan, Netherlands, Norway, and Spain were included, along with France, Germany, Italy, Sweden, and
the UK, which have always been included in the basket of countries. Patentees are now required to
report against the new basket.
Q8. Was the decision to not proceed with those two changes due to the court decisions? Why did the
government choose to not pursue an appeal rather than cancel long promised changes?
The pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically since the amendments were made, particularly
with the progression of various initiatives seeking to improve accessibility and affordability for needed
medicines.
The PMR amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC) and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-
name companies filed an application for a judicial review of the amendments. On June 29, 2020, the
Court upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of price information
that is net of third party rebates. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to
uphold the constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the
collection of confidential rebate information. Following this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February
18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the validity of the updated basket of
comparator countries, but found that the three new price regulatory factors in addition to the collection
of price information that is net of third party rebates to be invalid. Neither party has decided to seek
leave to appeal the decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
On December 5, 2022, with respect to updating the comparator basket of countries, the Federal Court of
Appeal unanimously dismissed an appeal by IMC and upheld the Federal Government’s amendment to
the Patented Medicines Regulation, . The decision upholds a key element of the Government’s agenda to
implement regulations that will result in lower drug prices for Canadians. IMC did not seek leave to
appeal this decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
Q9. Most other regulators look at factors beyond comparing prices paid in other countries – like value for
money and market size. Why are we no longer taking value and overall affordability into account?
Canada is unique in having a national price regulator in the PMPRB. Moving forward with the new basket
of countries will allow the Board to continue with its mandate of ensuring non-excessive prices for
patented medicines in Canada.
Other health system partners, such as CADTH, will continue to provide information for drug plans/payers
by looking at pharmacoeconomic considerations as part of its assessments.
The pCPA is an alliance of the provincial, territorial and federal governments that collaborates on a range
public drug plan initiatives to increase and manage access to clinically effective and affordable drug
treatments. One of pCPA’s key roles is to conduct joint negotiations for brand name and generic drugs in
Canada in order to achieve greater value for publicly funded drug programs and patients through its
combined negotiating power.
Q10. Who did Health Canada consult with regarding the regulatory amendments?
The views of stakeholders have been part of the consultation process since the amendments were first
proposed in 2017. The final changes announced in August 2019 were the product of nearly three years
of extensive consultations, study and review.
Health Canada has benefited from considerable stakeholder input since pre-publication of the Patented
Medicines Regulations in Canada Gazette, Part I in December 2017. Extensive feedback was received
from a diverse range of stakeholders, including patient groups, industry, academics, health partners, and
the provinces and territories.
In March 2022, in considering a path forward, the Department engaged with several targeted
stakeholders (provincial and territorial ministries of health, industry, life sciences organizations, patient
groups, payers, academics and health system partners) to hear their views on a path forward for the
Amendments in the context of the evolving pharmaceutical landscape.
Q11. What is the process for the PMPRB guidelines? How do the amendments impact them? Why did
you and the Department send letters to PMPRB about the guideline process?
PMPRB is part of the Health Portfolio and carries out its regulatory mandate at arm’s length (i.e.,
independently) from the Minister of Health. As set out in the Patent Act (96(4)), the Board may issue
guidelines with respect to any matter within its jurisdiction. The Act also requires consultation, including
with the Minister, provincial ministers of the Crown responsible for health and such representatives of
consumer groups and representatives of the pharmaceutical industry, before the Board issues any
guidelines (96(5)).
On June 30, 2022, in anticipation of the coming into force of the amendments to the PMR on July 1,
2022, the PMPRB published Interim Guidelines for establishing non-excessive prices during the period of
time between the coming into force of the PMR and the publication of the Final Guidelines. The
consultation process for the interim Guidelines proposed that once the Draft Guidelines were published,
there would be a targeted consultation with stakeholders.
Subsequently, on October 6, 2022, Draft Guidelines were published with a 60-day Notice and Comment
Period ending December 5, 2022.
I wrote to the Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB asking that the Board consider pausing the consultation
process to allow time to fully understand the short and long-term impacts of the proposed guidelines. I
also expressed interest in understanding any potential impacts with respect to drug shortages and
implications for provincial and territorial pharmaceutical management systems. This letter was written in
context of section 96(5) of the Patent Act, which states that the PMPRB must consult with various
parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
On December 16, 2022, the PMPRB published all submissions received on their website (including one
from Health Canada). On this same date, the PMPRB announced that it would not implement the
proposed new Guidelines on January 1, 2023 and that the Interim Guidelines, adopted in August 2022,
would remain in place until further notice.
According to the Interim Guidelines, an investigation into the price of a patented medicine by Board staff
will not be triggered if the national average transaction prices for medicines currently on the market
remain below its Non-Excessive Average Price (i.e., the projected ceiling price) that Staff calculated and
communicated to the patentee in their 2022 compliance letter. If they are above, an investigation may be
triggered. The Interim Guidelines also include a provision that investigations will not be triggered if list
prices of patented medicines do not increase, signaling that investigations may be triggered if list prices
increase.
Q12. How will vaccines and treatments for COVID-19 be impacted by the PMR and PMPRB Guidelines?
On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed
for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, or management, the PMPRB issued a policy notice stating that
special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-
19. As such, the prices of patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19
Interim Orders were not subject to review or an investigation by the Board unless a complaint was
received from either the federal Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts.
Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
Q13. What is the relationship between the Government and the PMPRB?
The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister of
Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an independent
body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are not paying
excessive prices.
The PMPRB and its legal framework are an important part of the pharmaceutical management system
and the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting
consumers against excessive prices.
As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees charge for
patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve
voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price is
excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
Q14. Is the government planning to resume consultations on PMPRB guidelines that were paused last
year? If so, when?
The PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. To date, the PMPRB has not signalled or communicated any next steps
regarding its Guidelines.
Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to PMPRB.
Q15. What is the process for filling vacancies on the PMPRB Board?
I appreciate the work current and former Board members have undertaken during their terms. The
Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve the interests
of Canadians. On February 1st, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based process, Thomas J.
Digby was appointment as the chairperson of the Board for a term of five years. On March 10th, 2023,
Notice of Opportunities for a new Board member and Vice-chairperson of the Board were issued by the
Privy Council Office. All members of the Board are Governor-in-Council appointments.
Pharmaceuticals Management Agenda, Drug Prices, Accessibility
Q16. What are the anticipated impacts of the PMR amendments on access to medicines?
The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in supporting
research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and improving the
affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
Patented drug prices in Canada are among the highest in the world. The changes to the Patented
Medicines Regulations that came into force on July 1, 2022 will improve access to patented medicines
for the many Canadians who cannot afford them. Furthermore, through initiatives directed at improving
and better aligning drug review processes, the Government of Canada is helping to reduce the time it
takes for Canadians to have access to the drugs they need.
Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing over the
next ten years in Canada.
Q17. Do you expect lower medicine prices will result in less investment by industry in research and
development (R&D) in Canada?
Evidence shows that revenues are only one of a number of factors that play into R&D investment
decisions by the pharmaceutical industry. Factors such as infrastructure for clinical trials and scientific
clusters, along with head office location, are stronger determinants.
Many countries with lower patented medicine prices also have significantly higher levels of investment
by pharmaceutical companies. In fact, pharmaceutical R&D investment in Canada has fallen to below 5%
of sales, less than half of its level in the 1990s, even as patented medicine prices have risen dramatically
during that same timeframe. This is despite significant government support through funding and grant
opportunities for research and investment in Canada.
Industry and government collaboration in the life sciences sector will continue to be a priority. The
government’s investments in the federal Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy are also supporting
the pharmaceutical sector in Canada.
Industry and government collaboration in the life sciences sector will continue to be a priority. The
Health/Bio-sciences Economic Strategy Table and the Strategic Innovation Fund are two examples of
successful partnerships. The government’s investments in the federal Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences
Strategy are also supporting the pharmaceutical sector in Canada.
Q18. Is the pharmaceutical industry meeting its commitment to invest 10% of its sales to R&D in
Canada?
The commitment was first made in 1989, in the context of a changing international legal environment
with the adoption of the first U.S. free trade agreement signed in 1988. Over the following decade,
increased investments were made, and, to some extent, the target was met. However, in the early
2000s, patentees began reporting decreased R&D to sales ratios. The R&D to sales ratio for all patentees
declined to 8.8% in 2003, from 9.9% in 2002 as did the R&D-to-sales ratio for members of IMC (formerly
known as Rx&D) to 9.1% from 10.0% the previous year. Since 2014, the figure has fallen below 5%, and
according to the PMPRB’s 2022 annual report, R&D to sales ratio in 2021 was 3.4%.
The Government of Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, which aims
to grow a strong, competitive, and resilient domestic life sciences ecosystem, with cutting edge
biomanufacturing capabilities, and to ensure Canada is prepared for future pandemics and health
priorities. The Strategy is supported by an investment of $2.2B and includes a number of funding
opportunities – the Strategic Innovation Fund, the integrated Canada Biomedical Research
Fund/Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund and the Clinical Trials Fund.
We have also supported the growth of the biomanufacturing and life sciences sector in Canada and
taken steps to position Canada as a global leader in health research and new technology platforms
through new partnerships. In August 2021, we signed a Memorandum of Understanding with leading
mRNA and vaccine producer Moderna to establish a state-of-the-art Canadian mRNA vaccine facility in
Canada. In February 2023, AstraZeneca announced that it had chosen Canada for a major expansion of
their research activities at their hub in Mississauga, Ontario, representing a significant investment in our
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
Q19. What is the anticipated trend with drug prices – are they expected to increase or decrease?
As a result of the coming-into-force of the amendments to the PMR, patentees are now required to
report against the new basket of comparator countries, which excludes the US and Switzerland and
includes countries that are more like Canada economically and from a consumer price protection
standpoint (Australia, Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Spain). The amendments sought to
provide the PMPRB with new tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices for patented medicines
and are expected to result in lower drug prices for Canadians.
In addition, the pan Canadian Pricing Alliance (pCPA), an alliance of the provincial, territorial and federal
governments, conducts joint negotiations for brand name and generic drugs in Canada to achieve
greater value for publicly funded drug programs and patients. Through its negotiations, the pCPA has
realized annual savings from patented drugs of $2.67B and this is expected to continue to be advanced
through the amendments. In addition, generic medications in Canada, which accounted for 76% of the
Canadian pharmaceutical market in 2018, are priced through the pan-Canadian Tiered Pricing
Framework. Under this framework, generic medications are priced based on various factors, such as the
number of competitors in the market and price of the branded reference products. As prices for branded
products decrease based on the new basket of comparator countries, reductions in generic medication
prices are also expected.
Specialty medications, such as biologics represent a growing portion of drug spending for a very small
portion of the population. The PMPRB has also estimated an additional savings opportunity of up to
$1.65B annually through the use of biosimilars in place of the biologic reference product. A number of
jurisdictions have implemented biosimilar switching policies as part of their provincial drug plans. Private
plans are also starting to follow suit. Biosimilars cost 25-50% less than biologics, resulting in significant
savings for the health system that can be put towards expanded health coverage, accessibility, and
affordability for Canadians.
PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD
ISSUE
• The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is an independent quasi-judicial body that
protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines sold in
Canada are not excessive.
KEY FACTS
• On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR)
came into force. These amendments, including the new basket of comparator countries, were designed
to provide the PMPRB with new tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices for patented
medicines.
• To operationalize the amendments and modernize other aspects of its existing Guidelines, the
PMPRB proposed new Guidelines, which were published on October 6, 2022, for a 60-day consultation
period, ending December 5, 2022.
• In December 2022, the PMPRB announced that it would not implement the proposed new
Guidelines on January 1, 2023. As indicated by the PMPRB, the Interim Guidelines will remain in place
until further notice.
• On December 5, 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier resigned from her role as Acting Chairperson of
the PMPRB, and on February 20, 2023, Matthew Herder resigned from the Board.
• On February 1, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J.
Digby as the chairperson of the PMPRB following an open, merit-based process
• On March 9 2023, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) adopted a motion to conduct a
study on the Patented Medicines Prices Review Board and invite the following witnesses, in addition to
any further witnesses the committee may consider relevant: the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister
of Health; Matthew Herder, former member of the PMPRB; Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, former acting
chair, PMPRB; and Douglas Clark, former executive director, PMPRB. The committee will report its
findings and recommendations to the House and request that the government table a comprehensive
response to the report.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON THE HEALTH CANADA SUBMISSION OR QUESTIONS ABOUT ANY POTENTIAL
INTERFERENCE IN THE BOARD’S DECISION…
• PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his views with respect to the
proposed Guidelines.
• As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking it to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including PTs, to understand fully the short
and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
IF PRESSED ON LEADERSHIP CHANGES AT PMPRB…
• On February 1, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, Thomas
J. Digby was appointed as the Chairperson of the PMPRB for a term of five years.
• The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve
the interests of Canadians.
• Health Canada would like to thank Mélanie Bourassa Forcier and Matthew Herder for their work
as members of the Board during their terms.
• Members of the PMPRB are Governor-in-Council appointments.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF THE RESIGNATION OF PMPRB OFFICIAL…
• Officials working as staff within the PMPRB are public servants, and the PMPRB is responsible for
its own staffing. Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON PMPRB’S CURRENT CAPACITY TO PROTECT CANADIANS FROM EXCESSIVE PRICES OF
PATENT MEDICINES…
• The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are
not paying excessive prices.
• The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical landscape, and
the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB and its role in protecting
consumers against excessive prices of patented medicines.
IF PRESSED ON GUIDELINES…
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
• Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB.
IF PRESSED ON THE PMPRB…
• As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees
charge for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price
is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving the affordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian economy,
innovation, and quality of life. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation ecosystem in
Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the government,
reviews the prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market to ensure
that they are not being sold at a price that the PMPRB finds to be “excessive”. The PMPRB can work with
patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to determine whether a price is
excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to refer matters to the PMPRB, which in
turn is required to inquire into the matter and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Minister is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which form part of the PMPRB’s legislative framework.
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Amendments included three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts, including third party rebates); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth, and medicine markets as Canada.
On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines on June 19, 2020 and
published its updated Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
The original coming into force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six months
due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were
informed of an initial delay of six months to January 1, 2021. In December 2020, stakeholders were
notified of another six-month delay to July 1, 2021. In June 2021, the coming into force was delayed
further to January 1, 2022. More recently in December 2021, stakeholders were informed of another six-
month delay to July 1, 2022. These delays provided additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the
new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing them to
continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic.
Since 2019, the pharmaceutical landscape has shifted dramatically, a new context has developed brought
on by the COVID-19 pandemic, coupled with the progression of various initiatives seeking to improve
accessibility and affordability for needed medicines. Health Canada took the opportunity in March 2022
to consult with stakeholders on a way forward. Further to these consultations, the Government
announced on April 14, 2022, it was moving forward with the coming into force on July 1, 2022, of the
new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting requirements for medicines with lowest risk
of excessive pricing of the Patented Medicine Regulations. The Government did not proceed with the
Amendments related to the new price regulatory factors, nor with the requirements to file information
net of all price adjustments (e.g. rebates, discounts, including third party rebates).
On June 30, 2022, in anticipation of the coming into force of the amendments to the PMR on July 1,
2022, the PMPRB published Interim Guidelines for establishing non-excessive prices for drugs launched
during the period of time between the coming into force of the PMR and the publication of the Final
Guidelines. The consultation process for the interim Guidelines proposed that once the Draft Guidelines
were published, there would be a targeted consultation with key stakeholders.
Subsequently, on October 6, 2022, Draft Guidelines were published with a 60-day Notice and Comment
Period ending December 5, 2022. The PMPRB expressed an intention to issue Final Guidelines by the end
of the year and coming into effect on January 1, 2023. The enforcement period would begin in January
2024 to provide rights holders two reporting periods to adjust to the new Guidelines. In addition to the
new Schedule of 11 comparator countries, the Draft Guidelines contained a number of substantive
changes as part of the Board’s modernization efforts. As part of its consultation process, the PMPRB
opened an online consultation portal and hosted an online public consultation on the draft Guidelines on
November 3, 2022, and November 8, 2022 in English and French, respectively. Further, representatives
of the pharmaceutical industry were invited to closed webinars on November 3 and 8, 2022, in English
and French.
On November 28, 2022, the Minister of Health wrote to the Acting Chairperson of the PMPRB asking
that the Board consider pausing the consultation process to allow time to fully understand the short and
long-term impacts of the proposed guidelines. This letter was written in context of section 96(5) of the
Patent Act, which states that the PMPRB must consult with various parties, including the Minister of
Health, before the issuance of any guidelines.
In December 2022, Mélanie Bourassa Forcier, Vice-Chairperson and Acting Chairperson of PMPRB,
confirmed her resignation and in February 2023, Matthew Herder confirmed his resignation from the
Board and published his resignation letter online. Douglas Clark, Executive Director (a public servant who
reports into the Chairperson) announced that he would remain as a special advisor for a specified period
but resigned from his Executive Director position in February 2023.
In February 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J. Digby as the
chairperson of the PMPRB following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, for a term
of five years.
On February 24, 2023, NDP MP Don Davies filed a motion calling for the health committee to conduct a
study to investigate reports that the Minister of Health personally intervened with the independent and
arms-length Patented Medicine Prices Review Board to indefinitely suspend reform that would have
saved Canadians billions on drug costs.
Litigation concerning the Amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations
The PMR Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
price information that is net of third party rebates. Following this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on
February 18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the validity of the updated
basket of comparator countries, but found that the three new price regulatory factors in addition to the
collection of confidential rebate information to be invalid. Neither party has decided to seek leave to
appeal the decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
On December 5, 2022, with respect to updating the comparator basket of countries, the Federal Court of
Appeal unanimously dismissed an appeal by Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC) and upheld the Federal
Government’s amendment to the Patented Medicines Regulations. The decision upholds a key element
of the Government’s agenda to implement regulations that will result in lower drug prices for Canadians.
IMC did not seek leave to appeal this decision to the Supreme Court of Canada.
Media Lines
Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB)
Issue Statement: There has been recent media coverage/requests related to the Patented Medicines
Prices Review Board (PMPRB), including on the proposed new Guidelines to operationalize the
amendments to the Patent Medicine Regulations (PMR). The following media lines will respond to
further media inquiries seeking more information about the Guidelines delay and recent resignations
from the PMPRB, including a member of the board and the Executive Director (a public servant).
On December 5, 2022, as part of the consultation process on the proposed Guidelines, Health Canada
sent a submission to the PMPRB, which included a request to consider pausing the consultations process
to allow more time to understand fully the short and long-term impacts of the proposed Guidelines.
On February 1, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the appointment of Thomas J. Digby as the
chairperson of the PMPRB.
Following this announcement, on February 3, 2023, the PMPRB released an ATI package, requested by
the media, specifically asking for the letter from the Minister sent to the previous chairperson asking
them to consider pausing the consultations process.
Key Messages:
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can
impact the ability of patients to access new medicines.
• On July 1, 2022, Health Canada’s amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations (PMR)
came-into-force. These amendments, including the new basket of comparator countries, were designed
to provide the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) with new tools to protect Canadians
from excessive prices for patented medicines.
• To operationalize the amendments and modernize other aspects of its existing Guidelines, the
PMPRB proposed new Guidelines, which were published on October 6, 2022 for a 60-day consultation
period, ending December 5, 2022.
• Health Canada supports and respects the PMPRB’s role as a strong, independent quasi-judicial
body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented
medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
If pressed on the Health Canada submission or questions about any potential interference in the Board’s
decision:
• PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body and is responsible for the development and
implementation of its Guidelines. As stated in section 96(5) of the Patent Act, the PMPRB must consult
with various parties, including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. It is in that
context that Minister Duclos wrote to the chair of the PMPRB to share his views with respect to the
proposed Guidelines.
• Health Canada also provided a submission to the PMPRB as part of the consultation process on
December 5, 2022.
If pressed on board leadership changes at PMPRB:
• On February 1, 2023, following an open, transparent and merit-based selection process, Thomas
J. Digby was appointed as the Chairperson of the PMPRB for a term of five years.
• The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve
the interests of Canadians.
If pressed on impact of the resignation of board members of the PMPRB:
• Health Canada would like to thank [Name] for their work as a member of the Board during their
term over the past nearly five years.
• Members of the PMPRB are Governor-in-Council appointments. For more information about the
appointment process please contact PCO media relations at 613-957-5420 or by email at
mediacentre@pco-bcp.gc.ca.
If pressed on impact of the resignation of PMPRB officials:
• Questions about human resources and staffing at the PMPRB should be directed to PMPRB
Media Relations.
If pressed on PMPRB’s current capacity to protect Canadians from excessive prices of patent medicines:
• The PMPRB is established under the Patent Act and reports into Parliament through the Minister
of Health. It does and will continue to play an important role in exercising its authority as an
independent body to oversee the prices of patented medicines in Canada and ensure that Canadians are
not paying excessive prices.
• The PMPRB and its legal framework is an important part of the pharmaceutical pricing and
reimbursement landscape and the Government of Canada is committed to the mandate of the PMPRB
and its role in protecting consumers against excessive prices.
• The Government of Canada continues to advance pharmaceutical management policies and
initiatives, including agile regulation for clinical trials and drug approval, a national strategy for rare
diseases, a Canadian Drug Agency and an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
If pressed on Guidelines:
• Specific questions regarding next steps with respect to the Guidelines should be directed to
PMPRB Media Relations.
If pressed on the PMPRB:
• As an arm’s-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees
charge for patented drug products in the Canadian market. The PMPRB can work with patentees to
achieve voluntary price reductions, or the board can hold public hearings to determine whether a price
is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
Questions and Answers:
Q1. Why did Health Canada ask the PMPRB to consider pausing the consultations process on the
proposed new Guidelines?
As part of the PMPRB’s consultation process, Health Canada sent a submission to the Board on
December 5, 2022, asking to consider pausing the consultation process, to allow time to work
collaboratively with health system partners and stakeholders, including PTs, to understand fully the short
and long-term impacts of the proposed new Guidelines.
Q2. These reforms to the Patented Medicines Regulations and PMPRB Guidelines have been under way
for more than five years. Is more time for consultations really needed—leading to another delay?
It is critical that all stakeholders understand fully how any new Guidelines will be implemented. More
information on the operationalization of some of the key technical aspects of the Guidelines and their
potential impacts will benefit all interested parties.
Q3. Do you expect that lower prices could limit access to new or innovative medicines?
The changes to the Patented Medicines Regulations that came into force on July 1, 2022 will improve
access to patented medicines for the many Canadians who cannot afford them. Furthermore, through
initiatives directed at improving and better aligning drug review processes, the Government of Canada is
helping to reduce the time it takes for Canadians to have access to the drugs they need.
Q4. Do you expect lower medicine prices will result in less investment by industry in research and
development (R&D) in Canada?
Evidence shows that revenues are only one of a number of factors that play into R&D investment
decisions by the pharmaceutical industry. Factors such as infrastructure for clinical trials and scientific
clusters, along with head office location, are stronger determinants.
Many countries with lower patented medicine prices also have significantly higher levels of investment
by pharmaceutical companies. In fact, pharmaceutical R&D investment in Canada has fallen to below 5%
of sales, less than half of its level in the 1990s, even as patented medicine prices have risen dramatically
during that same timeframe. This is despite significant government support through funding and grant
opportunities for research and investment in Canada.
Industry and government collaboration in the life sciences sector will continue to be a priority. The
government’s investments in the federal Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy are also supporting
the pharmaceutical sector in Canada.
If pressed on industry R&D spending targets:
Evidence shows that revenues are only one of a number of factors that play into R&D investment
decisions by the pharmaceutical industry. Factors such as infrastructure for clinical trials and scientific
clusters, along with head office location, are stronger determinants.
Many countries with lower patented medicine prices also have significantly higher levels of investment
by pharmaceutical companies. In fact, pharmaceutical R&D investment in Canada has fallen to below 5%
of sales, less than half of its level in the 1990s, even as patented medicine prices have risen dramatically
during that same timeframe. This is despite significant government support through funding and grant
opportunities for research and investment in Canada.
Industry and government collaboration in the life sciences sector will continue to be a priority. The
Health/Bio-sciences Economic Strategy Table and the Strategic Innovation Fund are two examples of
successful partnerships. The government’s investments in the federal Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences
Strategy are also supporting the pharmaceutical sector in Canada.
If pressed on the Coming-into-Force of the Regulations Amending the Patented Medicines Regulations
and access to medicines in Canada:
Amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force on July 1, 2022. Specifically, the
Amendments include a new basket of comparator countries and reduced reporting requirements for
those medicines at lowest risk of excessive pricing.
The modernized regulations are expected to lower prices of patented medicines over the coming years,
which will improve access for people in Canada to quality medicines.
In addition to these regulatory changes, the Government continues its work to streamline the approval
of new drugs while ensuring their safety, efficacy and quality, advance on universal national pharmacare,
launch a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, establish a Canadian Drug Agency, and proceed
with an ambitious biomanufacturing and life sciences strategy.
These developments will improve the accessibility of new medicines for people in Canada and support
the sustainability of the health care system, while at the same time supporting innovation and
investment in the pharmaceutical sector.
Pharmaceutical Industry Investments in R&D
• In 1989, in the context of a changing international legal environment with the adoption of the
first U.S. free trade agreement signed in 1988, Canadian manufacturers of brand name medicines made
a commitment to invest 10% of its annual sales into research and development in Canada. This
commitment was made in exchange for the federal government extending drug patents from 17-20
years under the U.S. free trade agreement.
• From 1989 until the early 2000s, increased investments were made, and to some extent, this
target was met. In 1995, R&D to sales ratios peaked at 11.7% for all patentees ($625M) and in 1997 for
members of IMC (formerly known as Rx&D) it reached 12.9% ($657M). In the early 2000s, patentees
began reporting decreased R&D to sales ratios.
• The R&D to sales ratio for all patentees declined to 8.8% ($1.194B) in 2003, from 9.9% ($1.198B)
in 2002 as did the R&D-to-sales ratio for members of IMC (formerly known as Rx&D) to 9.1% ($992M)
from 10.0% ($1.01B) the previous year.
• Since 2014, the figure has fallen below 5%, and according to the PMPRB’s 2022 annual report,
R&D to sales ratio in 2021 was 3.4% ($922M for all patentees and $735M for IMC members).
• The government of Canada has also supported the growth of the biomanufacturing and life
sciences sector in Canada and taken steps to position Canada as a global leader in health research and
new technology platforms through new partnerships.
August 2021 – a Memorandum of Understanding was signed with leading mRNA and vaccine producer
Moderna to establish a state-of-the-art Canadian mRNA vaccine facility in Canada. This partnership will
help make sure Canada is more prepared for future pandemics, while creating good, highly skilled jobs.
February 2023 - AstraZeneca announced that it had chosen Canada for a major expansion of their
research activities at their hub in Mississauga, Ontario, representing a significant investment in our
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector. This investment will create 500 highly skilled jobs and support
the development of treatments for complex diseases like cancer. AstraZeneca employs over 1,200 staff in
Canada and, in 2021, reported $135M in research and development investment in Canada.
Ministerial Roles and Responsibilities on the PMPRB
PMPRB Background
The PMPRB was created in 1987 as the consumer protection “pillar” of a major set of reforms to the
Patent Act. The PMPRB is a quasi-judicial body with a regulatory mandate to prevent pharmaceutical
patentees from charging consumers excessive prices during the statutory monopoly period. Although
part of the Health Portfolio, the PMPRB carries out its mandate at arm’s length from the Minister of
Health.
PMPRB Mandate and Jurisdiction
Independent from Health Canada, the PMPRB has a dual mandate:
• In its regulatory role, it protects consumers by ensuring that the prices of patented medicines
are not excessive.
• In its reporting role, it provides information on pricing trends in the pharmaceutical industry via
its Annual Reports.
Authorities Granted to the Minister of Health through the Patent Act
Patent Act (R.S.C., 1985, c. P-4) last amended June 30, 2021.
The Minister of Health is responsible for the pharmaceutical provisions of the Act as set out in Sections
79 to 103.
The Patent Act requires the Minister of Health to:
• Table the Annual Report prepared by the PMPRB before Parliament (Section 100 (1-4))
• Recommend new or amended regulations to the Governor in Council (Section 101)
In addition, under the Patent Act, the Minister of Health may (but is not obligated to):
• Convene meetings with the PMPRB (Section 102 ). The Minister may at any time convene a
meeting of the following persons:
(a) the Chairperson and such members of the Board as the Chairperson may designate;
(b) the provincial ministers of the Crown responsible for health or such representatives as they may
designate;
(c) such representatives of consumer groups and representatives of the pharmaceutical industry as the
Minister may designate; and
(d) such other persons as the Minister considers appropriate.
In addition, the participants at a meeting convened above shall consider such matters in relation to the
administration or operation of sections 79 to 101 as the Minister may determine.
• Enter into agreements with provinces respecting the distribution of excess revenues collected by
the PMPRB from pharmaceutical patentees (Section 103)
• Refers matters to the Board, which in turn is required inquire into the matter and to report to
the Minister at the time, and in accordance with, the terms of reference established by the Minister
(Section 90). Further to a referral from the Minister of Health under section 90 of the Act, the PMPRB
also reports on medicine price, utilization and cost trends under the National Prescription Drug
Utilization Information System (NPDUIS) initiative.
• The Minister may establish an advisory panel to advise the Minister on the appointment of
persons to the Board of PMPRB and is responsible for the recommendation to the Governor in Council
with respect to the appointment of a person to the Board (Section 92(2))
The Minister is entitled to be consulted as part of the process the Board must follow in making
Guidelines. Specifically, pursuant to s. 96(4), the Board may issue non-binding Guidelines with respect to
any matter within its jurisdiction. However, s. 96(5) requires the Board to consult with various parties,
including the Minister of Health, before the issuance of any guidelines. Further, the Minister may certain
representatives as participants in such consultations (Section 96 (5)).
Modifications to the Patented Medicines Regulations
The Minister of Health is responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the
Patented Medicines Regulations, which set out the information that rights holders are to report to the
PMPRB. The most recent changes to the Patented Medicines Regulations came into force on July 1, 2022.
The Minister of Health is responsible for the Patented Medicines Regulations, whereas the PMPRB is
responsible to operationalize these regulations though the issuance of PMPRB Guidelines which provide
a framework for rights holders with regards to reporting requirements and the establishment of non-
excessive prices for rights holders
Section 101 on Regulations
• (1) Subject to subsection (2), the Governor in Council may make regulations [concerning certain
matters relating to the Board]…
• (2) No regulations may be made under paragraph (1)(d), (f), (h) or (i) except on the
recommendation of the Minister, made after the Minister has consulted with the provincial ministers of
the Crown responsible for health and with such representatives of consumer groups and representatives
of the pharmaceutical industry as the Minister considers appropriate.
Section 96(5) Before the Board issues any guidelines, it shall consult with the Minister, the provincial
ministers of the Crown responsible for health and such representatives of consumer groups and
representatives of the pharmaceutical industry as the Minister may designate for the purpose.
Patented Medicines Regulation (PMR) - Background
Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world, and these high prices can impact
the ability of patients to access new medicines. The Minister of Health is responsible for making
recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines Regulations, which form part of the
framework administered by the Patented Medicines Prices Review Board (PMPRB).
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
Part II. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020. These represented
the first substantive update of the Patented Medicines Regulations since they were originally made in
1994.
The Amendments included three main elements:
• Updating the basket of comparator countries: to exclude countries like the US and Switzerland
and include countries that are more like Canada economically and from a consumer price protection
standpoint
• New economic factors: to enable the PMPRB to take a drug’s value and overall affordability into
account when determining whether a medicine is being sold at an excessive price
• Updated reporting requirements: requiring drug companies to report price information net of all
price adjustments (e.g., rebates, discounts, including third party rebates), and decreasing reporting
requirements for drugs at low risk of excessive pricing (i.e., veterinary drugs, over-the-counter drugs and
generic drugs)
The original coming-into-force date for the amendments of July 1st, 2020 was delayed four times by six
months each as detailed below:
• On June 1st, 2020 the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from July 1st,
2020 to January 1st, 2021
• On December 29th, 2020, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from
January 1st, 2021 to July 1st, 2021
• On June 29th, 2021, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from July 1st,
2021 to January 1st, 2022
• December 23rd 2021, the Government announced a delay in the coming-into-force from January
1st, 2022 to July 1st, 2022
The reasons for the delay were:
• To provide additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the new reporting obligations and to
familiarize themselves with the final guidelines;
• To allow stakeholders to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic; and
• The evolution of the pharmaceutical landscape since the Amendments were first introduced.
On April 14, 2022 Government announced it was moving forward with the coming-into-force of the
Amendments on July 1st, 2022.
• New basket of comparator countries was adopted, which removed the United States and
Switzerland and added Australia, Belgium, Japan, Netherlands, Norway and Spain along with France,
Germany, Italy, Sweden and the UK, which have always been included in the basket of countries.
• Reporting requirements were reduced for medicines with the lowest risk of excessive pricing
• The Government did NOT proceed with the new price regulatory factors or requirements to file
price information net of all price adjustments.
On July 1st, 2022, the amendments to the PMR came-into-force. As a result, patentees are now required
to report against the new basket of comparator countries.
LITIGATION SUMMARY
Following the publication of the Amendments in Canada Gazette, Part II, on August 21, 2019, two court
challenges on the Amendments were brought forward by industry, one in the Superior Court of Québec
and the other in the Federal Court of Canada, the former alleging that price authority rests exclusively
within provinces and the latter alleging that the Amendments are ultra vires (outside the scope of) the
Patent Act.
Superior Court of Quebec Case: Merck Canada et al. v. Attorney General of Canada (Merck)
• On August 23, 2019, Merck Canada Inc. and six other pharmaceutical companies filed a
constitutional challenge in the Superior Court of Québec, seeking a declaration that the provisions that
establish and empower the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) (ss. 79 - 103 of the Patent
Act), the existing Patented Medicines Regulations and the Amendments are unconstitutional as
encroaching on the exclusive provincial power over property and civil rights, hospitals, and purely private
and local matters.
• On December 18, 2020, the Superior Court of Québec upheld the constitutionality of the existing
regime, and the Amendments with the exception of the amendment that would allow the PMPRB to
collect price information that is net of third party rebates, which was declared invalid and ultra vires the
federal power over patents. Both parties appealed the decision to the Court of Appeal of Québec.
• On February 18, 2022, the Court of Appeal of Québec (CAQ) upheld the constitutionality of the
existing regime, as well as revised basket of comparator countries, but found that the amendment that
would allow the PMPRB to collect price information that is net of third party rebates and the new price
regulatory factors including their associated reporting requirements to be outside the patent power and
therefore invalid.
• Status: None of the parties sought leave to appeal this decision to the Supreme Court of Canada
(SCC).
Federal Court Case: Innovative Medicines Canada et al. v. Canada (Attorney General) (IMC)
• On September 2, 2019, Innovative Medicines Canada, and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of
pharmaceutical companies, filed an application for judicial review in the Federal Court alleging that the
Amendments are invalid because they are ultra vires (outside the scope of) the Patent Act.
• On June 29, 2020, the Federal Court upheld the validity of the revised basket of comparator
countries, the new price regulatory factors (market size, pharmacoeconomic value, and GDP and GDP
per capita) and associated reporting requirements; however, the Court declared that the amendment
that would allow the PMPRB to collect price information that is net of third party rebates was invalid and
ultra vires the Patent Act.
• Status: Both parties appealed the decision to the Federal Court of Appeal (FCA). The appeal was
heard February 28 - March 1, 2022 and the decision was reserved. On December 5, 2022 the Federal
Court of Appeal upheld the Federal Government’s amendment to the Patented Medicines Regulations
which updated the comparator basket of countries. Regulations repealing the new price regulatory
factors and collection of price information that is net of third party rebates were published in Canada
Gazette II on July 6, 2022 and as a result the FCA agreed with the parties that these two issues were
moot and should not be heard. None of the Applicants sought leave to appeal this decision to the
Supreme Court of Canada.
Other Related Litigation
PMPRB Guidelines Judicial Review
• On November 23, 2020, IMC and subsidiaries of brand-name pharmaceutical companies, filed a
judicial review application in respect of the decision of the PMPRB to issue their New Guidelines in
October 2020, which would operationalize the not yet in force Amendments, including those that were
found to be invalid by the Court of Appeal of Québec.
• The application argued that, the Guidelines are ultra vires [outside the scope of] the Patent Act
because they empower Board Staff to consider the Maximum Rebated Price, a matter outside of the
PMPRB’s jurisdiction and in defiance of the Federal Court decision in IMC; serve to set price ceilings that
are binding; and apply price tests that have nothing to do with determining an “excessive” price.
• Status: Following the publication in Canada Gazette II on July 6, 2022 of the regulations repealing
the new price regulatory factors and collection of price information that is net of third party rebates and
the PMPRB’s advice to stakeholders that it would consult on a new and different set of guidelines in the
coming months, the Applicants discontinued the judicial review on August 3, 2022.
Key Features and Differences – Proposed PMPRB Guidelines (2022)
Versus 2020 Guidelines
Key Differences Introduced in 2022 Guidelines versus 2020 Guidelines
• The October 2020 PMPRB Guidelines were to be used to implement the government’s original
regulatory amendments.
• Given the repeal of aspects of the original amendments and the coming into force of amended
regulations to change the basket of countries on July 1, 2022, the Guidelines needed to be revised.
• The October 2022 Guidelines are intended by the PMPRB to be more streamlined and less
prescriptive.
• The new proposed Guidelines introduce the use of ‘investigation criteria’ instead of ‘triggers’ or
‘price tests’ to guide patentees’ pricing and assist PMPRB staff in the monitoring of prices.
• With the new Guidelines, PMPRB staff would no longer determine a price ceiling for patented
medicines but use investigation criteria intended to guide the work of PMPRB staff and help patentees
assess their compliance.
Key Elements 2020 Guidelines 2022 Proposed Guidelines
Ceiling price vs investigation criteria
Price ceilings based on application of price tests Investigation criteria for all medicines
Annual reassessment
Annual reassessment against ceiling price only when:
• Complaint received
• Excess revenues > $50,000
• List price > ceiling price by more than 5%
Annual reassessment of prices based on additional criteria including:
• Complaint received
• No international prices filed
• List price > median international price of the basket of comparators
• List price increases by more than Consumer Price Index (CPI)
Ceiling Price based on categorization of medicines based on innovation / therapeutic value
Flexibility/recognition for innovative therapeutic value in establishing ceiling price
N/A since price tests and ceiling prices are no longer included
The Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, P.C., M.P.
Health Canada Submission to the Patented Medicines Prices Review Board
New draft Guidelines 2022 Notice and Comment/Consultation
In accordance with Section 96(5) of the Patent Act, this letter sets out comments from
Health Canada.
The draft Guidelines published on October 6, 2022 with a 60-day Notice and Comment
period ending on December 5, 2022, follow the recent consultation and adoption of
interim Guidelines. In its consultation documents, the PMPRB states that it would like to
issue its final Guidelines by the end of 2022 and have them come into effect on January
1, 2023.
As described by the PMPRB in the consultation backgrounder, this new version of the
Guidelines includes a number of differences from existing or previously proposed
Guidelines. Importantly, they signal a pivotal change from a long-standing practice of
including price tests and price ceilings, to instead including investigation criteria.
Given the new direction set out in the proposed new Guidelines, it is critical that all
stakeholders understand fully how the new Guidelines will be implemented.
Stakeholders have raised concerns and questions associated with the new Guidelines,
and the uncertainty they impart. More information about the potential impacts and the
operationalization of some of the key technical aspects of the Guidelines is being
requested.
Health Canada needs to understand the potential impact on all stakeholders and health
system partners. An understanding of how this new direction could affect various
players in the drug development and distribution system in Canada, and any potential
effects for patients, care-givers, health care professionals and health care facilities is
critical. Given the role of provinces and territories in the pharmaceutical management
system, Health Canada would like to consult our counterparts to understand their views
on these draft Guidelines.
Based on these considerations, Health Canada asks that the Board consider pausing
the consultation process. A pause will allow time to work collaboratively, with all
stakeholders and health system partners, to understand fully the short and long-term
impacts of the proposed new Guidelines. During this time, we understand that the
interim Guidelines currently in place could continue to be in force.
Sincerely,
Eric Bélair
Associate Assistant Deputy Minister
Strategic Policy Branch, Health Canada
Douglas Clark stepping down as Executive Director of the PMPRB
From: Patented Medicine Prices Review Board Canada
News Release
February 24, 2023—Ottawa, ON—Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Douglas Clark, Executive Director of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), has
announced that he will be stepping down from that position after almost a decade at the PMPRB. Before
joining the PMPRB, Mr. Clark served as Assistant Deputy Commissioner with the Competition Bureau and
before that as Director of the Patent Policy Director at Innovation, Science and Economic Development.
Mr. Clark has agreed to remain with the PMPRB as a special advisor to the Board for a specified period as
he transitions to retirement from the federal public service. A staffing process to appoint Mr. Clark's
successor will be launched shortly.
The PMPRB wishes to thank Mr. Clark for his years of dedicated service and leadership.
Quotes
"In his nine years at the Board, Doug has been an outstanding leader, creating and sustaining a high-
performance leadership team and developing an internal culture which is widely admired across the
government. At the behest of the Board, he succeeded in testing the limits of the PMPRB's mandate, in
the boldest tradition of the federal public service, opening the path for future Boards to implement
predictable processes with confidence and clarity. The results he delivered on preventing excessive
pricing of pharmaceuticals in Canada are having a deep and lasting impact on the sustainability of the
entire Canadian healthcare system. On behalf of the Board, we offer our thanks for his years of
dedication and commitment, and heartfelt wish that he, and his family, find success wherever their
future path may take them." -Thomas J. Digby, Chairperson, PMPRB
"It has been the honour of my professional life to serve as Executive Director of the PMPRB. People may
come and go but the commitment of staff at the PMPRB to the very highest ideals of public service is
unwavering and will endure. I would like to thank the current and former Chairpersons of the Board for
their steadfast support and especially my outstanding senior management team, who I consider the very
best of colleagues but also dear friends." -Douglas Clark, Executive Director, PMPRB
Contacts
PMPRB Media Relations
PMPRB.MediaCentre-CentreMedias.CEPMB@pmprb-cepmb.gc.ca
Search for related information by keyword: HE
HealthandSafety|PatentedMedicinePricesReviewBoardCanada|Canada|Druglabelling. Pricing and health
claim compliance| general public| news releases
Date modified:
2023-02-24
Government of Canada announcement – New PMPRB Board Chair
Government of Canada announces appointment to the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
News release
February 1, 2023 | Ottawa, Ontario | Health Canada
Today, the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos, Minister of Health, announced the appointment of the new
Chairperson to the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB).
Following a merit-based selection process, Thomas J. Digby is appointed for a term of five years. Mr.
Digby is a lawyer with expertise in intellectual property and has an extensive educational background in
the Biological Sciences. He has over 25 years of experience working with the pharmaceutical sector and
is highly knowledgeable regarding patented medicines.
The PMPRB is an independent quasi-judicial body established by Parliament in1987 under the Patent
Act. As an arm's-length organization of the government, the PMPRB reviews the prices patentees charge
for patented drug products in the Canadian market. As part of their mandate, the PMPRB can work with
patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions, or the Board can hold public hearings to determine
whether a price is excessive, and if so, order price reductions or the offset of excess revenues.
The Government of Canada is committed to appointing highly qualified candidates to best serve the
interests of Canadians and is committed to open, transparent and merit-based processes for selecting
Governor in Council appointees. Appointees play a fundamental role in Canadian democracy as they
serve on commissions, boards, Crown corporations, agencies and tribunals across the country.
Vice-Chairperson, Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Apply now
Portfolio: Health
Organization:
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board Position title:
Vice-Chairperson Type:
Part-time Per diem:
$550.00-$675.00Location:
Across Canada Application Review Date:
April 10, 2023 Opportunity number: J0323- 0222
Established in 1987 by the Patent Act, the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board's is an independent
quasi-judicial body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the prices of
patented medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board reports annually to Parliament via the Minister of Health.
The members of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board, including the Vice-Chairperson, are
responsible collectively for the implementation of the applicable provisions of the Patent Act. Together,
they establish the guidelines, rules, by-laws and other policies of the Board as provided by the Act and
consult as necessary with stakeholders including ministers of health and representatives of consumer
groups, the pharmaceutical industry and others.
Under section 93 (3) of the Patent Act, if the Chairperson is absent or incapacitated or if the office of
Chairperson is vacant, the Vice-Chairperson has all the powers and functions of the Chairperson during
the absence, incapacity or vacancy.
The Vice-Chairperson may be required to assist the Chairperson in fulfilling the responsibilities of the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board's Chief Executive Officer and to act as Chairperson when
required. This could include acting as a spokesperson or representing the Board with a wide range of
stakeholders and in public forums.
Members are appointed by the Chairperson to hearing panels for purposes of hearings to hear evidence,
prepare findings and recommendations and participate in forming the decisions of the Board with
respect to excessive prices for patented medicines.
Diversity and Official Languages
We are committed to providing a healthy and accessible workplace that supports one's dignity, self-
esteem and the ability to work on one's full potential. With this in mind, all appointees will be expected
to take steps to promote and maintain a healthy, respectful, inclusive and harassment-free work
environment.
Preference may be given to applicants who are members of one or more of the following groups:
women, Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, and members of a visible minority group.
The Government of Canada will consider bilingual proficiency and diversity in assessing applicants. You
are therefore encouraged to include in your online profile your ability to speak and understand your
second official language.
To be considered, please ensure that the information provided in your curriculum vitae and cover letter
clearly demonstrate how you meet the following requirements:
Education and Experience
•A degree from a recognized university in a relevant field of study or a combination of equivalent
education, job-related training and/or experience in one or more relevant disciplines such as medicine,
business or public administration, pharmacy or pharmacology, nursing, health policy, insurance
medicine, medico-legal, pharmacoeconomics, social sciences, law or economics;
Experience in dealing with the federal government as well as a variety of stakeholders and the public;
Experience in the interpretation and application of legislation, regulatory frameworks, government
policies and directives; and
Experience in the operation and conduct of a board or administrative decision-maker, quasi-judicial
tribunal, agency or equivalent.
If you move on to the next stage of the selection process, the following criteria will be assessed:
Knowledge, Skills and Abilities
Knowledge of the mandate and role of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board and the Patent Act as
it applies to the pricing of patented medicines;
Knowledge of the theories, practices and procedures related to administrative justice, especially related
to quasi-judicial bodies;
Knowledge of the operations of the federal government, including those related to sound management
principles, accountability and transparency;
Knowledge of current and emerging trends related to therapeutic medicines, including knowledge of the
price trends of patented medicines;
Ability to develop effective working relationships with departmental officials and stakeholders while
maintaining the degree of independence required of a quasi-judicial entity;
Ability to provide intellectual and strategic leadership to the Board in order to define the vision,
objectives and strategies of the organization;
Ability to analyze all aspects of a case, interpret and apply the relevant criteria with a view to making
lawful, fair and equitable decisions; and
Superior communication skills, both written and oral, with the ability to deal with various stakeholders.
Language Requirements
Proficiency in both official languages would be preferred.
If you move on to the next stage of the selection process, we will contact your references to confirm that
you meet the above selection criteria and that you possess the following Personal Attributes:
•Fairness and impartiality
•Sound judgment and integrity
•High ethical standards
•Superior interpersonal skills
•Tact and discretion
Eligibility Factors and Conditions of Employment
•Appointees must comply with the Ethical and Political Activity Guidelines for Public Office Holders
throughout their appointment as a term and condition of employment. The guidelines are available on
the Governor in Council Appointments website under the Forms and reference material.
•All appointees are subject to the Conflict of Interest Act. Public officeholders appointed on a full-time
basis must also submit to the Office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics
within 60 days of appointment, a confidential report in which they disclose all of their assets, liabilities
and outside activities. For more information, please visit the Office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics
Commissioner's website.
•Appointees must uphold the highest standards of probity and are expected to demonstrate behaviours
in the workplace that afford respect, equality and dignity, to everyone they interact with at work at all
times. The Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector outlines the values and expected behaviours for
public servants, including valuing diversity and creating workplaces free from harassment and
discrimination. Governor in Council appointees are expected to uphold and respect these values and
principles in a positive and active manner.
•Appointees must be willing to attend approximately four (4) in-person Board meetings per year and
meet monthly with the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board's Executive Committee.
•Appointees must be willing to travel to Ottawa on a regular basis and occasionally to other locations
within Canada.
•The time commitment maybe influenced by the volume of business that the Board needs to consider,
including hearings.
A link to this notice will be placed in the Canada Gazette to assist the Governor in Council in identifying
qualified candidates. It is not, however, intended to be the sole means of recruitment.
A list of qualified candidates may be established and may be used for similar opportunities.
How to Apply
Review of applications will begin on April 10, 2023. Candidates should apply online via the Governor in
Council Appointments website. Candidates are strongly encouraged to submit their applications by this
date. After this date, your application will be retained and maybe considered up until an appointment to
the position is made. Your cover letter should be addressed to the Director of Selection Processes, Senior
Personnel Secretariat, Privy Council Office, and should be sent only through the online application.
Instructions on how to apply for an appointment opportunity can be found on the Governor in Council
Appointments website.
Date modified:
2019-06-26
Member, Patented Medicine Prices Review Board
Apply now
Portfolio:Health
Organization:
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board Position title:
Member
Type:
Part-time
Per diem:
$475.00-$550.00 Location:
Across Canada Application Review Date:
April 10, 2023 Opportunity number: J0223- 1313
Established in 1987 by the Patent Act, the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board's (PMPRB) is an
independent quasi-judicial body that protects the interests of Canadian consumers by ensuring that the
prices of patented medicines sold in Canada are not excessive.
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board reports annually to Parliament via the Minister of Health.
The member of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board are responsible collectively for the
implementation of the applicable provisions of the Patent Act. Together, they establish the guidelines,
rules, by-laws and other policies of the Board as provided by the Act and consult a necessary with
stakeholders, including ministers of health and representatives of consumer groups, the pharmaceutical
industry and others.
Members are appointed by the Chairperson to hearing panels for purposes of hearings, to hear
evidence, prepare findings and recommendations and participate in forming the decisions of the Board
with respect to excessive prices for patented medicines.
Diversity and Official Languages
We are committed to providing a healthy and accessible workplace that supports one's dignity, self-
esteem and the ability to achieve one's full potential. With this in mind, all appointees will be expected
to take steps to promote and maintain a healthy, respectful, inclusive and harassment-free work
environment.
Preference may be given to applicants who are members of one or more of the following groups:
women, Indigenous peoples, persons with disabilities, and members of a visible minority group.
The Government of Canada will consider bilingual proficiency and diversity in assessing applicants. You
are therefore encouraged to include in your online profile your ability to speak and understand your
second official language.
To be considered, please ensure that the information provided in your curriculum vitae and cover letter
clearly demonstrate how you meet the following requirements:
Education and Experience
A degree from a recognized university in a relevant field of study or a combination of equivalent
education, job-related training and/or experience in one or more relevant disciplines such as medicine,
business or public administration, pharmacy or pharmacology, health policy, insurance medicine,
medico-legal, pharmacoeconomic, social sciences, law or economics;
Experience in the interpretation and application of legislation, regulatory frameworks, government
policies and directives; and
Experience in the operation and conduct of a board or administrative decision-maker, quasi-judicial
tribunal, agency or equivalent.
If you move on to the next stage of the selection process, the following criteria will be assessed:
Knowledge, Skills and Abilities
•Knowledge of the mandate and role of the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board and the Patent Act
as it applies to the pricing of patented medicines;
•Knowledge of the theories, practices and procedures related to administrative justice, especially related
to quasi-judicial bodies;
•Knowledge of the operations of the federal government, including those related to sound management
principles, accountability and transparency;
•Knowledge of current and emerging trends related to therapeutic medicines, including knowledge of
the price trends of patented medicines;
•Ability to develop effective working relationships with departmental officials and stakeholders while
maintaining the degree of independence required of a quasi-judicial entity;
•Ability to provide intellectual and strategic leadership to the Board in order to define the vision,
objectives and strategies of the organization;
•Ability to analyze all aspects of a case, interpret and apply the relevant criteria with a view to making
lawful ,fair and equitable decisions; and
•Superior communication skills, both written and oral, with the ability to deal with various stakeholders.
Language Requirements
Proficiency in both official languages would be preferred.
If you move on to the next stage of the selection process, we will contact your references to confirm that
you meet the above selection criteria and that you possess the following Personal Attributes:
•Fairness and impartiality
•Sound judgment and integrity
•High ethical standards
•Superior interpersonal skills
•Tact and discretion
Eligibility Factors and Conditions of Employment
•Appointees must comply with the Ethical and Political Activity Guidelines for Public Office Holders
through out their appointment as a term and condition of employment. The guidelines are available on
the Governor in Council Appointments website, under Forms and reference material.
•All appointees will be subject to the Conflict of Interest Act. Public office holders appointed on a full-
time basis must also submit to the Office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics Commissioner, within 60
days of appointment, a confidential report in which they disclose all of their assets, liabilities and outside
activities. For more information, please visit the Office of the Conflict of Interest and Ethics
Commissioner's website.
•Appointees must uphold the highest standards of probity and are expected to demonstrate behaviors in
the workplace that afford respect, equality and dignity, to everyone they interact with at work at all
times. The Values and Ethics Code for the Public Sector outlines the values and expected behaviors for
public servants, including valuing diversity and creating workplaces free from harassment and
discrimination. Governor in Council appointees are expected to uphold and respect these values and
principles in a positive and active manner.
•Appointees must be willing to attend approximately four (4) Board meetings per year and meet
monthly with the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board's Executive Committee.
•Appointees must be willing to travel to Ottawa on a regular basis and occasionally to other locations
with in Canada.
•The time commitment may be influenced by the volume of business that the Board needs to consider,
including hearings.
A link to this notice will be placed in the Canada Gazette to assist the Governor in Council in identifying
qualified candidates. It is not, however, intended to be the sole means of recruitment.
A list of qualified candidates may be established and may be used for similar opportunities.
How to Apply
Review of applications (more information here) will begin on April 10, 2023. Candidates should apply
online via the Governor in Council Appointments website. Candidates are strongly encouraged to submit
their applications by this date. After this date, your application will be retained and may be considered
up until an appointment to the position is made. Your cover letter should be addressed to the Director of
Selection Processes, Senior Personnel Secretariat, Privy Council Office, and should be sent only through
the online application.
Instructions on how to apply for an appointment opportunity can be found on the Governor in Council
Appointments website.
Date modified:
2019-06-26
STATUS OF DOMESTIC BIOMANUFACTURING CAPACITY
ISSUE
• Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy, which aims to grow a
strong, competitive, and resilient domestic life sciences ecosystem, with cutting-edge biomanufacturing
capabilities, and to ensure Canada is prepared for future pandemics and health priorities.
• The Strategy’s funding opportunities are underway through the Strategic Innovation Fund, the
integrated Canada Biomedical Research Fund/Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund, and the Clinical
Trials Fund, which intend to stimulate growth and innovation and strengthen talent in Canada’s life
sciences and biomanufacturing ecosystem.
KEY FACTS
• Canada announced the creation of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy on July 28,
2021 to re-build a strong and resilient domestic biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
- Investments in biomanufacturing capacity can reduce our reliance on imported products and
strengthen our domestic industrial capacity.
- The Government will work with provinces, territories, and other partners to deliver real results
for Canadians.
- The strategy is supported by existing resources and Budget 2021 investments, including support
of $2.2 billion for the revitalization of Canada’s biomanufacturing and life science sector.
- Health Portfolio explicit work includes:
$250 million, over three years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to establish a new Clinical
Trials Fund.
Advancing regulatory modernization efforts, including: modernized clinical trial regulations, a new
pathway for advanced therapeutic products; agile regulations for the licensing of drugs and medical
devices
• The objective of the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy is to grow the domestic life
sciences ecosystem, and prepare Canada for future pandemics and health priorities. In order to improve
Canada’s pandemic vaccine preparedness, the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy proposes
increasing domestic biomanufacturing capacity across multiple platforms, including those that represent
the latest in vaccine technology, such as mRNA.
KEY MESSAGES
• The government continues to work to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19.
• Canada is investing to establish world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity –
from research and development to fill and finish.
• Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy is focusing on growing our domestic life
science ecosystem to prepare Canada for future pandemics and other health priorities.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
IF PRESSED ON THE DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES…
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and they
represent an alternative to traditional vaccines, with potential for rapid development and scaling of
production.
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development and preparedness for future pandemics, outside of the COVID-19
context.
• This includes partnerships with leading mRNA vaccine developers like Moderna who is building a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec.
IF PRESSED ON THE MODERNA FACILITY…
• Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to
the COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events.
• In 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna is building a state-
of-the-art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. When completed, it will produce up to 100
million pandemic vaccine doses annually.
• Moderna’s new facility will not only strengthen Canada’s preparedness for future pandemics but
will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence.
IF PRESSED ON MITSUBISHI TANABE PHARMA CORPORATION’S DECISION TO CEASE OPERATIONS AT
MEDICAGO INC.,
• Our Government was disappointed to learn of Mitsubishi’s decision to begin the process to
winddown its support for Medicago’s operations.
• Medicago remains the only Canadian-based company to have received market authorization for
its COVID-19 vaccine.
• Medicago’s innovative, Canadian developed, plant-based vaccine platform technology remains
highly regarded by experts.
• Canadians can be assured that we are in contact with both Medicago and Mitsubishi to ensure
an orderly transition process, and make sure Canadian interests are protected.
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is our government’s top priority, including
ensuring we have sufficient domestic vaccine production capacity to protect against future infectious
disease threats and pandemics.
• Thanks to our efforts, Canada has attracted major investments from leading global companies,
such as Sanofi and Moderna, as well as advancing breakthrough Canadian science and innovation by
supporting domestic champions such as Vancouver’s Abcellera.
IF PRESSED ON VACCINE INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working to re-establish domestic capacity across key vaccine platforms, to be better
prepared for future health emergencies.
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre in Montreal,
which has partnered with Novavax to produce its COVID-19 vaccine, and investments in companies like
Biovectra and Sanofi Pasteur.
• It also includes partnering with Moderna, who is building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine
manufacturing facility in Quebec, and significant investment to Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON PANDEMIC VACCINE PREPAREDNESS …
• The COVID-19 pandemic has reinforced the importance of strengthening domestic capacity to
rapidly develop vaccines to protect all people in Canada against pandemics and other health
emergencies.
• Through strategic investments and partnerships, the Government of Canada is working to grow
Canada’s domestic life sciences sector and biomanufacturing capacity. These include those with
Moderna who is in the process of building a state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine production facility in Quebec,
and Sanofi Pasteur who is establishing an influenza vaccine manufacturing facility in Ontario.
IF PRESSED ON THE VACCINE TASK FORCE AND COUNCIL OF EXPERT ADVISORS…
• We thank the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force for their critical role in advising on the Government
of Canada’s COVID-19 vaccine response efforts.
• As the scope of the Task Force’s work has expanded, the Council of Expert Advisors was
established to transition from the Vaccine Task Force and assume a long-term advisory function.
• The expertise on the Council of Expert Advisors is broad – advising on scientific, health, public
health, and industrial matters –supporting the Government’s goal of a revitalized Canadian life-science
sector and improved pandemic preparedness.
BACKGROUND
Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took early and decisive action to
strengthen Canada’s biomanufacturing capacity to protect Canadians, and to provide investment to
support domestic biomanufacturing capabilities. A key element is the implementation of the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy) announced in June 2021.
Ministers of Health and Innovation, Science, and Industry have joint accountability for the Strategy which
outlines actions to take a coordinated approach to grow Canada’s domestic capacity to rapidly develop
and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for future
pandemics or other health emergencies and sector growth. This included Budget 2021 investments of
$2.2B.
The five pillars of the Strategy are:
• Coordinating Governance;
• Strengthening Research Systems and the Talent Pipeline;
• Growing Canada’s Life Sciences and Biomanufacturing Sector;
• Operationalizing National Research Council’s Biologics Manufacturing Centre (BMC) and
Considering a National Centre; and,
• Ensuring Best-in-Class Regulation & World-Class Clinical Trials Systems.
Increasing domestic capacity and building a robust life sciences sector will require dedicated efforts to
connect and mobilize federal investments and assets in collaboration with academia and industry to the
broader life sciences ecosystem.
The emergency regulatory measures put in place during COVID-19 aim to make the system more agile,
and enable prompt access within Canada to health products needed to diagnose, treat and slow the
spread of the virus without compromising safety, efficacy and quality. Going forward, it will be important
to maintain this level of agility (especially during non-pandemic times) to ensure Canadians receive
access to needed health products. Efforts are underway to modernize regulations in areas such as agile
licensing for drugs and medical devices, clinical trials, and advanced therapeutics.
The COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force and Council of Expert Advisors (CEA)
One of the main focuses on the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy is establishing dedicated
governance to ensure the Government’s actions across the entire life sciences ecosystem are
coordinated and expertly guided to ensure alignment and the achievement of the Strategy’s objectives.
While the COVID-19 Therapeutics Task Force and the COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force were formed at the
onset of the pandemic and played a foundational role in, providing invaluable insights and scientific
validation in Government of Canada’s pandemic response tactics, the Task Forces were not established
to be permanent. As the scope of pandemic response efforts shift towards more enduring operational
structures, Canada requires a permanent advisory body with broader expertise to provide guidance
during pandemic and interpandemic settings. The Council of Expert Advisors (CEA) was established to
take on this longer-term role.
The CEA brings together leading experts across biomanufacturing and life sciences to advise the
Government on overall strategic priorities, specific project proposals, funding opportunities and other
proposed actions. The CEA will also monitor progress on the Strategy’s initiatives and advise on ways to
adapt approaches and strategies to respond to new technologies and changing conditions in the
marketplace.
Investments under the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy
Budget 2021 committed $1B over seven years through the Strategic Innovation Fund to support life
science firms to innovate and expand in Canada. Thus far, one (1) project, Biovectra in Charlottetown,
Prince Edward Island, has been funded while the remaining projects are moving through the evaluation
process.
Supported through Budget 2021 commitments, the Government of Canada has launched two (2) funds
to help strengthen Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, including the Canada Biomedical
Research Fund ($250M over four years) which supports transitional and applied research, training and
talent development, to drive downstream manufacturing capacity, and the Bioscience Research
Infrastructure Fund ($500M over seven years), which will support the bioscience capital and
infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research hospitals.
• These funds are administered through Canada’s three federal research agencies, the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada, and the
Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada along with the Canadian Foundation for
Innovation (CFI).
The first of these investments has been made by CFI in November 2022, with $127 million distributed
through the Bioscience Research Infrastructure Fund. This investment responds to urgent and essential
needs of postsecondary institutions and research hospitals by supporting biocontainment facilities
capable of working with pathogens.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research has launched three funding opportunities under the Clinical
Trials Fund (pan-Canadian clinical trials consortium, clinical trials training platforms, clinical trials
projects) in May 2022 and are under peer review, with funding set to begin this Fall.
Canadian Biomanufacturing Capacity Since 2020
In addition to Budget 2021 funding, the government has announced a number of investments to bolster
domestic production capacity through the Strategic Innovation Fund, Next Generation Manufacturing
Canada Supercluster, the National Research Council, Regional Development Agencies, and other
government partners, including in:
• National Research Council (NRC) (Montréal, QC) - $126 million to establish the new Biologics
Manufacturing Centre;
• Medicago (Quebec City, QC) - $173 million to develop a plant-based virus-like-particle vaccine
and for the construction of a Good Manufacturing Practice facility.
• AbCellera (Vancouver, BC) - $175.6 million in government support of antibody discovery for
clinical testing and for the construction of a GMP antibody production facility;
• Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO) (Saskatoon, SK) – $59.2M, over three years,
starting in 2021-22, to support the development of its vaccine candidates and expand its Saskatoon
facility;
• Precision Nanosystems (Vancouver, BC) - $25.1 million in government support to build a
biomanufacturing centre for production of RNA vaccines;
• KABS Laboratories (St-Hubert and Val des Sources, QC) - $54.25 million toward a biologics
production facility with a focus on antibody therapies and new fill-finish capabilities;
• Novocol (Cambridge, ON) - $32.7 million contribution for expanded fill-finish capacity;
• Providence Therapeutics and Northern RNA Inc. - $5 million through the Next Generation
Manufacturing Supercluster to expand their operations in Calgary to design and manufacture COVID-19
vaccines and build a pipeline of mRNA vaccines;
• Sanofi Pasteur (Toronto campus) – up to $415 million support towards building an end-to-end
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility; and,
• Resilience Biotechnologies (Mississauga, ON) - $199 million to increase manufacturing and
fill/finish capacity for a number of vaccines and therapeutics including mRNA technologies.
Moderna’s Canadian Facility
In 2022, the Government of Canada and Moderna announced that Moderna would build a state-of-the-
art mRNA vaccine manufacturing facility in Quebec. Construction of the facility is underway, and when
completed, will be able to produce up to 30 million mRNA vaccine doses per year in non-pandemic times
and up to 100 million doses per year during a pandemic.
Moderna is a leading mRNA vaccine developer that has demonstrated, through its response to the
COVID-19 pandemic, its benefit as a flexible solution to unanticipated health events—not only by rapidly
developing a successful COVID-19 vaccine, but also by producing and distributing it at commercial scale.
Having an mRNA developer producing vaccines at scale in Canada represents one important piece in
Canada’s plan to rebuild the life sciences sector, and will better protect Canadians for whatever the
future holds.
Moderna’s new facility in Canada will not only help strengthen our biomanufacturing sector and
pandemic preparedness, but will also help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a global
mRNA research and development (R&D) hub. As part of the agreement with the Government of Canada,
Moderna is committed to building a robust R&D Workplan, which will include Pandemic Preparedness
R&D projects along with development of partnerships with Canada’s leading research universities and
institutions to help advance research and development here at home. For example, Moderna has already
partnered with McGill University through Moderna’s mRNA Access program to accelerate vaccine
innovation, as well as with the University of Toronto to do research across a range of scientific disciplines
to develop new ways to treat infectious diseases.
The facility will boost the Canadian economy through the creation of hundreds of jobs during
construction and operation of the facility, including direct and indirect biomanufacturing and research
jobs. Moderna’s facility will also mean domestic opportunities for the brightest young minds in the field
through internships, co-op positions, and other Moderna-supported training and development
opportunities. In this way, the facility will enhance Canada’s talent pipeline by attracting, developing and
retaining a highly skilled workforce. The facility will also offer the potential for Canadian companies to
work with Moderna, and, where possible, opportunities to comprise part of Moderna’s supply chain.
In November 2022, Prime Minister Justin Trudeau Participated in the facility’s ground-breaking
ceremony. The facility is expected to be operational in 2024 at the earliest, subject to planning and
regulatory approvals. In addition to COVID-19 vaccines, the facility is expected to be able to produce
vaccines for other respiratory diseases, such as influenza – pending their ongoing development by
Moderna and approval by Health Canada.
Medicago
Medicago is the only Canadian-based company to have received market authorization for Covifenz
COVID-19 vaccine. Covifenz is the product of years of scientific efforts that began with public science
collaboration between Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada and the Université Laval in the late 1990s.
Since then, Medicago has established itself as an innovative global leader in plant-based vaccines, using
living plants as bioreactors for the production of virus-like particles (VLP).
In 2020, Canada entered in to an advance purchase agreement (APA) with Medicago to secure access to
up to 76 million doses of its COVID-19 vaccine (20M firm doses and 56M optional doses) for a total firm
commitment of $500 million (at $25 per dose). Canada has already paid a non-refundable advance
payment of $150 million to Medicago. No other funds through the APA have been paid and due to
unanticipated manufacturing issues, Medicago has not marketed any lots of its COVID-19 vaccine for
commercial use.
In October 2020, based on the expert advice of Canada’s COVID-19 Vaccine Task Force and robust due
diligence by ISED Strategic Innovation Fund officials, Canada and Medicago into a $173 million
contribution agreement to help advance Medicago’s domestic vaccine and biomanufacturing
capabilities. In March 2022, an additional contribution of $27 million was provided to the company to
support its capabilities for a total contribution of $200 million.
In October 2022, Medicago’s parent company, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation, notified the
governments of Canada and Québec of their intentions to break ties with the company noting
profitability and production challenges. In late October 2022, Medicago announced the termination of
62 jobs at its Durham, North Carolina, manufacturing facility, which come into effect December 26, 2022.
On February 3, 2023, Mitsubishi Tanabe Pharma Corporation announced that it has decided to cease all
operations with Medicago Inc. That same day Health Canada’s Health Products and Food Branch were
informed the Mitsubishi Tanabe will be cancelling their vaccine authorization and withdrawing the
submission currently under review (which would had been filed to extend the use of the vaccine to the
elderly population). Health Canada will work with Medicago to close out their files.
Medicago, whose headquarters is in Quebec City and operates an additional facility in North Carolina,
employs roughly 550 people (about 400 in Canada). The company has been 100% owned by Mitsubishi
Tanabe Pharma since December 2022. Before the decision, global tobacco giant Philip Morris
International owned 21 per cent of the company's shares. Medicago’s plant-based COVID-19 vaccine,
Covifenz, was initially rejected by the World Health Organization over its ties with Big Tobacco.
Inspection and Licensing – Oversight of Drug Manufacturing in Canada
Health Canada’s role in regulating drugs is to evaluate and approve products, set requirements, monitor
safety and enforce compliance and communicate health risks. Further, Health Canada approves
establishments involved in the manufacturing of drugs marketed for use in Canada.
To ensure drugs are safe, effective and of high quality, all drug producing facilities in Canada, including
those supporting domestic biomanufacturing efforts, must hold a Drug Establishment License and be
inspected by Health Canada to demonstrate it meets Good Manufacturing Practices, known as “GMPs”.
Health Canada continues to remain supportive in strengthening Canada’s drug manufacturing capacity
and prioritizing new and continued COVID-19 drug manufacturing, enabling industry with responsive and
flexible regulations to mobilize and support current needs of the domestic market.
Health Canada is committed in providing regulatory advice and guidance in the planning and
development of operations to support domestic biomanufacturing in Canada now and into the future.
As part of Health Canada’s role in ensuring a safe and effective drug supply, inspection and other
regulatory experts will continue to promote and enforce Canada’s high standards for drug
manufacturing.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
o The government is committed to creating a new Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency). The
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) is engaging provinces, territories, patients, and
stakeholders to develop options for the mandate and functions of the new agency. The CDATO also
supports work on other pharmacare-related initiatives (e.g., national formulary, drugs for rare diseases
strategy, Canada Pharmacare Bill).
KEY FACTS
o Key reports on the future of the Canadian pharmaceuticals system recommended the creation
of a new national drug agency that would build on existing provincial and territorial successes and take a
coordinated approach to improving system management.
o The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office was established in spring 2021 to work with
provinces, territories and key stakeholders on options for a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA), supported by a
Budget 2019 investment of $35 million over four years.
o In December 2021, the Prime Minister reinforced the commitment to creating the CDA in the
Minister of Health’s mandate letter, stating the government would “continue engaging with willing
provinces and territories towards national universal pharmacare, while proceeding with a national
strategy on high-cost drugs for rare diseases and advancing the establishment of the Canada [sic] Drug
Agency.”
o In March 2022, the Prime Minister elaborated on the mandate of the CDA in the Supply and
Confidence Agreement with the New Democratic Party of Canada, announcing the CDA will “develop a
national formulary of essential medicines and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement” in
2025. This commitment was reiterated in Budget 2022.
o Work to develop a proposal for establishing a CDA has been informed by analysis of the current
pharmaceuticals management system and significant engagement, including meetings with provinces
and territories, and hundreds of stakeholders such as healthcare professionals, patient organizations,
and industry.
KEY MESSAGES
o Prescription drug prices in Canada are among the highest in the developed world. High prices
and a patchwork of drug coverage leaves many Canadians facing significant barriers to getting the
prescription drugs they need.
o The Government of Canada is considering options for a Canadian Drug Agency (CDA).
o Since 2021, the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) has received thoughtful advice
from provinces, territories, partners and stakeholders on the potential scope and functions of a future
CDA.
o The CDATO has also received insights from patients, pharmaceutical companies, insurers,
prescribers and academics and many others through over 300 meetings and roundtables.
o Over the course of these consultations, CDATO has learned of pharmaceutical system gaps –
including inadequate infrastructure, poor return on investment, and fragmentation.
Ongoing Work
o CDATO is scoping opportunities for a CDA to provide the structure and pan-Canadian system
coordination required to address those gaps, and support efforts to make Canada’s drug system more
sustainable and prepared for the future.
o Engagement with provinces, territories, partners and stakeholders will continue to be an
important part of the CDA’s path forward.
o Based on insights from engagement, the CDATO is scoping activities to pave the way for greater
collaboration as the Agency is built:
Data and analytics – working with partners to determine how the CDA can support drug plans, as
well as helping to standardize and improve access to drug and treatment data and analysis.
Appropriate use – collaborating with leaders in the appropriate use field to improve health
outcomes and ensure patients are prescribed the safest and most effective treatments for their
conditions.
Coordination – partnering to build a CDA that is well-positioned to adapt and evolve to address
the ever-changing pharmaceuticals landscape.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
o Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvals process within Health Canada.
o The CDA will focus on the system as a whole to address gaps, remove duplication, improve
system coordination and enhance access and equity.
o The CDA will also provide the dedicated leadership and capacity that is needed to implement
national priorities to improve the pharmaceuticals system.
o The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS TO DATE
o The Government of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories and key
stakeholders as we consider options for establishing the Canadian Drug Agency.
o We have held over 300 meetings and roundtables to obtain advice from PTs and stakeholders on
the potential scope and functions of a CDA, including input from patient organizations, pharmaceutical
companies, insurers, healthcare professionals, academics, and others.
o This has informed the development of options for establishing the Agency, including its mandate
and functions.
o We will continue to communicate as work progresses towards launching the Agency.
IF PRESSED ON RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
o Provincial and territorial healthcare systems, including public drug plans, are facing mounting
pressure, exacerbated by the pandemic.
o Our approach will focus on filling gaps, improving access, and system sustainability.
o The CDA will respect provincial and territorial jurisdiction and will not duplicate well-performing
functions and organizations.
o Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration is the cornerstone of our approach for establishing
the CDA, and we will continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward its launch.
BACKGROUND
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• Budget 2018 announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National
Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins.
• The Council engaged with Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial, and Indigenous leaders,
health care experts, and stakeholders through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire,
and written submissions.
• On June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the
implementation of national universal pharmacare over several years, including FPT collaboration to
create a new arms-length Canadian Drug Agency with the following functions:
o Assessing the clinical effectiveness of drugs compared to other treatment options
o Assessing the cost effectiveness of drugs compared to other treatment options
o Deciding which drugs and related products (such as devices and supplies) should be on the
national formulary
o Negotiating prices and supply arrangements with manufacturers
o Providing advice to prescribers, pharmacists, and patients on how best to use drugs
o Monitoring the safety and effectiveness of drugs in real-world use
Budget Commitments
• Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements
of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support this initiative. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years,
starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases
access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, Budget 2021 and
Budget 2022.
External Perspectives
Media and Public Opinion
• Canadians are generally supportive of improving affordable access to prescription drugs but are
also sensitive to cost considerations as government health-related expenses continue to grow,
particularly in the context of COVID-19.
• Mainstream media coverage of the pharmaceuticals system focuses primarily on approval of
new treatments, science-based innovation, clinical trail breakthroughs, and accessibility / affordability of
treatments from a human interest perspective.
• Media reports are generally factual, and link the mandate letter and related federal Budget
announcements. Select media emphasize Quebec’s unique approach to health.
• A May 2022 Fraser Institute poll following the federal budget, found that 79% of Canadians
support universal national pharmacare with no costs attached. Support fell by almost half, to 40%, if the
program was to be financed by an increase in the GST.
• An October 2020 Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians had to pay for
half or more of their prescription drug costs in the past year. Nearly nine-in-ten Canadians supported the
idea (86%) of an affordable drugs program and more than seven-in-ten (77%) said increasing coverage
should be a high priority for government.
Stakeholders
• The stakeholder ecosystem for the pharmaceuticals management system is very large and
diverse, including patients, patient organizations, Indigenous representatives, healthcare professionals,
prescribers, dispensers, scientists and researchers, employers and employees, and innovative and
generic manufacturers.
• Some stakeholders, including brand name manufacturers and unions, have developed written
input to share their perspectives on the mandate and role of a CDA.
• Industry emphasizes priorities such as accelerating approvals processes, support for innovation,
a data-driven approach to technology assessment, value analysis, and assessing treatment outcomes.
Provinces and territories
• Engagement with provinces and territories on the CDA is expected to advance in relation to the
positive shift in the intergovernmental health context, following the PTs agreed to the federal
government’s proposal of an additional $46.2 billion in new health-care funding over 10 years.
• Premiers have noted pharmaceuticals among the priority areas, including in July 2022.
• Information Redacted
Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
• In recent years, decisions related to system management have been driven by rapidly evolving
system demands, new technologies, and evolving international market factors that have been
challenging to reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and the provisions of the Canada
Health Act.
• This has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
o Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug. The CDA would
collaborate with provinces, territories, partners and stakeholders to ensure the Agency is well-positioned
to adapt and evolve to address the ever-changing pharmaceuticals landscape.
o Data, real-world evidence, and analytical capacity. The CDA would work with partners to
determine how the Agency can support public drug plans and help to standardize and improve access to
drug and treatment data and analysis.
o Health outcomes and appropriate use. The CDA would collaborate with leaders in the
appropriate use field to improve health outcomes and ensure patients are prescribed the safest and
most effective treatments for their conditions.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can be high cost, which poses significant
challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health care system, including the sustainability of public and
private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. As
reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the Throne as well as Budget 2021, this
included working with Provinces, Territories and stakeholders to establish a national strategy for drugs
for rare diseases to launch in 2022-2023.
• On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced the launch of the first-ever National
Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, supported by investments of up to $1.5 billion over three years.
This first phase aims to increase access to and affordability of effective drugs for rare diseases, which will
contribute to improving the health of patients across Canada.
• As part of the overall $1.5 billion investment, the Federal Government will make available up to
$1.4 billion over three years to Provinces and Territories to improve access to new and emerging drugs,
as well as to support enhanced access to existing drugs, early diagnosis, and screening for rare diseases..
• Similarly, to ensure that eligible First Nations and Inuit clients with rare diseases will also benefit,
the Government is providing up to $33 million over the first three years to Indigenous Services Canada’s
Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• The Federal Government is also making key investments of a total of up to $68 million for
various initiatives to help improve consistent access to drugs for rare diseases across the country.
KEY MESSAGES
• On March 22, 2023, the Government of Canada announced measures in support of the first-ever
National Strategy for Drugs for Rare Diseases, with an investment of up to $1.5 billion over three years.
Through this, the Government will help increase access to, and affordability of, effective drugs for rare
diseases to improve the health of patients across Canada, including children.
• As part of this overall investment, the Government of Canada will make available up to $1.4
billion to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements. This funding will help provinces and
territories improve access to new and emerging drugs, as well as support enhanced access to existing
drugs, early diagnosis and screening for rare diseases.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
• Similarly, to further support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases, $33
million from this funding will go to Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• To further help improve consistent access to drugs for rare diseases across the country, the
Government of Canada will also invest $68 million for various initiatives, including to improve the
collection and use of evidence, and for critical research and innovation in rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THE IMPLEMENTATION, SUCH AS THE COMMON SET OF DRD, STAKEHOLDER
CONSULTATION THROUGH THE IMPLEMENTATION ADVISORY GROUP, AND PROGRESS ON BILATERAL
AGREEMENTS…
• The federal government is working with provinces and territories to achieve outcomes together
that build national consistency for patients, while also providing flexibility to address their own
circumstances.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
IF PRESSED ABOUT HOW THE MONEY WILL BE PROVIDED TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES…
• As part of this overall investment, the Government of Canada will make available up to $1.4
billion to provinces and territories once bilateral agreements are finalized and signed. This funding will
help provinces and territories to improve access to new and emerging drugs, as well as to support
enhanced access to existing drugs, and improve early diagnosis and screening for rare diseases.
• Similarly, to further support eligible First Nations and Inuit patients living with rare diseases, $33
million from this funding will go to Indigenous Services Canada’s Non-Insured Health Benefits Program.
• Funding will flow once bilateral agreements are finalized and signed.
• As a critical next step to advance the development of these bilateral agreements, the
Government of Canada will engage with provinces and territories to jointly determine a small set of new
and emerging drugs that would be cost-shared and covered in a consistent way across the country, for
the benefit of patients.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseases are not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
public health care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options, resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can be high cost. The pharmaceutical treatments for
rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases, or drugs for
rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with Provinces and Territories as an active member of the pan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment of
rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on drugs for rare diseases, including on new
drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national strategy
To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partners for federal funding for drugs for rare diseases.
Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy – and the balance of access vs. affordability
vs. appropriate use – will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also help manage
expectations around the limits of federal funding.
In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials to
establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national strategy.
A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and continued through early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helping to
inform the design of the national strategy.
Over the summer, as a follow up to the What We Heard Report, Health Canada continued discussions
with patients and caregivers, and other stakeholders and partners to build a strategy that will work for all
Canadians. Based on input received to date, a draft framework for the national strategy was developed
in spring of 2022. Further targeted consultations to seek feedback on this draft framework and further
inform a comprehensive model for the national strategy took place throughout April and May 2022.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries. As of 2017, this
international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for rare diseases.
Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting in 2021-2022, for the CIHR
to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposed to provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-2022, in
support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over five years,
starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-start the new
Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation programming.
Budget 2021 proposed to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for drugs for rare diseases.
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• The Government has committed to implement national universal pharmacare, including a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary, a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and a Canada
Pharmacare bill.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to provide Prince Edward
Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s efforts to
provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
• Budget 2022 announced that the federal government will continue its ongoing work towards a
universal national pharmacare program. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023, and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national
formulary of essential medicines and bulk • purchasing plan.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We are making progress with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve access to
medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
• Through this partnership, the Government of PEI is aiming to make further improvements to
their drug programs, such as increasing coverage and simplifying access. Under the Improving Affordable
Access to Prescriptions Drugs Program, those who experience the most vulnerability, including uninsured
Island residents, seniors, and families with high burden of medication cost will benefit from improved
access to medications.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to reduce the copay eligible Islanders spend
on many prescription medicines, expand access to the Catastrophic Drug Program and increase access to
the provincial High Cost Drug Program.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
SI L’ON INSISTE SUR LA LOI SUR L’ASSURANCE-MÉDICAMENTS DU CANADA …
• Nous sommes impatients de travailler avec tous les parlementaires pour veiller à ce que les
Canadiens aient un meilleur accès aux médicaments dont ils ont besoin.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following broad consultations, a
multidisciplinary national panel established to develop a draft formulary framework released its final
report in June 2022. The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
• Drug coverage and the health system should respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
• As part of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs initiative supported by the
Government of Canada, PEI is adding new medications to its provincial formulary under their growing
public pharmacy program.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• This builds on previous formulary additions made by PEI to improve access to medications, as
well as changing requirements on dozens of medications to allow greater ease of access for physicians
seeking to provide these medications to Islanders.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to improve access and affordability. This
includes reducing the copays for eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in the Seniors Drug
Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program.
• PEI will also lower the cap on the amount of money a household spends on eligible medications
under the Catastrophic Drug Program. Finally, under the High Cost Drug Program, PEI will remove
barriers for those in the lowest income brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the
exclusion of households earning over $150,000 from coverage.
This partnership between the Governments of Canada and Prince Edward Island will significantly reduce
the out-of-pocket costs of eligible PEI residents to access a wide range of medication.
BACKGROUND
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
Prince Edward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs
to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans
for Island residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its
ongoing work to advance national universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement under this program was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI
has increased formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide residents
with no cost access to these addiction treatments through its Substance Use Harm Reduction Program.
In addition, PEI is strengthening community mental health services with the addition of second
generation long acting antipsychotic medications as requested by local care providers, to the Community
Mental Health program. Other improvements include changes to special authorization requirements for
23 medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking
to provide medications to Islanders. As of December 28, 2022, PEI expanded access to 38 medications,
including two important medications, Zejula® (niraparib tosylate) and Lynparza® (olaparib), for treating
ovarian cancer. As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing
the total to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine,
multiple sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis. On March 3, PEI also announced their
intention to make the following changes over the coming months:
• Reducing copays for commonly prescribed, eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in
the Seniors Drug Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the
Diabetes Drug Program. The list includes medications used in the management of mental health,
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. The medications identified in this list represent about 60% of
prescriptions that Islanders use on a regular basis.
• Adjustment to the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the cap on the amount of money a
household spends on eligible medications, based on a percent of household income.
• Adjustment to the High Cost Drug Program to remove barriers for those in the lowest income
brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the exclusion of households earning over
$150,000 from coverage.
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• The Government has committed to implement national universal pharmacare, including a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary, a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases, and a Canada
Pharmacare bill.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to provide Prince Edward
Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s efforts to
provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
• Budget 2022 announced that the federal government will continue its ongoing work towards a
universal national pharmacare program. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023, and then tasking the Canadian Drug Agency to develop a national
formulary of essential medicines and bulk • purchasing plan.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare. This will include tabling a Canada Pharmacare bill and working
to have it passed by the end of 2023.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We are making progress with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve access to
medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
• Through this partnership, the Government of PEI is aiming to make further improvements to
their drug programs, such as increasing coverage and simplifying access. Under the Improving Affordable
Access to Prescriptions Drugs Program, those who experience the most vulnerability, including uninsured
Island residents, seniors, and families with high burden of medication cost will benefit from improved
access to medications.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to reduce the copay eligible Islanders spend
on many prescription medicines, expand access to the Catastrophic Drug Program and increase access to
the provincial High Cost Drug Program.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE …
• The mandate letter from the Prime Minister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
• The agreement to bring forward a Canada Pharmacare bill builds on this commitment.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA PHARMACARE ACT …
• We look forward to working with all Parliamentarians to ensure that Canadians have better
access to the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF A NATIONAL FORMULARY AND BULK PURCHASING PLAN …
• Work is already underway to develop a national formulary. Following broad consultations, a
multidisciplinary national panel established to develop a draft formulary framework released its final
report in June 2022. The panel’s work was overseen by the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies
in Health (CADTH), at the request of Health Canada.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON PRINCE EDWARD ISLAND PILOT…
• Drug coverage and the health system should respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Progress has already been made to improve the affordability and accessibility of needed
prescription drugs for Prince Edward Island residents.
• As part of the Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs initiative supported by the
Government of Canada, PEI is adding new medications to its provincial formulary under their growing
public pharmacy program.
• As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing the total
to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine, multiple
sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis.
• This builds on previous formulary additions made by PEI to improve access to medications, as
well as changing requirements on dozens of medications to allow greater ease of access for physicians
seeking to provide these medications to Islanders.
• In the coming months, PEI will also make changes to improve access and affordability. This
includes reducing the copays for eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in the Seniors Drug
Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the Diabetes Drug Program.
• PEI will also lower the cap on the amount of money a household spends on eligible medications
under the Catastrophic Drug Program. Finally, under the High Cost Drug Program, PEI will remove
barriers for those in the lowest income brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the
exclusion of households earning over $150,000 from coverage.
This partnership between the Governments of Canada and Prince Edward Island will significantly reduce
the out-of-pocket costs of eligible PEI residents to access a wide range of medication.
BACKGROUND
Supply and Confidence Agreement
The agreement announced on March 22, 2022, committed to continuing progress towards a national
pharmacare program by passing a Canada Pharmacare Act by the end of 2023 and then tasking the
National Drug Agency [Canadian Drug Agency] to develop a national formulary of essential medicines
and bulk purchasing plan by the end of the agreement (June 2025). This commitment was reflected in
Budget 2022.
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
On February 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. On February 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention to introduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
Prince Edward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI will receive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs
to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans
for Island residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its
ongoing work to advance national universal pharmacare.
A first drug coverage improvement under this program was announced May 25, 2022. As of June 1, PEI
has increased formulary coverage of opioid and alcohol dependency medications to provide residents
with no cost access to these addiction treatments through its Substance Use Harm Reduction Program.
In addition, PEI is strengthening community mental health services with the addition of second
generation long acting antipsychotic medications as requested by local care providers, to the Community
Mental Health program. Other improvements include changes to special authorization requirements for
23 medications on the Pharmacare formulary that will allow greater ease of access for physicians seeking
to provide medications to Islanders. As of December 28, 2022, PEI expanded access to 38 medications,
including two important medications, Zejula® (niraparib tosylate) and Lynparza® (olaparib), for treating
ovarian cancer. As of January 23, 2023, PEI expanded access to an additional 23 medications, bringing
the total to 61 new medications to treat a variety of conditions including cancer, heart disease, migraine,
multiple sclerosis, pulmonary arterial hypertension and psoriasis. On March 3, PEI also announced their
intention to make the following changes over the coming months:
• Reducing copays for commonly prescribed, eligible medications to $5 for residents covered in
the Seniors Drug Program, the Family Health Benefit Program, the Generic Drug Program and the
Diabetes Drug Program. The list includes medications used in the management of mental health,
cardiovascular disease, and diabetes. The medications identified in this list represent about 60% of
prescriptions that Islanders use on a regular basis.
• Adjustment to the Catastrophic Drug Program to lower the cap on the amount of money a
household spends on eligible medications, based on a percent of household income.
• Adjustment to the High Cost Drug Program to remove barriers for those in the lowest income
brackets, avoid duplication of income testing and remove the exclusion of households earning over
$150,000 from coverage.
Key Messages – Proposed Amendments to Certain Regulations made under the Food and Drugs Act
(Agile Licensing for Drugs)
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada wants to provide people in Canada with access to the newest drugs and medical
devices as quickly as possible, without compromising on their safety, effectiveness and quality
requirements. We are working to modernize our regulatory system for drugs and medical devices to
make it more efficient and predictable for industry, and to facilitate access to treatments.
• Our regulatory system needs to keep evolving to:
• adapt to the pace of scientific and technological innovation,
• provide timely access to drugs, especially in the case of a public health emergency, and,
• better manage risks and uncertainties, and ensure the safety, effectiveness and quality of drugs
and devices once they are on market.
• The proposed regulations would reduce regulatory roadblocks and irritants to innovation by
introducing regulations that are more agile and internationally aligned.
• Some of the specific amendments proposed to the regulations are:
o introducing regulatory tools, such as terms and conditions, to manage risks and uncertainties
once the product is for sale,
o creating transparency requirements around the risks, benefits and uncertainties of drugs,
o introducing more targeted enforcement powers, such as suspending and revoking
authorizations,
o allowing reviews of certain drugs that address unmet medical needs to rely on the authorization
of a trusted foreign regulator, and
o removing outdated requirements, including requirements for specific technology needs.
• Consultations are underway for Amending Certain Regulations made under the Food and Drugs
Act (Agile Licensing) (December 17, 2022 until April 26, 2023).
• Through this regulatory proposal, some of the amendments that were introduced to our
regulations to address the COVID-19 pandemic would be extended. This includes allowing terms and
conditions for all drugs and Class II-IV devices, allowing rolling submissions for drugs that meet certain
criteria like an unmet medical need, and allowing for modified licensing requirements and prepositioning
of drugs that may be needed to address future public health emergencies.
• All drug submissions would continue to be required to have all of the necessary information and
data to establish the safety, effectiveness and quality of a drug and satisfy all requirements under the
Food and Drug Regulations.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The Government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Canada’s health care system.
• The meeting between the Prime Minister and his provincial and territorial counterparts on
February 7th provided an opportunity to discuss how, collectively, we can achieve better results for
Canadians.
• The federal government will increase health funding by $198.6 billion over 10 years, including
$46.2 billion in new funding for provinces and territories. This includes:
o An immediate, unconditional $2 billion top-up to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT) to address
immediate pressures on the health care system, especially in pediatric hospitals, emergency rooms and
surgical and diagnostic backlogs;
o A 5 per cent CHT guarantee for the next five years, resulting in a permanent funding increase;
o $25 billion over 10 years to support shared health priorities through tailored bilateral
agreements;
o $1.7 billion over 5 years to support wage increases for personal support workers and related
professions; and
o $2.5 billion over 10 years in complementary federal support, $2 billion of which will support
Indigenous health priorities.
• The Government has been consistent in its message that any new investments will need to be
tied to results, measured through data.
• Moving forward, the Government is committed to work with provinces and territories to
improve our health care system by addressing our shared priorities.
KEY FACTS
• The Prime Minister and Canada’s premiers met in Ottawa on February 7, 2023, to discuss health
priorities and present the federal plan, including a financial offer totalling $196.1 billion in increased
health funding for provinces and territories, four shared health priorities and associated results and
indicators, and the commitments sought from provinces and territories to access the new funding.
• The Council of the Federation (CoF), who announced its intention to accept the Government’s
offer on February 13th, first made a formal request for an increase in health transfers in September
2020, to address PT projected increases in health care costs. The requested increase would have caused
the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, or 35% of PT health spending.
o The CoF has continuously reiterated its demand for a 35% federal share, including most recently
with a “public awareness” campaign in October 2022.
• In July 2022, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $2 billion
one-time top-up to the CHT, to further help them to address pandemic-related health system pressures,
particularly the backlog of surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
• Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health-related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to PTs through the Safe Restart
Agreement, $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over $40 billion in direct federal spending (e.g.,
spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
• Furthermore, the Government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and territories
improve the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
• In November 2022, the Government passed Bill C-31, the legislation that will enable the Canada
Dental Benefit, the first step in the Government’s proposed dental plan for low- and middle-income
families. This interim measure will provide up to $650 annually (per child) for two years directly to
families who earn $90,000 or less, to pay for dental visits for children under 12 years of age.
• For more information on federal spending, please see the Background.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians and their families deserve timely access to the health services they need, when and
where they need them.
• We are providing $198.6 billion, nearly $200 billion over 10 years, for health care, including $46
billion in new funding that will be provided directly to provinces and territories.
• The federal government will continue to work with provinces and territories, in the best interest
of Canadians, their families and health workers, to deliver concrete results for Canadians and
improvements to the health care system.
IF PRESSED… (GENERAL)
• We still have more work to do to achieve better outcomes for patients, but we agree that all
Canadians deserve a system that includes:
o access to high-quality family health services when they need it, including in rural and remote
areas and for underserved communities;
o a resilient health workforce that provides them high quality, effective and safe health services
when they need it;
o access to their own health information electronically that is shared between health professionals
they see; and
o access to timely, equitable and quality mental health, substance use and addictions services to
support their wellbeing.
• We are providing $196.1 billion over 10 years, including $46 billion in new funding to provinces
and territories to address immediate pressures on the health care system and to transform it for the
long-term.
• This includes $25 billion over 10 years to provinces and territories to support shared health
priorities through tailored, flexible bilateral agreements.
• To access their share of federal funding, including the CHT increase, provinces and territories are
asked to commit to improve how health information is collected, shared, used, and reported to
Canadians.
• In 2021-22, the Government of Canada provided $43.1 billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and by over 9%
to $49.3 billion in 2023-24.
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON NEW FUNDING FOR MENTAL HEALTH & SUBSTANCE USE HEALTH…
• There is no health without mental health. That is why access to mental health and substance use
health supports, including at the community level, are integral pieces of work we want to undertake with
the provinces and territories to improve the health system in Canada.
• An inclusive approach to investments in health services, including health workers and data and
digital tools, is required to meet the mental health and substance use care needs of Canadians.
• Investments include an increase in the Canada Health Transfer and bilateral funding for tailor-
made agreements. The tailor-made agreements total $25 billion over ten years and cover all areas of
investment, including mental health and substance use health.
• These tailor-made agreements with provinces and territories will help expand the delivery of
timely, high-quality, and accessible mental health and substance use health services, as well as reduce
substance use harms, prevent overdose, reduce stigma, and help save lives and provide key data and
information to inform future decision-making at all levels of government.
• It is incremental to the existing $11 billion funding provided over ten years to support improved
access to home and community care, mental health, and addiction services.
• Canada’s health workforce has demonstrated its desire and commitment to move away from
stand-alone, siloed mental health and substance use health services. A collaborative health system will
allow for a better flow of patient information and reinforce the full continuum of care service that
Canadians deserve.
• Our response to mental health and substance use health is stronger when it is provided as part
of integrated care.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC…
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of Quebec,
and continues to work with the Quebec government to strengthen public health care.
• The bilateral agreements are intended to be flexible, so that provinces and territories can best
address the unique needs of their populations and geography.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreements will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support
home and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our Government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provinces and
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec also received $1.35 billion as part of its share of the previous CHT top-ups, and a further
$225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS FOR PRE-EXISTING BILATERAL AGREEMENTS…
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to transfer $5 billion in targeted funding
for home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021 22.
• In 2021-22, these agreements were amended to accommodate a $1 billion for Safe Long-term
Care Fund.
• Our Government is working with provinces and territories to negotiate new agreements to
enable access to the remaining 5 years of funding.
• In addition, as per the Budget 2021 commitment a further $3 billion over five years is available
to support provinces and territories in applying LTC standards and making permanent changes.
• Our meeting with the premiers on February 7, 2023, provided an opportunity to discuss how,
collectively, we can achieve better results for Canadians and improve access to care.
• We are making significant progress in our discussions with provincial and territorial counterparts
to achieve better outcomes for Canadians. Collaborative work with our counterparts is already underway
which, we hope, will soon lead to the conclusion of new bilateral agreements.
BACKGROUND
Proposed Federal Investment Offer
On February 7, 2023, the Prime Minister and his PT counterparts met to discuss actions needed to
improve the health care system. Following this meeting, the Government announced an investment of
$198.6 billion over 10 years, including $48.7 billion in new funding, to improve health services. This
funding would be distributed through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), bilateral agreements with PTs,
an Indigenous-specific funding stream, and complementary federal support. Premiers accepted the
federal offer on February 13, 2023.
The Government proposed to provide an immediate, unconditional $2 billion CHT top-up to address
immediate pressures on the health care system, as well as guaranteed 5% growth to the CHT for the next
five years (expected value of $17.3 billion over 10 years). To access their share of the federal funding,
including the 5% CHT growth, PTs would have to commit to improve how health information is collected,
shared, used, and reported to Canadians to promote greater transparency on results, and to help
manage public health emergencies.
The Government also announced it would provide $25 billion over 10 years to PTs to support shared
health priorities through bilateral agreements. As part of these agreements, PTs were asked to develop
action plans that will describe how funds will be spent (incremental to existing spending) and how
progress will be measured.
Funding will also be provided to support Indigenous priorities ($2 billion over 10 years) through a health
equity fund on a distinctions basis, to address unique challenges Indigenous Peoples face when it comes
to fair and equitable access to quality and culturally safe health care services. The Minister of Indigenous
Services, the Minister of Crown-Indigenous Relations, and the Minister of Northern Affairs will work with
Indigenous partners to prioritize investments.
Complementary federal support will also flow $505 million over 5 years to the Canadian Institute for
Health Information (CIHI), Canada Health Infoway, and federal data partners to work with PTs to develop
new health data indicators, to support the creation of a Centre of Excellence on health worker data, to
advance digital health tools and an interoperability roadmap, and to underpin efforts to use data to
improve safety and quality of care. The Territorial Health Investment Fund will also receive $175 million
over 5 years in recognition of medical travel and the cost of delivering health care in the territories.
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request for Increase in CHT:
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
cause the CHT to rise to over $76 billion, an increase of $31 billion from its current level of $45 billion in
2022-23, or an increase from its pre-pandemic 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also
called for the CHT to grow by an annual escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and has continued to
reiterate its demand for 35%, most recently with a “public awareness” campaign that was launched on
October 24, 2022, consisting of radio, print, online and billboard ads.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories (PTs) with an additional $5 billion for
health care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the
backlog of procedures caused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1
billion to support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billion to
address infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund
that also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
In July 2022, the Government provided PTs with an additional $2 billion one-time top-up to the CHT, to
further help them to address pandemic-related health system pressures, particularly the backlog of
surgeries, medical procedures and diagnostics.
The CHT, the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is
tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are universality,
comprehensiveness, portability, accessibility, and public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs will receive
$43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23 and to $49.3 billion in 2023-24.
Pandemic Funding:
Throughout the pandemic, the federal government has provided billions of dollars, beyond the CHT, in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems to support the fight against COVID, as
well as billions in direct federal spending to support public health and purchase vaccines and tests and
other equipment.
Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health-related COVID-19
spending will total over $72 billion. This includes almost $20 billion to PTs through the Safe Restart
Agreement (SRA), $6.5 billion in top-ups to the CHT and over 40 billion in direct federal spending (e.g.,
spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federal funding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. Bilateral agreements detailing how federal
investment between 2017-18 and 2021-22 would help improve access to home and community care and
mental health and addiction services were negotiated with all PTs and posted to Health Canada’s
website. New agreements will be required for PTs to access the remaining five years of this funding
(2022-23 to 2026-27).
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of up to $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help PTs protect people in long-term care and support infection prevention and control.
Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on PTs demonstrating that
investments have been made according to those spending plans. PTs will be able to use this funding to
undertake a range of activities, including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness
assessments, making improvements to ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support PTs in ensuring
standards for long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made. The federal government will
work collaboratively with PTs, while respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term
care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The Government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Association are launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with PTs on improving
the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapid roll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with PTs to assist health services to undertake virtual
care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to PTs through bilateral
agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure
videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end
supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
RECENT DEVELOPMENTS IN THE US PHARMACEUTICAL SPACE
Inflation Reduction Act
Background and Overview
• On August 7, 2022, the U.S. Senate passed the Inflation Reduction Act (IRA). The Bill now awaits
passage by the House of Representatives, set to convene on August 12, 2022 for the final vote.
• A number of provisions are intended to lower the price that Medicare pays for prescription drugs
(Medicare, as you likely know, is the US federal health insurance plan for seniors).
• The Bill includes provisions which allow, for the first time, the Federal Gov’t to negotiate prices
for a limited number of drugs covered under Medicare Part D (drugs given outside clinical settings) and
Part B (drugs given in clinical settings).
• Prescription drug costs are consistently one of American voters’ top health care concerns. The
Congressional Budget Office (CBO) found that the average price of brand-name drugs covered by
Medicare Part D more than tripled between 2009 and 2018.
• The CBO estimates that the Bill’s provisions will:
o Reduce projected Medicare spending by $288 billion through 2031.
o Result in approximately 15 fewer new drugs being developed over the next 30 years, out of what is
expected to be around 1,300 new drugs launched during that time frame (approximately a 1% reduction
in the number of new drugs).
Key Provisions
• Capping seniors’ Medicare Part D annual out-of-pocket prescription drug costs at $2,000 a year
starting in 2025.
• A $35 monthly co-pay cap on insulin for Seniors.
• Making many vaccines available to Seniors for free.
• Limiting any increases in the price paid by Medicare for prescription drugs to the rate of
inflation:
o Beginning in October of 2022, if the price of a Part D prescription drug is raised more than the
rate of general inflation, the manufacturer will have to rebate to Medicare the amount of the increase
that is higher than the inflation rate. Rebates for higher-than-inflation price hikes for medications
covered under Medicare Part B (usually office-based infusions, such as for cancer drugs) would begin in a
few months later in January 2023.
o Given that US prescription drug prices have traditionally increased at a faster rate than general
inflation this has the potential to result in significant savings.
• Negotiation for a small number of single source branded pharmaceuticals:
o A small number of single-source (i.e., not generic or biosimilar) branded pharmaceuticals would
be selected for negotiation from among the 50 drugs with the highest aggregate Medicare Part D
spending, and the 50 drugs with the highest total Medicare Part B expenditures - 10 Part D drugs in
2026; 15 Part D drugs in 2027; 15 Part B and Part D drugs in 2028; and 20 Part B and Part D drugs in 2029
and later years.
o Medicare would establish so-called maximum “fair prices” for the selected drugs (i.e., a
mandated minimum discount). The amount of the minimum discount off of the average manufacturer’s
price is based on how long the drug has been on the market. For drugs marketed more than 9 years, a
minimum 25% discount is required; greater than 12 years, 35%; and greater than 16 years, 60%.
o These discounts would only be the starting point for the negotiation and further discounts could
be negotiated by the federal government. These additional discounts would depend on a number of
factors, including clinical effectiveness indicators, which drug manufacturers may explicitly call attention
to in the negotiation process to mitigate the discounts.
o The legislation exempts from the negotiation process drugs which are:
o Less than 9 years (for small-molecule drugs) or 13 years (for large-molecule biologics) from their FDA-
approval date.
o Have generic or biosimilar competitors.
o Not one of the 50 drugs with the highest aggregate Medicare Part D spending or the 50 drugs with
the highest aggregate Medicare Part B spending.
o Orphan drugs.
o Due to all these exemptions, the vast majority of drugs would not be subject to the Negotiation
Provisions of the IRA with one recent study finding that, excluding insulin products, only about 20 drugs
currently covered by Medicare would be eligible for negotiation.
o NOTE: The above provisions only apply to Medicare and not private health insurance plans.
Summary
· Overall, the new provisions of the IRA are projected to:
o Improve access to drugs for seniors while reducing their out of pocket costs.
o Reduce the amount the federal government pays for prescription drugs and save $288 Billion through
2031.
o According to the CBO, have minimal impact on the development of new drugs (less than 1% reduction
over the next 30 years).
Executive Order on Lowering Prescription Drug Costs for Americans
On Friday October 14, 2022 President Biden signed the "Executive Order on Lowering Prescription Drug
Costs for Americans." (https://www.whitehouse.gov/briefing-room/presidential-
actions/2022/10/14/executive-order-on-lowering-prescription-drug-costs-for-americans/).
Summary of the Executive Order
• The "Executive Order on Lowering Prescription Drug Costs for Americans." instructs the
Department of Health and Human Services (HSS) to consider additional actions to reduce prescription
drug costs.
• That includes leveraging the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Innovation (Innovation Center) at
HHS. The Innovation Center has the authority to test new ways of paying for Medicare/Medicaid services
that improve the quality of care while lowering costs - including models that may lead to lower cost-
sharing for commonly used drugs and support value-based payment that promotes high-quality care.
• Under the Executive Order, HHS will have 90 days (until January 12th 2023) to submit a formal
report outlining any plans to use the Innovation Center’s authorities to lower drug costs and promote
access to innovative drug therapies for Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. The report will also
include the Secretary’s plan and timeline to test these proposals.
Background
• On average, Americans pay two to three times as much as people in other countries for
prescription drugs, and one in four Americans who take prescription drugs struggle to afford their
medications.
• Nearly three in ten American adults who take prescription drugs say that they have skipped
doses, cut pills in half, or not filled prescriptions due to cost.
• This Executive Order continues the focus of the Biden Administration on reducing prescription
drug costs and builds on the recently passed Inflation Reduction Act which included a number of drug
pricing reforms such as:
o Capping seniors’ Medicare Part D annual out-of-pocket prescription drug costs at $2,000 a year
starting in 2025.
o A $35 monthly co-pay cap on insulin for seniors.
o Making many vaccines available to seniors for free.
o Limiting any increases in the price paid by Medicare for prescription drugs to the rate of
inflation; and
o Allowing Federal Gov’t to negotiate prices for a limited number of drugs covered under
Medicare.
Considerations
• The text of the Executive Order provides limited detail on what “payment and delivery models”
the HHS should consider under this Order other then they should:
o Lower drug costs and promote access to innovative drug therapies for beneficiaries enrolled in
the Medicare and Medicaid programs
o Lead to lower cost-sharing for commonly used drugs; and
o Support value-based payment that promotes high-quality care.
• However a September 2021 HHS Report in response to a similar Biden Administration Executive
Order includes a list of potential new policies being considered by the Innovation Center such as:
o Small-scale mandatory models that link Medicare payment for prescription drugs and biologics
to factors such as improved patient outcomes, reductions in health disparities, patient affordability, and
lower overall costs.
o Testing models providing additional cost-sharing support to Medicare Low Income Subsidy
Beneficiaries for using biosimilars and generics.
o Testing total cost of care models in Medicare to determine whether they produce changes in
drug utilization, reductions in total spending, and improvements in patient outcomes.
Summary of Eli Lilly’s recent announcement on Insulin pricing
Issue
On March 1st 2023 pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly and Co. said it will cut prices of its most commonly
prescribed insulins up to 70% and expand a program that limits out-of-pocket monthly costs for some
consumers to $35 per month.
Background
Insulin and Diabetes:
Diabetes is a non-communicable and chronic disease related to the body’s inability to produce and/or
use insulin. Insulin is a hormone that controls blood sugar by helping the body use and store glucose in
the bloodstream. While insulin is naturally secreted by the pancreas in healthy individuals, people with
diabetes either cannot produce insulin, produce insufficient insulin, or do not respond to insulin and
thus need other medication to control their blood sugar.
People with Type 1 diabetes cannot produce insulin or produce an insufficient amount of insulin.
Treatment includes multiple daily injections of insulin to control blood sugar.
Type 2 diabetes is characterized by an insufficient amount of insulin or an inability to respond to insulin.
Approximately 10–25% of Type 2 diabetes patients use insulin for treatment.
Lack of insulin can lead to diabetic ketoacidosis, coma, and death; it is especially life-threatening for
people with Type 1 diabetes, who require insulin daily to survive. An estimated 7.4 million people in the
United States take insulin as part of diabetes treatment.
United States Insulin Market:
The global insulin market is highly concentrated. Only three companies - Novo Nordisk, Sanofi, and Eli
Lilly - supply insulin to patients in the United States with each controlling approximately 1/3rd of the
market. From 2002 to 2013, the prices of the most popular insulin products tripled, with some costing
up to $900 per patient per month. Since 2013 insulin prices have continued to increase at a much higher
rate than inflation. A 2022 study published in the Annals of Internal Medicine found that 1.3 million
American adults (approximately 17%) with diabetes skipped doses, delayed buying or otherwise rationed
doses of insulin due to cost.
Current Status
US Political Environment:
The high price of insulin in the US has received a great deal of media and political attention over the last
several years. In January 2019, Congress held hearings on insulin prices with top executives from insulin
companies and launched a bipartisan probe in February 2019. In 2021, the Senate Finance Committee
unveiled a sweeping investigation of insulin prices which found that prices had continued to increase
significantly in recent years. Most recently, the federal Inflation Reduction Act (IRA) caps insulin costs at
$35 a month for seniors. Earlier versions of the IRA had extended this cap to the broader population and,
during his February State of the Union address to Congress, President Joe Biden called on Congress to
extend that out-of-pocket cap to younger Americans.
Eli Lilly Announcement
On March 1st, 2023. Eli Lilly announced price reductions for its most commonly prescribed insulins and
an expansion of its Insulin Value Program that caps patient out-of-pocket costs at $35 or less per month.
Under this new plan, the drugmaker will cut list prices by 70% for the fast-acting injectable Humalog,
which is the company's most commonly prescribed insulin. Lilly also will discount an older fast-acting
drug, Humulin:
• The list price for Humalog U-100, 10 mL vial will drop from $274.70 to $66.40.
• The list price for Humulin U-100, 10 mL vials will drop from $148.70 to $44.61.
The price changes will take effect by December 2023.
Additionally, Eli Lilly will immediately cap out-of-pocket costs for privately insured consumers at $35 a
month at the "majority of retail pharmacies." Company officials estimate that about 85% of national and
local pharmacies will honor the $35 price cap. For those without insurance, the drugmaker offers a
program savings card that will cap Lilly insulin at $35 a month.
Industry experts have called this announcement “significant” and initial reactions are that it will lower
existing financial barriers American diabetics face when accessing insulin.
Considerations regarding Eli Lilly’s efforts:
• The Insulin Industry has been facing significant and growing political pressure around insulin
prices. This announcement may ease this pressure for Eli Lilly.
