Created: 2024-02-01T21:32:29.409412
Name: Consumer_Product_Enforcement_Summary_Report_-_Cyclical_Enforcement_Project_2018-2019:_Lighters_Regulations
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/reports-publications/industry-professionals/enforcement-summary-report/lighters-regulations-2018-2019.html
Package ID: a5890434-be55-4a7d-ac25-520575e326e3
Keywords: ['Consumer Product Safety Program', 'Canada Consumer-Product-Safety Act', 'CCPSA', 'cyclical enforcement project', 'compliance of utility-lighters', 'Lighters Regulations']
Notes: The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry's compliance of utility lighters with the requirements of the Lighters Regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Lighters Regulations - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Reports and Publications – Consumer Product Safety Industry and health professionals Consumer Product Enforcement Report Consumer Product Enforcement Summary Report - Cyclical Enforcement Project 2018-2019: Lighters Regulations Fiscal Year 2018-2019 Summary The Consumer Product Safety Program (CPSP) administers and enforces the Canada Consumer Product Safety Act (CCPSA) and regulations made under it. The purpose of this Cyclical Enforcement (CE) project was to verify industry's compliance of utility lighters with the requirements of the Lighters Regulations. For this project, compliance of select utility lighters with the Lighters Regulations was determined through a sampling and testing process by which Health Canada inspectors visited establishments and sampled relevant products. Compliance with the requirements listed under the Regulations was then verified through testing at the Product Safety Laboratory. Prior to initiating this CE project, the CPSP carried out a market survey to determine the presence of utility lighters companies in Canada. Targets were then selected from that list of companies. Over the course of the 2018-2019 fiscal year, flammability testing of 9 different products was carried out. The testing resulted in 4 recalls, 1 stop distribution and 4 commitments to address non-compliance. All instances required a corrective action. Results Readers should consult the individual recall and safety notices, if applicable, for details of the products subject to this enforcement action. Summary of the samples assessed and corrective actions taken during this project Brand Product Name Source of Sample Determination Corrective Action Bernzomatic Bernzomatic LTR 200 Flexible Utility Lighter Worthington Industries Did not meet the flame height and labelling requirements Commitment by Worthington Industries Château CM Homeware Multi-purpose Lighter Château Manis Électroniques Inc. Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Voluntary recall by Château Manis Électroniques Inc. Clair de lune Ambiance Flexilight Multi-purpose Utility Lighter Distribution Orca Lite Inc. Did not meet the child-resistance requirement Voluntary recall by Distribution Orca Lite Inc. Coghlan's Coghlan's Disposable Gas Utility Lighter Coghlan's Ltd. Did not meet the flame height requirement Commitment by Coghlan's Ltd. Gibson Gibson Open Face Reel Fishing Pole BBQ Lighter Gibson Enterprises Inc. Did not meet the sudden increase in flame height requirement Stop distribution by Gibson Enterprises Inc. Grill Mate Grill Mate BBQ Utility Lighter S.R. Potten Ltd. Did not meet the after burn requirement Commitment by S.R. Potten Ltd. Home Home Flexible Multi-Purpose Lighter Home Hardware Stores Ltd. Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Voluntary recall by Home Hardware Stores Ltd. MASTER Chef MASTER Chef BBQ Igniter Lighter Canadian Tire Corporation Did not meet the flame height, after burn and sudden increase in flame height requirements Voluntary recall by Canadian Tire Corporation Quick Light Quick Light Refillable BBQ Lighter Giant Tiger Stores Limited Did not meet the labelling requirements Commitment by Giant Tiger Stores Limited Disclaimer: A systematic bias is applied during inspection and sampling. Products are not randomly selected but are chosen because they are deemed by the inspector to be more likely to not meet health and safety requirements due to characteristics that are observed. Due to this biased nature of sampling and the fact that sample sizes within CE projects are very small, the findings of CE projects are not intended to reflect overall market compliance unless otherwise stated. Note that these summary reports relate only to the product(s) actually tested and the specific criteria indicated. Testing by Health Canada does not represent approval or endorsement of the product(s). For More Information Report Incidents Subscribe to Consumer Product Safety News Monitor Consumer Product Safety Recalls Contact the Consumer Product Safety Program Page details Date modified: 2020-01-29 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy