Created: 2020-07-09T17:33:10.769252
Name: Appearance_of_the_Minister_of_Health_Before_HESA_on_the_Supps_B/Mandate_Letter
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/a7111394-6cd8-4397-8795-20a86d40aaa0/resource/01fb1f8d-5e22-4842-b0eb-708cb9cf0644/download/cusersjdavitskdesktopto-publishsupps-b-binder-disclosure-english.pdf
Package ID: a7111394-6cd8-4397-8795-20a86d40aaa0
Keywords: ['Supplementary Estimates B / Health Canada Portfolio Financial Overview']
Notes: Opening Statement
Mandate Letter
Supplementary Estimates B / Health Canada Portfolio Financial Overview
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
APPEARANCE OF THE MINISTER OF HEALTH
BEFORE HESA on the Supps B/Mandate Letter
A. Opening Statement
Opening Statement
B. Mandate Letter
1. Strengthen Medicare and Renew Health Funding Agreements with the PTs
2. Create National Standards for Mental Health Services
3. Make Home and Palliative Care More Available
4. Continue to Implement National Pharmacare
5. Canada Health Act Priorities and Compliance
6. Respond to the Opioid Crisis
7. Address Drug Shortages
8. Implement Restrictions on Marketing to Kids
9. Address Increases in Youth Vaping
10. Create a National Autism Strategy
11. Invest in Paediatric Cancer Research
12. Study National Dental Care
13. Sex and Gender Based/ Race and Diversity Research at CIHR
14. Create a National Institute for Women’s Health
15. Ensuring Access to Sexual and Reproductive Health
16. Strictly Regulating Cannabis
17. Implementing a Pan-Canadian Concussion Strategy
18. Making Progress toward Ending the MSM Blood Donor Deferral
19. Responding to the MAID Court Ruling
20. Supporting Effective Pesticide Use
21. Protecting People and the Environment from Toxins and Other Pollutions
22. Improving Seafood Traceability
23. Address Anti-Microbial Resistance
C. Supplementary Estimates B / Health Canada Portfolio Financial Overview
Health Canada (Tab 38 - 53)
38. From CFIA to HC to facilitate the sharing of information and address food fraud ($618,481)
39. From IS to HC to provide microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation
communities ($487,785)
40. From DND to various organizations for the Canadian Safety and Security Program ($341,000)
41. From NRCC to various organizations for genomics research and development ($250,000)
42. From PWGS to various organizations, to implement and support cluster management offices ($177,678)
43. From HC to Economic Development Agency of Canada and for the Regions of Quebec to host the 2019
International Economic Forum of the Americas ($35,000)
44. From HC to CIHR to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making ($58,000)
45. From HC to PHAC to expand health information in the Climate Atlas of Canada ($75,000)
46. From HC to PHAC for the United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime ($96,682)
47. From HC to NRCAN for the Climate Change Adaptation program ($100,000)
48. From HC to PHAC to develop international scientific advice on food allergens ($110,000)
49. From HC to IS to develop distinctions-bases healthy eating tools for Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami ($120,000)
50. From HC to PHAC for the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development work on chemicals
management and pesticides ($150,000)
51. From HC to PHAC for the WHO economic evaluation of the impact of climate change on health and health
systems ($179,562)
52. From HC to IS for public education on cannabis in Indigenous communities ($354,495)
53. From HC to RCMP to implement regulations on access to cannabis for medical purposes ($460,058)
Public Health Agency of Canada (Tab 54 - 68)
54. Funding for a community-based approach to dementia ($3,894,277)
55. Funding to strengthen multiculturalism and address challenges faced by black Canadians ($2,103,565)
56. Funding to combat illegal drug use and protect Canadians ($1,715,905)
57. Funding to support the Métis Nation in gathering health data and developing a strategy ($1,200,000)
58. Reinvestment of royalties from intellectual property ($217,000)
59. From NRC to various organizations for genomics research and development ($844,735)
60. From DND to various organizations for the Canadian Safety and Security Program ($240,000)
61. From HC to PHAC for the WHO economic evaluation of the impact of climate change on health and health
systems ($179,562)
62. From PSPC to various organizations, to implement and support cluster management offices ($177,678)
63. From HC to PHAC for the organization for Economic Co-operation and Development work on chemicals
management and pesticides ($150,000)
64. From HC to PHAC to develop international scientific advice on food allergens ($110,000)
65. From HC to PHAC for the United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime ($96,682)
66. From HC to PHAC to expand health information in the Climate Atlas of Canada ($75,000)
67. From PHAC and PWGSC to RCMP for law enforcement record checks ($6,517)
68. From PHAC to CIHR to participate in the European Union Joint Programme – Neurodegenerative Disease
Research ($75,000)
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (Tab 69 - 73)
69. Funding to Build a new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, BC ($1,931,626)
70. Funding for the Genomics Research and Development Initiative ($720,000)
71. Transfers from PWGSC to various organizations, to implement and support cluster management
offices ($1,398,265)
72. Transfers from NRCAN to various organizations for genomics research and development ($268,000)
73. Transfers from CFIA to HC to facilitate sharing of information and address food fraud (-$618,481)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (Tab 74 - 83)
74. Funding for research against cervical cancer in Canada ($2,014,845)
75. From NSERC to CIHR and SSHRC for the Canada Research Chairs Program ($12,377,708)
76. From NSERC to SSHRC and CIHR for the Busines-Led Networks of Centres of Excellence
($1,994,788)
77. From VA to CIHR for research on the potential therapeutic beneftis and harms associated with
cannabis use ($150,000)
78. From NSERC and SSHRC to CIHR for the Healthy Cities Research Training Platform ($100,000)
79. From PHAC to CIHR to participate in the European Union Joint Programme- Neurodegenerative
Disease Research ($58,334)
80. From HC to CIHR to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
($58,000)
81. From NSERC to CIHR and SSHRC to increase innovation partnerships ($49,994)
82. From CIHR to SSHRC for research on Living within the Earth’s Carrying Capacity (-$250,000)
83. From CIHR and SSHRC to NSERC to work on a common grants management solution (-
$1,481,805)
Remarks for
the Honourable Patty Hajdu
Minister of Health
For an appearance before
the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health
Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates (B)
March 11, 2020
Ottawa, ON
Introduction
Mr. Chair, I would like to thank you for inviting me before
the Committee today. It is an honour to make my first
appearance as Minister of Health.
I am grateful for this opportunity to talk about my mandate,
our work in the Health Portfolio and our Financial
Overview for Supplementary Estimates “B” for 2019-20.
I am accompanied today by:
 Dr. Stephen Lucas, Deputy Minister of Health
Canada;
 Ms. Tina Namiesniowski, President of the Public
Health Agency of Canada;
 Dr. Theresa Tam, Chief Public Health Officer, also
with the Public Health Agency of Canada
 Catherine MacLeod, Executive Vice-President of the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research; and
 Dr. Siddika Mithani, President of the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency.
I may turn to them occasionally to provide more detail on
our resourcing plans.
But first, I would like to talk about our ongoing response to
the COVID-19 outbreak.
As you know, this situation is evolving quickly.
The number of cases in Canada and around the world
continues to increase. Globally, there are now more than
100 countries affected.
While our focus continues to be on containing the virus to
delay the onset of community transmission, we are
preparing for the possibility of a more widespread
outbreak.
It is at times like these that we see how important it is to
have a strong, coordinated approach to public health.
Public servants at all levels of government have been
working extremely long hours to protect Canadians. I want
to recognize them for their dedication and professionalism
in the face of this international health threat.
The Public Health Agency of Canada, for example, is
working closely with the provinces and territories to ensure
a consistent, evidence-based approach to addressing this
crisis.
At the federal level, we are conducting national disease
surveillance and providing guidance on public health
measures.
I have weekly conversations with my provincial and
territorial counterparts.
Our National Microbiology Laboratory is helping to
confirm new cases of COVID-19 and conducting research
to advance our understanding of the virus.
Last week, I had the pleasure of announcing that the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research is investing
nearly $27 million over two years in coronavirus research.
This investment will support research on diagnostic tools
and candidate vaccines, as well as strategies to tackle
misinformation, stigma and fear.
Ensuring access to vaccines and antivirals is a top priority.
While there are currently no drugs specifically authorized
to treat COVID-19, there are a variety of authorized
treatment options including general antiviral drugs that are
being used to treat patients infected with COVID-19.
Health Canada encourages companies and researchers
with drugs that could be effective in the treatment of
COVID-19 to contact the Department. Clinical trials can be
authorized and established very quickly, particularly in
urgent circumstances.
Health Canada is also leading federal workplace health
initiatives, ensuring regulatory preparedness, and
providing occupational health and safety advice and
guidelines for federal employees.
As Minister of Health, I am focused on how this virus is
affecting the health of Canadians and our health care
system. But there is more to it than that. COVID-19 has
already had a negative effect on the global economy. We
must prepare for the possibility of a wide range of impacts.
Last week, the Prime Minister announced a new Cabinet
Committee to oversee the federal response to COVID-19.
This committee, chaired by Deputy Prime Minister
Freeland, will allow us to ensure government-wide
planning and proactive response to protect the health and
safety of Canadians, respond to impacts on workers and
businesses, and ensure that the government can continue
to deliver its services to Canadians across a range of
scenarios.
COVID-19 is a serious public health challenge, but we are
ready. The government is working on all fronts to protect
the health, safety and well-being of Canadians. We will
continue working closely with the provinces and territories,
Indigenous peoples, businesses and communities to
minimize the health, economic and social impacts of this
rapidly evolving public health issue. I will keep this
Committee informed of new developments as they arise.
My mandate
Our response to COVID-19 illustrates the Government’s
— and my — commitment to protecting the health and
well-being of Canadians.
While my mandate as Minister of Health is far-reaching
and touches many important issues, I will highlight just a
few for you today.
Strengthening public health care
As Minister, I am leading the Government’s work to
strengthen public health care for all Canadians.
We are working toward a national universal pharmacare
program so that Canadians can access the prescription
drugs they need without worrying about the cost.
We have already strengthened our regulatory approach to
pharmaceutical pricing. This will help lower the prices
Canadians pay for patented medicines and make
pharmacare more affordable. Budget 2019 provided
support for Canadians who need access to high cost
drugs for rare diseases, as well as funding to create a
Canadian Drug Agency, which will lower drug costs
further.
While access to medication is an essential element of
health, Canadians must also have access to a doctor
when they need one. This is especially important when
faced with an emerging crisis, as we are now. Our goal is
to ensure that each and every Canadian has timely access
to a family doctor or primary health care team.
And because there can be no true physical health without
mental health, we are working to set national standards for
access to mental health services. It is so important that
Canadians have access to mental health supports when
they need them.
Canadians should also have improved access to home
care and palliative care. I am pleased to say that we have
made progress, through the Framework on Palliative Care
in Canada and our supporting Action Plan, which aim to
make home care and palliative care more accessible
across the country.
For some, having access to Medical Assistance in Dying
— or MAID — is an important aspect of end-of-life care.
As you know, a few weeks ago, the Minister of Justice
introduced amendments to the existing MAID legislation.
The proposed amendments are designed to make MAID
more accessible to those who qualify for it, while ensuring
that vulnerable individuals are protected.
Problematic Substance Use
As Minister of Health, I am also focused on addressing
problematic substance use. As you know, Canada
remains in the grip of a deadly opioid overdose crisis —
one that has claimed the lives of nearly 14,000 Canadians
since 2016. Our Government understands that this crisis
requires a comprehensive, compassionate and evidence-
based response.
We must protect Canadians from lethally potent, illegally
produced synthetic drugs, like fentanyl. These drugs are
now found in communities across the country and are the
main cause of overdoses.
We must also tackle the root causes of substance use and
addiction, such as mental illness, trauma and pain. This
includes stigma, which unfairly marginalizes people and
prevents them from getting help.
Through our public education and awareness efforts, we
are working to end the discrimination experienced by
people who use drugs, to make it easier for them to get
the care they need and deserve.
Managing risks to health
Managing the health risks that Canadians face doesn’t
stop with opioids.
We continue to be concerned by the number of young
Canadians who vape and we have taken action to restrict
the promotion of vaping products where it can be seen or
heard by youth.
We continue to play an active role in mitigating the impact
of drug shortages on Canadians, working closely with
provinces and territories, manufacturers, and others in the
supply chain so that Canadians have access to the drugs
they need.
And, we are taking action, both domestically and abroad,
to address the growing public health threat of
antimicrobial resistance. This year we will release the
Pan-Canadian Action Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance,
which is being developed in collaboration with provincial,
territorial and non-government partners.
Health Promotion
My mandate also includes health promotion. As part of
that work, I am collaborating with the Minister of Canadian
Heritage to implement a pan-Canadian Concussion
Strategy and to raise awareness for parents, coaches and
athletes on concussion treatment.
This includes the Concussion Harmonization Project, a
comprehensive, evidence-based approach to addressing
concussions wherever they occur.
Canadians living with Autism Spectrum Disorder have
diverse and, often, complex needs. To address these
needs effectively, everyone needs to be involved — from
all levels of government, to service providers on the front
lines. That’s why we are working collaboratively with
provinces, territories, families and stakeholders toward the
creation of a national autism strategy.
Research
Research is essential to the work we do in the Health
Portfolio and is the foundation of our evidence-based
approach.
Earlier, I mentioned our recent investment in COVID-19
research — this is just one example of our commitment to
understanding the health challenges we face.
For example, Budget 2019 provided $2.4 million over
three years for research on plasma donation by men who
have sex with men. This builds on ongoing efforts to
reduce barriers to blood and plasma donation.
We are also working to ensure that sex, gender and
diversity factors are included in research initiatives. This
includes providing additional funding for grants to study
race, diversity and gender.
Health Portfolio Supplementary Estimates (B)
I would now like to speak to the expenditure authorities of
my Portfolio. If approved by Parliament, these
Supplementary Estimates (B) will provide the Health
Portfolio with an increase of $34.1 million in spending
authorities. This represents an increase of 0.6%.
Health Canada
Let me begin with Health Canada, which has a budget of
just under $2.7 billion.
This will increase only slightly with the Supplementary
Estimates (B). We are not requesting any new funding at
this time; however, some funds are being transferred to
and from the Department to better support government
health priorities.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
Next, the Public Health Agency of Canada is seeking
voted authorities of $13 million and transfers of $1.8
million.
This new funding will go toward initiatives that address a
number of key priorities, including: dementia, health
challenges faced by Black Canadians, the drug overdose
crisis and health data collection for the Métis Nation.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA)
I will turn now to the Canadian Food Inspection Agency.
In 2019-2020, this agency is expecting to receive an
increase of $3.8 million.
This funding will be used, in part, to lead a cluster of
science-based departments and agencies in renewing the
Government of Canada’s science infrastructure.
Funding will also go toward the planning and design of the
new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia.
This centre will conduct research into diseases affecting
fruit plants and trees.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Finally, I would like to talk about the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research — or CIHR — which is proposing an
increase of $15.1 million.
Of this, $2 million in new funding will go toward the B.C.
Women’s Hospital and Health Centre, as part of the
recently announced $10 million investment in research to
eradicate cervical cancer in Canada.
In addition, $12.4 million is being transferred to the CIHR
from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council for the Canada Research Chairs Program. This
is a tri-agency initiative to attract and retain a diverse
community of researchers.
Conclusion
Everything we do within the Health Portfolio is aimed at
protecting the health and well-being of Canadians — and
we are committed to doing our job efficiently and
effectively.
This includes working with the provinces and territories to
respond to COVID-19 and to strengthen the publicly
funded health care system so that Canadians can have
access to high-quality services.
I look forward to working with this Committee, and all of
my colleagues in the House of Commons, to ensure that
the health needs of all Canadians continue to be met.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you today. I am
pleased to take questions from the Committee.
Health Funding Agreements and Transfers
SYNOPSIS
 Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the
government will continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to
strengthen Medicare and renew health agreements. This work will include
ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams, setting national
standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and palliative
care. This commitment builds on the bilateral agreements that are in place and
will be renewed in 2022 to support improved access to home and community
care and mental health and addiction services. Consistent with the FPT endorsed
Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities and the long-term
funding agreements agreed to by all provinces and territories, these bilateral
agreements will result in measurable improvements, and public reporting on the
outcomes achieved. This work will respect the asymmetrical arrangement agreed
to with the Province of Quebec.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 When will the Government of Canada see results from these investments?
KEY MESSAGES
 As outlined in my mandate letter, our government is
committed to working collaboratively with provinces and
territories to strengthen Medicare.
 In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers reached agreement on
a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities supported by a targeted federal investment of $11
billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve
access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services.
 Bilateral agreements set out details of how each jurisdiction
will use federal funding, and these agreements will be
renewed starting in 2022-23 for the remaining five years of
the 10-year commitment.
 Building on these achievements, our government has now
committed to work collaboratively with provinces and
territories to improve access to doctors or primary health
teams.
 Through this work, our Government will continue to work
closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the
country.
 Canadians are proud of their publicly funded health care
system, and expect governments to work together to
strengthen its ability to serve the needs of citizens.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE LETTER COMMITMENT ON PRIMARY HEALTH CARE
 There are almost 90,000 physicians in Canada, a record
number, but access to care is still an issue for some
Canadians.
 Our Government is committed to engaging with provincial
and territorial counterparts, health professionals and experts
to help make sure Canadians can access primary health
care when they need it.
IF PRESSED ON FEDERAL FUNDING TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
 Budget 2017 provided $11 billion in new targeted funding
over 10 years to provinces and territories to improve access
to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services.
 Funding for provinces and territories has been allocated
according to each jurisdiction’s share of the Canadian
population. This approach provides equal support to all
Canadians.
 In addition to targeted funding, our Government will provide
provinces and territories with close to $42 billion in 2020-21
through the Canada Health Transfer, totalling over $200
billion over the next 5 years.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
 Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet
the needs of the people of Quebec.
 The Canada-Quebec bilateral agreement will flow
approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to
support home and community care and mental health and
addiction services and reflects the principles of asymmetrical
federalism as recognized in 2004.
 This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will
flow over $9.4 billion to Quebec in 2020-21.
IF PRESSED ON MEASUREMENT AND REPORTING
 The Government of Canada has consistently emphasized
the importance of Canadians seeing results for the
investments in mental health and home care.
 In the August 2017 Common Statement of Principles,
federal, provincial and territorial Ministers of Health agreed
to work collectively to develop a focused set of indicators to
measure
 progress and report to Canadians.
 Governments have been working with CIHI to develop
common indicators to evaluate progress. CIHI will begin its
annual public reporting on the first of these indicators later
this spring.
 In addition, provinces and territories have also included
program-specific indicators in their bilateral agreements.
IF PRESSED ON NEXT STEPS
 The Government of Canada signed bilateral agreements
with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted
funding for home care and mental health from 2017-18
through 2021-22.
 A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to
flow the remaining $6 billion in funding starting in 2022-23.
BACKGROUND
Federal Commitment to the Health Accord (now referred to as the Common
Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities):
In 2015, the Government committed to engage with the Provinces and Territories (PTs)
to develop a new Health Accord, including a new long-term agreement on funding. The
Government also committed to work jointly, and with Indigenous leaders, to explore
areas of shared priority that will improve the health of Indigenous Peoples.
Federal Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve
access to home care and mental health services as follows:
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, for better home and palliative care,
and $1 billion over 4 years, starting in 2018-19, to address critical home care
infrastructure requirements; and,
o $5 billion over 10 years, starting in 2017-18, in support of mental health initiatives
This funding is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major
transfer to PTs. It provides long-term predictable funding for health care, and is tied to
PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act which are: universality;
comprehensiveness; portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2019-2020,
PTs will receive $40.4 billion through the CHT.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles
on Shared Health Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community
care, and mental health and addiction services. On March 10, 2017, the Government of
Canada and the Government of Quebec agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement
distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based on the asymmetrical
agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes a commitment for PT governments to work with
the Canadian Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these
areas, to continue collaborating to advance work in health innovation and prescription
drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to improve health outcomes for
Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health Ministers
(except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress to Canadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility
it required to implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care
and mental health and addiction services, it was agreed that the start date of the
agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e. beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocated to PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the
federal funding offer, as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The
Government of Canada then engaged with PTs to negotiate detailed funding
agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government of Canada will
negotiate renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-23
to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed
and are posted online.
Minister Hadju’s mandate letter from the Prime Minister outlines that the government will
continue to work collaboratively with provinces and territories to strengthen Medicare.
This work will include ensuring greater access to doctors or primary health teams,
setting national standards for mental health access, and supporting home care and
palliative care.
Mental Health Care Standards and Availability
SYNOPSIS
 The Government is committed to strengthening access to primary health care,
including mental health services.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government’s plan to enhance access to mental health care for
Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes the importance of access to
mental health services and has made significant investments to
this end. Budget 2017 provided provinces and territories with
$5 billion over 10 years to improve access to mental health and
addiction services for Canadians.
 Budget 2019 provided $25 million over 5 years to implement
and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide
prevention service.
 In this new mandate, our Government is committed to doing
even more in this area, and we will be working with provinces
and territories to support Canadians in getting faster access to
the mental health services they need, when they need them.
 We are also committed to working with stakeholders, experts,
and provinces and territories to determine the best approach
for setting national standards for accessing mental health and
substance use services.
 We are gathering information from across the country on
current practices to improve access to mental health and
substance use services, and existing standards, to prepare for
discussions with provinces and territories, experts and
stakeholders on this issue.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONAL STANDARDS FOR ACCESS
TO MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES
 Improving access to mental health services is a shared
priority for Federal, Provincial and Territorial governments.
We are committed to working with stakeholders, experts,
and provinces and territories to determine the best approach
for setting national standards for accessing mental health
and substance use services.
 We are gathering information from across the country on
current practices to improve access to mental health and
substance use services, and existing standards, to prepare
for discussions with provinces and territories, experts and
stakeholders on this issue.
IF PRESSED ON CORRELATION BETWEEN MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE
USE
 Our government recognizes that too often mental health and
substance use issues coexist and is committed to working
with stakeholders, provinces and territories to address
existing silos so that Canadians can experience
comprehensive and integrated services.
IF PRESSED ON CONVERSION THERAPY…
 Our government is committed to amend the Criminal Code to
“ban the practice of conversion therapy and take other steps
required with the provinces and territories to end conversion
therapy in Canada.”
 Health Canada is supporting colleagues in the Department
of Justice who have the lead on this important amendment to
the Criminal Code.
IF PRESSED ON POST-TRAUMATIC STRESS INJURIES…
 Our Government recognizes the impact that posttraumatic
stress disorder, also known as PTSD, has on individuals,
families, communities and workplaces.
 Our Government recognizes the tremendous impact that
post-traumatic stress disorder, also known as PTSD, has on
individuals, families, communities and workplaces.
 On January 22, 2020, the first Federal Framework on PTSD,
developed in collaboration with partners was tabled in
Parliament.
IF PRESSED ON SUICIDE PREVENTION…
 The Government recognizes the impact suicide has on
families and communities.
 Budget 2019 announced $25 million over 5 years to
implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian
suicide prevention service.
IF PRESSED ON OTHER INVESTMENTS IN MENTAL HEALTH…
 Our Government cares deeply about the mental health of
Canadians and recognizes the importance of intervening
early to promote mental health and prevent mental illness.
 That is why we are investing in programs that promote
mental health, build resilience in vulnerable young children
and families, and prevent mental illness and suicide.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL ENGAGEMENT…
 Our Government is working to advance mental health on the
global stage.
 Canada’s engagement with our global partners on mental
health allows us to share Canada’s best practices and learn
from others as we seek to address mental health challenges
affecting many Canadians.
 In May 2018, Canada co-founded, alongside the United
Kingdom and Australia, the Alliance of Champions for Mental
Health and Well-Being.
 Ministers joining the alliance commit to advancing global
mental health through collective international action.
BACKGROUND
One in three Canadians will be affected by a mental illness in their lifetime, and the
economic, social and human costs are high. The total cost of mental illness to the
Canadian economy has been estimated at $50B each year, in direct and indirect costs,
equivalent to 2.8% of GDP.
Systemic Access Barriers
The availability of mental health care services in Canada is limited. According to
Statistics Canada, in 2018, 17.8% of Canadians aged 12 and older (roughly 5.3 million
people) reported having needed some help with their mental health in the previous year.
Among those 5.3 million Canadians, 43.8% reported that their needs were either unmet
or only partially met. Access to mental health care services for children and youth is of
particular concern, given that most (75%) of mental disorders have their first onset
before the age of 25.
Provincial/Territorial and Federal Roles in Mental Health
While PT governments have primary jurisdiction in the planning and delivery of mental
health services, the Government of Canada also plays a vital role, including funding
mental health research and promotion, mental illness surveillance and suicide
prevention. It is also responsible for the delivery of mental health and addictions
services to several federal populations, including First Nations on-reserve and Inuit,
federal inmates, veterans and military personnel.
In 2007, the Government of Canada established the Mental Health Commission of
Canada (MHCC) as an arm’s length organization to act as a catalyst for fostering
improvements in the mental health care system. The MHCC is currently helping the
Government advance mental health work in problematic substance use, suicide
prevention, and target initiatives for vulnerable populations. Budget 2018 confirmed an
investment of $10 million over five years for MHCC to help assess the impact of
cannabis use on the mental health of Canadians.
Government Commitments
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’
access to mental health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces
and territories to help them expand access to community-based mental health and
addiction services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex
needs, and spread proven models of community mental health care and culturally
appropriate interventions linked to primary health services. In August 2017, an
agreement was reached with the provinces and territories on a Common Statement of
Principles for Shared Health Priorities (CSOP) that confirmed these priorities. Bilateral
agreements have since been finalized with each jurisdiction that set out details of how
they will use federal funding in future years, consistent with the CSOP.
Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion
Innovation Fund, the Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to
address multiple risk and protective factors to promote mental health for children, youth,
young adults and populations susceptible to mental health inequities (e.g., low-income
families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis, LGBTQ2+, people living
with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada has provided funding to Crisis Services Canada in the
amount of $4.3 million over five years to support the development of the Canada
Suicide Prevention Service (CSPS). Budget 2019 announced an additional $25 million
The Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act received Royal Assent
in June 2018. The Act requires the development of a comprehensive federal framework
on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD), to be tabled in Parliament by December 21,
2019 and published on Canada.ca within 30 days of tabling. To inform the development
of the federal framework, in accordance with the Act, the Minister of Health convened a
National Conference
over five years and $5 million ongoing to augment and sustain this service, with PHAC
launching a call for proposals on July 8, 2019 for organizations interested in leading the
CSPS. The Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention was made publicly available in
November 2016. It focuses on raising public awareness, reducing stigma, disseminating
information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based practices.
Progress Reports on the Framework are available on Canada.ca, with the next report
planned for release in December 2020.
Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder
on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and
Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness Canada, partners and stakeholders,
including people with lived-experience.
Conversion Therapy
The Department of Justice is leading the file on banning conversion therapy. Health
Canada has supported the Department of Justice by reviewing definitions, providing
journal articles and conducting an environmental scan on conversion therapy.
The Government of Canada has committed to amend the Criminal Code to “ban the
practice of conversion therapy and take other steps required with the provinces and
territories to end conversion therapy in Canada.”
“Conversion therapy is a practice that aims to change an individual's sexual orientation
to heterosexual or gender identity to cisgender, which means identifying with the
sex assigned to them at birth.” Conversion therapy consists of efforts such as
counseling, religious practices, behavioral modification, cognitive reframing, and other
means to attempt to change an individual’s sexual orientation. Conversion can result in
negative outcomes such as distress, anxiety, depression, negative self-image, a feeling
of personal failure, difficulty sustaining relationships, and sexual dysfunction.
There are differences across provincial legislation where Manitoba, Ontario and Nova
Scotia have current legislation against the practice of conversion therapy. New
Brunswick and Prince Edward Island have proposed motions to ban conversion therapy.
Other provinces have no legislation in place, but have expressed support for a
conversion therapy ban.
Home and Palliative Care
SYNOPSIS
 On August 27, 2019, Health Canada released an Action Plan on Palliative Care,
which builds on the Framework. The Action Plan lays out Health Canada’s five-
year plan to tackle issues identified in the Framework. Using federal levers, it
aims to help improve quality of life for people with life-limiting illness, address
concerns of families and caregivers, and enhance access to quality palliative
care, through improved health care system performance.
 Many of the planned initiatives in the Action Plan will require ongoing
collaboration with partners for successful implementation. The Action Plan
complements financial support to provinces and territories under the Common
Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is Health Canada doing to improve access to palliative care in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Canadians approaching the end of their lives deserve to
receive care in the setting of their choice, including in their
homes or communities.
 That is why our Government has worked collaboratively with
partners, such as the provinces and territories, to develop a
Framework on Palliative Care and an Action Plan to
implement it.
 Complementing this work, the federal government is
providing $10.5 million in funding for four projects which will
increase awareness and planning for care, train more health
care providers, build on the best delivery models for home
palliative care, and support caregivers.
 In addition, our government is providing $6 billion in federal
funding directly to provinces and territories to support better
home and community care, including palliative care.
IF PRESSED…about what the federal government is doing to
support improvements to palliative care at home:
 The federal government identifies and funds promising
initiatives such as the Canadian Home Care Association’s
project to equip health care providers with the knowledge
and skills to make services more effective and efficient, and
to include family caregivers in decision-making.
 In addition, three federally-funded organizations are
collaborating to train paramedics to provide palliative care in
the home, thereby reducing hospital visits.
IF PRESSED…about why the federal government doesn’t compel
provinces and territories to provide more palliative care:
 In order to support improvements to palliative care in
Canada, the federal government, through Budget 2017,
committed $6 billion over 10 years for provinces and
territories to improve access to home and community care,
as well as palliative care.
 The Framework and Action Plan complement this
investment. They build on the strategies and policies already
in place in provinces and territories, and provide a useful
reference point to help identify opportunities, address gaps
and share promising practices.
BACKGROUND
NEED FOR IMPROVEMENT IN PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
A 2018 report by the Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) noted that:
 While 75% of Canadians would prefer to die at home, only about 15% have access
to palliative home care services.
 Recipients of home palliative care services are 2.5 times more likely to die at home,
and are less likely to receive care in an emergency department, or intensive care
unit.
ACTION PLAN ON PALLIATIVE CARE: BUILDING ON THE FRAMEWORK ON
PALLIATIVE CARE IN CANADA
While all governments, communities, and Canadians have a role to play in improving
end-of-life care, the Action Plan lays out the federal role. The goals of Health Canada’s
five-year plan to implement the Framework on Palliative Care include:
 raising awareness and understanding of advance care planning and palliative
care;
 supporting health care providers, families and communities;
 enhancing data and research;
 improving access to palliative care for underserved populations; and
 increasing access to culturally-sensitive palliative care for Indigenous
communities.
The Action Plan complements current financial support to provinces and territories
under the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health Priorities, and other
initiatives under way across the country.
Indigenous Peoples
Budget 2017 allocated Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) $184.6 million over five years
to improve home and palliative care for First Nations and Inuit communities. During the
development of the Framework and Action Plan, National Indigenous Organizations
(NIOs) indicated their interest in discussing Indigenous-led engagement processes
toward the development of a separate distinctions-based framework on palliative care.
Engagement with Indigenous groups will be a complex and multi-faceted process, and
conversations with NIOs and with ISC have begun. Between January and June 2020,
ISC is planning to engage with First Nations and Inuit peoples on the continuum of care,
focussing on health and social services, including palliative care. Plans for other
streams of engagement (e.g., Indigenous health providers, urban Indigenous
populations) are also underway.
OTHER FEDERAL INVESTMENTS IN PALLIATIVE CARE
The federal government has funded a number of palliative care initiatives. Health
Canada provided $6 million in funding to Pallium Canada to enhance their Learning
Essential Approaches to Palliative Care, including a program specifically for paramedics
providing palliative care in the home. Most recently, on May 10, 2019, the Minister of
Health announced funding of more than $4.5 million under the Health Care Policy
Contribution Program to support three projects that aim to help improve access to
palliative care at home and in the community. These initiatives will complement previous
federal funding ($6 million, 2017-2020) which endeavours to increase the capacity of
health care providers to deliver palliative care in communities across the country.
In terms of research funding, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), along
with the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) and
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC), is supporting the
Canadian Frailty Network through the Networks of Centers of Excellence Program, with
an investment of $47.8 million between 2012-13 and 2021-22. This network aims to
improve the care of seriously ill, frail elderly patients/families through the development,
evaluation, and implementation of health care technologies. Moreover, between 2013-
14 and 2017-18, CIHR invested more than $8.2 million in the area of palliative care in
cancer. In addition, CIHR is currently investing approximately $2.8 million over 4 years
in two research teams focused on Late Life Issues.
Implementing Pharmacare
SYNOPSIS
 Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, the Government of Canada announced concrete steps
as part of Budget 2019 toward the implementation of national pharmacare. These
include the creation of a Canada Drug Agency, taking steps toward the
development of a national formulary, and creating a national strategy for high-
cost drugs for rare diseases.
 In August 2019, the Government of Canada also announced the final
amendments to the Patented Medicines Regulations. The most significant
reforms to the regulations since their introduction in 1987, these amendments lay
the groundwork for national pharmacare by giving the Patented Medicine Prices
Review Board the tools to protect Canadians from excessive prices and making
patented medicines more affordable.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 When does the Government intend to implement a national pharmacare
program?
KEY MESSAGES
 No Canadian should have to choose between paying for
prescription drugs and putting food on the table.
 That is why Budget 2019 announced the next critical steps
towards the implementation of national pharmacare. These
include working with provinces, territories and stakeholders
on the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency, taking steps
toward the development of a national formulary, and creating
a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases.
 As we said during the campaign, we are committed to taking
the critical next steps to implement national universal
pharmacare so all Canadians have the drug coverage they
need at an affordable cost.
If pressed on pharmacare
 Building on the historic changes our Government has already
made to reduce drug prices, we will continue to work with
provincial and territorial governments and other key partners
to enable all Canadians to get and afford the medicines they
need.
BACKGROUND
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
 In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of an Advisory Council
on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins.
Over the summer and fall of 2018, the Council engaged with Canadians,
patients, provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and
stakeholders. The Council’s stakeholder engagement included regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and the opportunity to provide
written submissions. The Council released an interim report in March 2019 and
on June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament.
Budget 2019 Commitments
 Guided by the initial recommendations in the Council’s interim report, Budget
2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational
elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canada Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach
towards assessing effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary
to promote more consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for high-cost drugs for rare diseases to
help Canadians get better access to the effective treatments they need.
 Budget 2019 proposes to provide Health Canada with $35 million over four
years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office to support the creation
of a Canada Drug Agency and national formulary. It also proposes to invest up to
$1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
 The Government has recently modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations
to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools
and information to fulfill its mandate to protect Canadian consumers from
excessive prices of patented medicines. These reforms include three main
elements:
o Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that
consider the price of patented medicines relative to their value and impact
on the Canadian health care system;
o Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of
all adjustments (e.g. rebates, discounts), so that the PMPRB is informed
of actual market prices in Canada; and,
o Revising the PMPRB7 “basket” of comparator countries, to include
markets with comparable consumer protection priorities, economic wealth
and medicine markets as Canada. Specifically, the list of countries has
been updated to remove the U.S. and Switzerland, and to add Australia,
Belgium, Japan, the Netherlands, Norway, and Spain (now the
“PMPRB11”).
P/T Perspectives on Pharmacare
 In July 2019, Canadian Premiers stressed that any national pharmacare program
should not penalize jurisdictions for investments made to improve drug coverage
for its citizens. They also reaffirmed that participation in any national pharmacare
program must be voluntary and that discussions with the federal government on
pharmacare should be guided by the following four principles: (1) the need to
focus on removing cost barriers, (2) that program development should be based
on evidence about potential benefits, risks and costs, (3) that P/T governments
must retain responsibility for the design and delivery of public drug coverage, and
(4) that federal funding should be long-term, adequate, secure, flexible and take
into account present and future cost pressures.
Canada Health Act Priorities and Compliance
SYNOPSIS
 Canada Health Act compliance and health care delivery issues.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act to ensure Canadians are not
forced to pay out-of-pocket for medical services they need?
KEY MESSAGES
 One of my priorities is to defend and promote the Canada
Health Act – this is a responsibility I take very seriously.
 The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access
to medically necessary physician and hospital services
based on health needs, irrespective of their ability, and
willingness, to pay.
 Extra-billing and user charges contravene both the Canada
Health Act and provincial health care insurance laws, and
result in mandatory deductions to provincial and territorial
health transfers.
IF PRESSED ON AMENDING THE CANADA HEALTH ACT TO ACHIEVE
PROGRESS ON MANDATE LETTER PRIORITIES
 Our government has committed to ensuring Canadians
know what to expect from their public health care system
and to improving access to primary care.
 As we move forward on these commitments consideration
will be given to whether amendments to the Canada
Health Act are the best means to achieve this outcome.
IF PRESSED ON THE DIAGNOSTIC SERVICES POLICY
 This policy confirms the long-standing federal position that
medically necessary diagnostic services should be
insured, regardless of whether they are received in a
hospital or a private clinic.
 Provinces and territories have had nearly two years to
come into compliance with this policy and my officials
have been consulting with them on the implementation of
this policy.
IF PRESSED ABOUT THE CHARTER CHALLENGE IN BC
 The provisions of BC’s health insurance legislation which
are being challenged mirror the principles and intent of the
Canada Health Act. Our Government stands behind the
principles that are so fundamental to our health care
system. This is why we are supporting BC in this Charter
challenge.
IF PRESSED ON OUT-OF-COUNTRY COVERAGE IN ONTARIO
 When temporarily outside the country, the portability
criterion of the Canada Health Act requires all provinces
and territories to cover medically necessary hospital and
physician services at rates equivalent to those of the
home province or territory.
Health Canada has informed Ontario that its elimination of

coverage for out-of-country care is not consistent with the
portability criterion.
BACKGROUND
 Diagnostic Services Policy:
 The Diagnostic Services Policy, which comes into effect April 1, 2020, was
announced in August 2018 and is aimed at eliminating patient charges for
medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy
confirms the federal position that medically necessary diagnostic services will be
considered insured services, regardless of whether they are provided in a
hospital setting or a private clinic. Patient charges for these services will result in
mandatory dollar-for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer
payments of the implicated province or territory. PTs were given nearly two
year’s notice that this policy was coming into effect, to give them time to align
their health care systems with its requirements.
o Seven provinces allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services and
Saskatchewan actively encourages the practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
Amendments to BC legislation prohibiting private payment for medically
necessary diagnostic services, come into force on March 31, 2020.
 Charter Challenge in BC: Launched by BC private clinic owner, Dr. Brian Day,
this court case challenges the constitutionality of provisions of BC’s health
insurance legislation that prohibit user charges, extra-billing and the purchase of
private insurance for publicly insured health care services.
 The federal government is currently presenting evidence to the Court, the case is
expected to conclude on February 28, 2020, and a decision is expected later this
year.
 Out-of-Country Coverage in Ontario: On April 24, 2019, Ontario announced that
it would be discontinuing coverage for out-of-country emergency care, effective
October 1, 2019. That date was later deferred to December 31, 2019. The province
cited the cost of administering the program, the low reimbursement rate (which has
not changed in 20 years) and the fact that most residents purchase private travel
insurance as the rationale for this policy change. The province continues to provide
coverage for some services outside the country, such as dialysis and for procedures
not available in the province that are received on a pre-approved.
 Under the portability criterion of the Canada Health Act (CHA), when insured
residents receive insured health services while they are temporarily absent from
their home province and outside Canada, those services must be covered at the
home province rate. Section 11(1)(ii) of the Act requires that payment be made on
the basis of the amount that would have been paid by the province for similar
services rendered in the province.
Opioid Overdose Crisis
SYNOPSIS
 The opioid overdose crisis continues to be a serious and unrelenting public health
threat whose effects are being felt by people, families, and communities across
Canada. In recent years, Canada has experienced an unprecedented increase in
opioid-related overdoses. Between January 2016 and June 2019, there were 13,913
apparent opioid-related deaths across the country. Life expectancy in Canada has
stopped increasing for the first time in over four decades; this is largely attributable
to the opioid crisis.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How is the Government addressing the opioid overdose crisis in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES:
 The opioid overdose crisis continues to be one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s recent history.
 Tragically, between January 2016 and June 2019, 13,913 people across
the country lost their lives to apparent opioid-related overdoses. This
crisis has devastated families, and communities across Canada.
 Our Government has responded with significant action. We have
invested nearly $600M since 2017 to support improved access to
treatment and life-saving services; education and awareness among the
public and health care providers; research and surveillance to build the
evidence base for further action, and have strengthened law
enforcement efforts.
 We remain deeply concerned about the opioid overdose crisis in
Canada and are committed to a collaborative, compassionate,
comprehensive, and evidence-based response. We will continue to work
with stakeholders and partners, including provinces and territories, to
bring forward solutions to save lives and help reverse this national public
health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS AND ACTIONS TO DATE
 The investment of nearly $600 million committed by our Government in
response to the opioid crisis has focused efforts on prevention,
treatment, enforcement and harm reduction. This includes $150 million
provided directly to provinces and territories through the Emergency
Treatment Fund.
 As part of Budget 2019 and additional funding commitments, our
Government committed to investing $106.7M to scale up key life-saving
measures, help circumvent the toxic illegal drug supply, and identify and
address emerging drug threats.
 Our Government has also made legislative and regulatory changes to
encourage
 people to contact emergency services in the event of an overdose,
reduce regulatory barriers to harm reduction services, and make certain
medications to treat severe opioid use disorder more accessible.
 However, we know that more needs to be done. We are committed to
expand access to drug treatment and address opioid and
methamphetamine use disorder, including expanding community-based
services, scaling up effective programs, building more in-patient rehab
beds, and making drug treatment courts more available.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES
 Evidence clearly shows that supervised consumption services are
effective harm reduction measures that help reduce harms and save
lives.
 In December 2016, Canada had two operating supervised consumption
sites. Since December 2016, the number of operating supervised
consumption sites across the country has increased to 40.
 These sites reduce the risk of overdose death and transmission of
infections. In addition, they provide access to other health and social
services for people who use drugs, including opportunities to pursue
treatment.
 Since June 2017, these sites have received over 1 million visits, more
than 42,000 referrals to health and social services have been made, and
more than 9,000 reported overdoses have been reversed without a
single death at a site.
 Given the seriousness of the current opioid crisis, we will continue to
take appropriate measures to maintain and expand access to
supervised consumption services as part of a public health response to
the crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT FOR PROBLEMATIC SUBSTANCE USE
 The evidence is clear that problematic substance use is a health
condition that can be managed and treated.
 Our Government has taken significant steps to improve access to
substance use treatment services across the country, including
increasing access to medications that can be used to treat severe opioid
use disorder, making regulatory changes to reduce barriers to treatment,
increasing treatment in federal correctional facilities, and enhancing the
delivery of culturally appropriate substance use treatment services in
First Nations and Inuit communities.
 Notably, we have invested in an Emergency Treatment Fund, which
provided one-time, matched emergency funding totalling $308 million for
provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based treatment
services. Provinces and territories are required to report on progress to
date, and we are awaiting feedback on how PTs are delivering on their
commitments.
 We are committed to continuing to work closely with provinces and
territories as well as other partners and stakeholders to address
persistent gaps in substance use treatment services across the country.
IF PRESSED ON PHARMACEUTICAL ALTERNATIVES TO THE
ILLEGAL DRUG SUPPLY (“SAFER SUPPLY”)
 The evidence shows that the risk of harm from the use of illegal drugs,
particularly those containing opioids, continues to increase. Highly
potent synthetic opioids, such as fentanyl and carfentanil have
permeated the illegal drug supply, and are fuelling the unprecedented
rate of overdoses and deaths.
 Many stakeholders and public health experts have been calling for a
secure and predictable supply of pharmaceutical-grade drugs as an
alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply, also referred to as “safer
supply”.
 Our Government has taken steps towards this objective, including
reducing regulatory barriers, funding the development of guidelines for
injectable opioid agonist treatment, and supporting safer supply pilot
projects.
 Our Government will build on these efforts to expand access to a safer
supply of prescription-based opioids by supporting pilot projects and
consolidating and sharing best practices. Doing so can help provide
pathways to care and treatment.
IF PRESSED ON ADDRESSING CHRONIC PAIN
 Chronic pain is a serious health issue impacting one in five Canadians
as well as their families and caregivers.
 Our Government recognizes the challenges that Canadians living with
pain are facing accessing the health services they need to manage their
pain.
 Since 2013, we have invested close to $100 million in pain-related
research through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research. This
includes $12.5 million for the national Chronic Pain Research Network
from 2016 to 2021.
 In addition to these investments, we established the Canadian Pain
Task Force to help us better understand and address the needs of
people living with pain. We look forward to their June 2020 report which
will outline best practices and elements of an improved approach to
pain.
 We will continue to take steps to improve health outcomes for
Canadians living with pain.
IF PRESSED - DECRIMINALIZATION
 The Government of Canada is not considering the decriminalization or
legalization of illegal drugs. We are committed to addressing the opioid
crisis, and problematic substance use, from a public health perspective.
IF PRESSED ON ADDRESSING STIGMA
 Data suggests that the majority of opioid overdose deaths are occurring
when people are alone, often in private residences. A big contributor to
this social isolation is the stigma associated with problematic substance
use.
 Stigma prevents people who use drugs from receiving supportive health
and social services that can help improve wellbeing. This is why stigma
has been a big priority for this government.
 Through our national anti-stigma campaign, and outreach with health
care professionals and youth, we hope to create a society where people
who use drugs can access services without fear of discrimination and
prejudice.
BACKGROUND
On December 11, 2019, jointly with the provinces and territories, the Government of
Canada released updated data indicating that 13,913 Canadians lost their lives between
January 2016 and June 2019 to apparent opioid-related overdoses. Life expectancy in
Canada has stopped increasing, a first in over four decades; this is largely attributable
to the opioid crisis.
This most recent national data indicated that, from January to June 2019, 80% of
accidental apparent opioid-related deaths involved fentanyl or fentanyl analogues,
compared to 54% in 2016. The presence of fentanyl and its analogues in the illegal drug
supply is therefore the main driver of recent overdose deaths.
Fentanyl is now so pervasive in the illegal drug market that a large number of
Canadians who use drugs are at risk of a potentially fatal overdose. While Canadians of
all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with 86% of deaths occurring in
BC, Alberta, and Ontario, mostly among young-middle aged men.
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OPIOID CRISIS
The federal government has taken significant actions and made investments of nearly
$600M since 2017 to address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use
more generally. Action has been
taken across the four pillars of the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy:
Prevention, Harm Reduction, Treatment and Enforcement, underpinned by Data and
Evidence. Actions to date include:
 Improved access to treatment and harm reduction, including: $150M Emergency
Treatment Fund, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment, more than 40 new
supervised consumption sites, and wider availability of naloxone;
 Strengthened law enforcement, including: more than 42kg of fentanyl seized, 6
new detector dog service teams, and more than $37M investment in education
and enforcement efforts;
 Developed educational products and tools for the public and health care
providers, including: opioid awareness campaign video that has been viewed
more than 2.5M times, mandatory opioid warning stickers and patient handouts,
new opioid prescribing guidelines, and new restrictions on opioid marketing; and,
 Conducted research and surveillance to build the evidence base, include 15
research grants provided to CIHR, 8 public national reports on opioid-related
harms and deaths, 11 Public Health Officers provided to PTs for surveillance
efforts, and a new drug checking technology challenge.
Most recently, Budget 2019 and additional funding commitments announced
investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing to: scale up key lifesaving
measures ($39.0M), circumvent the toxic illegal drug supply ($35.0M + $1M ongoing),
and identify and address emerging drug threats, including methamphetamine ($32.7M).
CHRONIC PAIN AND THE OPIOID CRISIS
Chronic pain impacts one in five Canadians. People with chronic pain comprise a
significant proportion of people who use drugs (estimates range from 31% to 60%) and
those dying of illicit drug/opioid overdose deaths in Canada (19% to 44% dependent on
jurisdiction). Unmanaged pain complicates treatment of substance use disorders and
vice versa placing Canadians with these concurrent illnesses at risk of negative health
outcomes. There is growing consensus of the need to improve health system capacity
to address pain and the complexities of concurrent pain, mental health and substance
use disorders, particularly in jurisdictions hardest hit by the overdose crisis.
The Government of Canada has heard from stakeholders about the importance of
greater national coordination and leadership on pain, and the desire for more robust
Government actions to support and improve the quality of life of people who live with
chronic pain. To help address these concerns, Health Canada established the Canadian
Pain Task Force (3 year mandate) to provide advice regarding best practices and an
improved approach to prevent and manage pain in Canada. The Task Force’s first
report was published in July 2019. It highlighted weaknesses in our health system to
effectively manage pain. It also highlighted innovative clinical models, proven
educational approaches, novel support programs, and world-renowned research that
exist in pockets across the country. The Task Force’s next report is due in June 2020.
Drug Shortages
SYNOPSIS
Recent media articles have reported that drug shortages in Canada are worsening,
highlighting current shortages of cancer drugs, and concerns voiced by healthcare
professionals and patients unable to access supply.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
What action is Health Canada taking to address drug shortages?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our government’s top priority is the health and safety of
Canadians.
 I recognize the serious impact drug shortages can have on
patients and their families.
 Health Canada takes an active role in identifying drug
shortages and mitigating their impact on Canadians, working
closely with provinces, manufacturers, and others in the drug
supply chain.
 Health Canada will continue to use all available tools to
assess and manage critical national shortages when they
happen, and work with partners so that Canadians have
access to the drugs they need.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S ROLE IN THE SUPPLY OF DRUGS…
 Drug shortages are a global challenge and concern. My
department works with manufacturers and other governments
to identify shortages early and to try to prevent them.
 When critical national shortages occur, Health Canada
engages stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify
mitigation measures.
 These measures can include facilitating access to international
supply and expediting the review of new drug applications.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT U.S. IMPORTATION OF DRUGS FROM CANADA
WILL HAVE ON SUPPLIES CRITICAL DRUGS…
 Ensuring that Canadians have access to the medicines they
need is a top priority for the Government of Canada.
 Our Government is monitoring developments in the U.S. to
better understand the potential implications of the U.S.
proposal.
 Health Canada continuously monitors for drug shortages in
Canada
 and works in collaboration with the provinces, territories and
other stakeholders to mitigate any impact on Canadians.
 Our Government is committed to safeguarding access to drugs
for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT US CARAVANS CROSS-BORDER SHOPPING FOR
CHEAPER INSULIN IN CANADA…
 Insulin is not regulated as a prescription drug in Canada and
can be sold by pharmacies to customers without a prescription,
regardless of whether the person is from Canada or the U.S.
 Health Canada is not aware of any current insulin shortages
being reported as a result of cross-border purchasing of insulin.
The Department will continue to monitor the situation closely.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada recognizes that drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients
and health care professionals and is committed to doing its part to address them when
they occur.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility
requiring collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners, and the federal government. When national shortages occur, Health
Canada works with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply
chain to determine the details and status of the shortage, coordinate information-
sharing, and identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory measures and
exploring access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortage is national in scope, whether alternative supplies
are available and whether the product is considered medically necessary are all
considered in determining the potential impact and any necessary actions by Health
Canada
Health Canada also co-chairs the Multi-Stakeholder Steering Committee on Drug
Shortages, which mobilizes provinces and territories and key stakeholder groups to play
a lead role in advancing tools to address drug shortages.
Mandatory Drug Shortage Reporting
On March 14, 2017, federal regulations came into force requiring drug companies to
publicly report drug shortages and discontinuations, including the reasons for the
shortage or discontinuation, within a specified timeframe on a third-party reporting
website, drugshortagescanada.ca. Timely public communication of drug shortages and
discontinuations by drug companies is an essential part of preventing and managing
shortages. It helps the drug supply chain and the healthcare system respond
appropriately, in order to minimize the impact on patients.
The mandatory reporting website provides access to data, including information related
to a specific shortage or company, as well as the ability to download data for further
analysis. Having this information accessible to all parties significantly increases the
transparency related to the management of drug shortages in Canada.
Restricting Advertising to Children
SYNOPSIS
 Food advertising to children is recognized as a major contributor to childhood
obesity globally and in Canada. Health authorities and experts have called for
comprehensive restrictions to reduce children’s exposure to, and the power of, food
advertising. Since 2016, Health Canada has engaged extensively with stakeholders
on policy options. A draft guide detailing a comprehensive, evidence-based proposal
was distributed for stakeholder feedback in December 2018 and January 2019.
Policy development is ongoing.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What steps is the Government taking, including engaging with stakeholders, to
restrict advertising of certain food and beverages to children?
KEY MESSAGES
 Obesity is harming an increasing number of children. One in
three Canadian children is overweight or obese.
 Advertising of foods has been identified as a major
contributor to childhood obesity globally and in Canada.
 Over the past three years, we have made significant
progress on the development of an evidence-based
approach to restricting the advertising of food to children.
 The Government supported the Child Health Protection Act
that did not pass in the previous parliament. We will continue
to engage transparently with Canadians, stakeholders and
experts as we examine options for protecting the health of
our children.
BACKGROUND
Restricting Advertising to Children of Foods that Meet Certain Nutrient Criteria
(M2K)
Children are uniquely vulnerable to the power and influence of advertising. There has
been growing concern over the past ten years about the negative impact the advertising
of foods, particularly those with excessive sodium, sugar, and/or saturated fat, has on
children’s nutritional health.
Canada’s childhood obesity rate has nearly tripled since 1980. 1 in 3 Canadian children
are now overweight or obese; placing Canada’s childhood obesity rate above the
average for the EU, OECD and G20. Obesity increases the risk of developing chronic
diseases and some cancers, some of which are beginning to appear in children.
Health authorities and experts, such as the World Health Organization (WHO), have
identified the advertising of such foods to children as a major contributor to childhood
obesity. They have called on countries to take comprehensive action, including
regulating advertising to children, to halt and reverse the increase in childhood obesity
and appearance of risk factors for chronic diseases at younger ages.
Placing restrictions on the advertising of foods with excess nutrients of concern to
children was identified as a mandate priority in the 2015, 2017 and 2019. It is also a
deliverable of Health Canada’s Healthy Eating Strategy (HES), launched in 2016.
During the previous mandate, Health Canada advanced work on regulations under
Private Member’s Bill S-228 (the Child Health Protection Act), which proposed
legislative amendments to prohibit the advertising of food to children under 13 years of
age. As part of its policy development, Health Canada conducted research and
consulted with health and academic experts to establish criteria for identifying foods that
should be subject to advertising restrictions as well as the advertising media, tactics and
techniques to restrict. Health Canada has engaged extensively on this file since 2016,
including over 50 bilateral and group engagements, a public consultation in summer
2017, and stakeholder sessions in November and December 2018. A record of these
meetings and correspondences are available on Health Canada’s “meetings and
correspondence on healthy eating” webpage.
Bill S-228 did not receive Royal Assent prior to the dissolution of the previous
government.
Any proposal put forward to restrict child-directed advertising will be based on scientific
evidence, expert advice and transparent engagement with Canadians, experts, and
stakeholders.
Increases in Youth Vaping
SYNOPSIS
 The Government of Canada is very concerned about the rapid rise in youth
vaping. Results of the 2018-19 Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs
Survey show that e-cigarette prevalence rates have doubled among students in
2018-19 since the last survey in 2016-17.
 Given these results, the Government is taking further action, including putting in
place additional controls through regulations, investing in public education and
intensifying enforcement of the legislation.
 On December 19, 2019, the Minister announced proposed new regulations to
prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be
seen or heard by youth. Proposed regulations were published in the Canada
Gazette, Part I on December 21, 2019 for a public comment period of 30 days.
The department is reviewing the feedback received from Canadians with a view
to finalizing the regulations as soon as possible.
 Building on feedback from consultations that Health Canada conducted in 2019,
the Department is developing additional regulations to further reduce the appeal
of these products to young Canadians, including proposals restricting nicotine
concentration and flavours. The What We Heard Report from the consultation on
measures to reduce youth access and the appeal of vaping products is available
on Canada.ca.
 Health Canada has invested more than $8.8 million in its national public
education campaign, this year for a total of $12 million since December 2018.
The “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” campaign is designed to inform
youth and their parents about the risks and harms of vaping.
 Health Canada has also intensified enforcement of the strong set of controls
already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act. Between July
and December 2019, Health Canada inspectors visited 3,000 specialty vape
shops and convenience stores across the country, seizing more than 80,000
units of non-compliant vaping products.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to address the increased use and appeal of
vaping products to youth?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is concerned by the rapid rise in youth
vaping, and is taking action to address it.
 That is why, on December 19, 2019, I announced new
proposed regulations to prohibit the promotion and
advertising of vaping products anywhere they can be seen or
heard by youth. This means that young Canadians would no
longer see advertising for
 vaping products in public spaces, in convenience stores or
online.
 Health Canada is also looking at additional measures to
reduce youth access and the appeal of vaping products.
These include measures regarding reducing nicotine
concentration limits and flavour restrictions, using the best
available evidence.
 We have increased our investment in advertising and the
national public education campaign that is designed
specifically to inform youth and their parents about the risks
and harms of vaping.
 My department has also intensified enforcement of the
strong set of controls that Parliament has established under
the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act. Over the past six
months, Health Canada has inspected 3,000 vaping and
convenience stores and seized over 80,000 units of non-
compliant product from the market.
 We are also engaging our provincial, territorial and non-
governmental partners as we know that by working together
we can make a greater impact and can better protect youth.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER RESTRICTIONS ON ADVERTISING…
 Our Government is pursuing a comprehensive, evidence-
based regulatory agenda to address youth access and the
appeal of vaping products to youth.
 On December 19, 2019, I announced new proposed
regulations to strengthen the legislative framework that is
already in place.
 The proposed Vaping Products Promotions Regulations
would prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping
products anywhere they can be seen or heard by youth. This
means that young Canadians would no longer see
advertising for vaping products in public spaces, in
convenience stores or online.
 These consultations closed on January 20, 2020 and Health
Canada is reviewing the feedback received from Canadians
now with a view to finalizing these regulations as soon as
possible.
 Health Canada is also looking at additional measures to
reduce youth access and the appeal of vaping products.
These include measures regarding reducing nicotine
concentration limits and flavour restrictions, using the best
available evidence.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
 Health Canada has invested more than $12 million in a
national public education campaign since December 2018,
including $8.8 million in this year alone.
 The Consider the Consequences youth vaping prevention
campaign is designed to inform youth and parents of the
risks and harms associated with vaping.
 A recent evaluation of advertising campaign found that 26%
of teens who saw the ads, report that they decided not to
vape as result of the ads.
 The campaign includes digital advertising on social media
and advertising in malls, cinemas and on transit. It also
includes an interactive learning tour in schools and
community venues, and web-based and print resources for
youth, parents and educators.
 The interactive learning tour is in schools across Canada as
we speak. Vaping awareness kits have been provided to
middle and high schools across Canada and to health care
professionals.
 These materials are also available on Health Canada’s
website.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
 The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant
restrictions in place to limit youth access to vaping products
and vaping product promotions. For example, it is prohibited
to furnish a vaping product to anyone under 18 in Canada,
and lifestyle advertising of vaping products is strictly
prohibited under the Act.
 Health Canada has intensified its compliance and
enforcement activities to verify industry compliance with the
current prohibitions on the sale and promotion of vaping
products.
 Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies to
remove:
o lifestyle advertising or advertisements from television
and in-store displays; and,
o online content from social media influencers that
encouraged youth vaping.
 Between July and December 2019, Health Canada
inspected 3,000 retailers of vaping products and seized
more than 80,000 units of non-compliant vaping products.
BACKGROUND
There is a rapidly growing consumer market for vaping products in Canada. Smoking is
the leading preventable cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-
related disease is caused by the toxic and carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping
products expose users to far fewer toxic chemicals and substances than conventional
cigarettes and are marketed, sold and used as less harmful alternatives to tobacco
products.
Vaping does have risks and the potential long-term health effects of vaping remain
unknown. Non-smokers and young people should not vape. Vaping nicotine can lead to
addiction and physical dependence and youth are especially susceptible to the negative
effects of nicotine. In addition, for those who do not smoke, vaping can also cause lung
damage and can increase exposure to harmful chemicals. Health Canada
acknowledges that vaping is a less harmful option than smoking for Canadians who
currently use combustible tobacco products. Switching completely to vaping will reduce
their exposure to many toxic cemicals found in tobacco smoke.
The most recent Canadian Student Tobacco, Alcohol and Drugs Survey (CSTADS)
results from 2018-2019, released in December 2019, indicate e-cigarette prevalence
rates have doubled among students since the last survey with 20% of students reporting
having used an e-cigarette
in the past 30 days, an increase from 10% in 2016-2017. These students are also
reporting using vaping products more frequently. Health Canada has not seen a
corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to be at all-time
lows. Results showed the prevalence of current daily smoking decreased among
students in Grades 7 to 12 to 0.9% in 2018-2019, down from 1.3% in 2016-2017.
The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) became law on May 23, 2018 and
regulates the manufacture, sale, labelling and promotion of both tobacco and vaping
products. The TVPA includes significant prohibitions and restrictions intended to prevent
access to, and uptake of, tobacco and vaping products by youth, including:
• prohibiting the furnishing (including online) to persons under 18;
• prohibiting the sale and promotion of products with design features that make the
product appealing to youth (e.g., a vaping device that is shaped like a toy);
• prohibiting the sale and promotion of products using flavour names appealing to
youth (e.g., flavour names such as cotton candy or crème brûlée); and
• restricting the promotion of tobacco and vaping products.
Autism
SYNOPSIS
Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD) is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by
communication difficulties as well as social and behavioural challenges. The
Government of Canada will work collaboratively with provinces, territories, families and
stakeholders toward the creation of a national autism strategy.
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to helping all
Canadians with disabilities, including those with autism
spectrum disorder, as well as those who care for them and
provide much needed support.
 Our Government is working collaboratively with the
provinces, territories, families, those with ASD, and
stakeholder organizations, toward the creation of a national
autism strategy.
 We are investing more than $54 million to help families with
autism have access to credible information, training to seek
employment, and tax credits to help with some of the costs
related to caring for loved ones with disabilities.
 We have also invested close to $48 million in research in the
past five years, to increase the understanding of ASD as well
as the capacity to treat it effectively.
 I look forward to working collaboratively with provinces,
territories, families and stakeholders toward the creation of a
national autism strategy.
BACKGROUND
Government of Canada Initiatives
Budget 2018 announced $20 million over five years (2018-2023) in funding to support
two new initiatives: 1) The Autism-Intellectual-Developmental Disabilities National
Resource and Exchange (AIDE) Network ($10.9 million/5 years) will be operational in
March 2020 providing access to online resources, an inventory of services, supports,
employment opportunities and local programming for families across the country. In
addition, six AIDE Network locations across Canada will provide a point of access for
Canadians to obtain resources and supports on ASD.
2) The ASD Strategic Fund is providing $9.1 million over 5 years for community-based
projects that pursue innovative program models, help reduce stigma, and integrate
health, social and educational components to better serve the complex needs of
families. One example is the Caregiver Skills Training (CST) project from McGill
University that will provide evidence-based skills training for caregivers of children with
ASD offering strategies and solutions that can address practical needs and challenges.
Research and Surveillance
The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research,
invested close to $48 million in research related to ASD between 2014-15 and 2018-19.
In the past two years, there has been an investment of close to $23 million in research
to increase the understanding
of ASD as well as the capacity to treat it effectively. For example, a CIHR-funded
research team led by Dr. Lonnie Zwaigenbaum from the University of Alberta developed
a tool for detecting ASD at a very early age, which has enabled families to access
critical resources and services early, positively impacting their children’s development.
CIHR-funded researchers are also developing innovative technologies for children with
ASD and their families. For instance, an interdisciplinary team led by Dr. Francois
Bolduc from the University of Alberta is creating an artificial intelligence-based
interactive ‘chatbot’ that will allow persons with ASD (and other neurodevelopmental
disorders), their families, health professionals and teachers to better navigate the
healthcare system by identifying personalized interventions and resources.
Through Canada’s Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research, CIHR and its partners are
investing in CHILD-BRIGHT, an innovative pan-Canadian network that aims to improve
life outcomes for children with brain-based developmental disabilities and their families.
The network’s many projects include:
 “Ready 2 Work”, an online vocational/employment readiness platform developed
alongside self-advocates with autism spectrum disorder (ASD), their families, and
professionals who operate vocational programs for young people with ASD.
 “MEGA TEAM”, which is evaluating whether a take-home video game can
improve executive functioning in children with ASD.
On March 29, 2018, PHAC published the first National Autism Spectrum Disorder
Surveillance System report. This federal, provincial and territorial partnership addresses
a critical knowledge gap, which will support governments, professionals, health care
providers, service providers, educators, communities and stakeholders in meeting the
needs of those with ASD. The report provides, for the first time, national data on the
number (i.e., prevalence) of children and youth ages 5-17 years living with ASD, based
on data collected in 2015 from six provinces and one territory. Key findings highlight that
1 in 66 children and youth have been diagnosed with ASD in Canada.
PHAC has provided $102,189 in the form of a contribution agreement to the Canadian
Paediatric Society, to develop ASD Guidelines for early detection and screening,
diagnosis as well as post-diagnosis follow-up. The guidelines were released publicly
and to health care professionals in October 2019.
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC)
The December 2019 Mandate Letter included a commitment toward the creation of a
national autism strategy by the Minister of Health with support from the Minister of
Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion.
Employment Support (through the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities
Program) To improve employment outcomes for persons with intellectual disabilities and
ASD, Budget 2019 proposes to provide $12 million over three years, starting in 2019–
20, to the Canadian Association for Community Living, in partnership with the Canadian
Autism Spectrum Disorders Alliance for the Ready, Willing and Able (RWA) program.
RWA is a national employment program for persons with intellectual disabilities and
ASD.
ESDC Accessible Canada Act (An Act to Ensure a Barrier-Free Canada)
Under the leadership of the Minister of Accessibility, the Government of Canada passed
legislation that will transform how the Government of Canada addresses accessibility.
The goal of this legislation is to increase the inclusion and participation of all people in
Canada, including people with disabilities, and promote equality of opportunity by
increasing accessibility and proactively identifying, removing and preventing barriers in
areas of federal jurisdiction. The Act received Royal Assent on June 21, 2019.
The Government of Canada supports initiatives that are intended to improve the
participation and inclusion of persons with disabilities in all aspects of Canadian society
through the Disability component of the Social Development Partnerships Program
(SDPP-D). The SDPP-D is a grant and contribution program that provides funding to
not-for-profit organizations to address the social issues and barriers facing persons with
disabilities. Since 1998, Autism Society Canada has received operating funding through
SDPP-D. In April 2019, the Minister of Public Services and Procurement and
Accessibility announced operating funding of $18 million over three years (starting in
2019-20) for 28 national not-for-profit disability organizations through the SDPP-D.
Under this announcement, Autism Society Canada will receive operating funding of
$350,000 over three years. Other organizations supporting individuals with ASD, such
as Autism Speaks Canada ($500,000) and the Canadian Autism Spectrum Disorders
Alliance ($328,768) will also receive core funding under the program.
National Housing Strategy (NHS)
Under the NHS, the $13.2 billion National Housing Co-Investment Fund provides low-
cost loans and contributions for new construction and retrofit of affordable housing. The
Co-Investment Fund is targeted to create at least 2,400 new affordable housing units for
persons with developmental disabilities. Low-income people living with disabilities will
also benefit from funding initiatives for community housing, federal housing investments
in provincial and territorial programs, and the upcoming Canada Housing Benefit.
Provincial Funding for ASD
All provinces provide ASD-specific funding for a range of services and supports with
current investments focused on interventions, services and education supports for pre-
school and school-aged children. While the three territories do not have any ASD-
specific funding, they do have supports for broader disability services, which includes
ASD.
Pediatric Cancer Research
SYNOPSIS
 Cancer is one of the leading causes of disease-related deaths in Canadian
children over the age of one month. While childhood cancer accounts for less
than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it is estimated that 1000 children
and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019.
 The Minister of Health’s mandate letter includes a commitment to “make new
investments in pediatric cancer research and develop a long-term plan to ensure
sustainable funding”.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Could you please provide this committee with an update on the Government’s
support for pediatric cancer research?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes the significant toll childhood
cancers take when families are faced with this illness.
 That is why, over the past five years, our Government has
invested more than $32 million in pediatric cancer research.
 Although significant progress has been made in treating
many childhood cancers, there is still much to be done; that
is why my
 mandate letter includes a commitment to make new
investments in pediatric cancer research and develop a long-
term plan to ensure sustainable funding.
 Our Government remains committed to supporting pediatric
cancer research and will continue to work closely with all of
our partners, to improve cancer treatments and outcomes for
our youth.
IF PRESSED…
 It is important to note that knowledge acquired in one area of
cancer research increases the total knowledge brought to
bear in all areas of cancer research. In this regard, our
Government, through CIHR, has invested over $859 million
in cancer research over the past five years.
BACKGROUND
Pediatric Cancer in Canada
Cancer is one of leading causes of disease-related deaths in Canadian children over
the age of one month.1 While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new
cancer cases in Canada, it was estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14
years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019.2 In general, it is recognized that
cancers in children act differently and are found in different organs than in adults while
tumors in children tend to grow and spread throughout the body more quickly.3
The types of cancer that account for the majority of new cases of pediatric cancer in
Canada include leukemia, brain and central nervous system cancer and lymphomas.
Additionally, the three leading types of cancer that account for the majority of cancer
related deaths for children and youth (0-14 years) are cancers of the brain and central
nervous system (34%), leukemia (26%) and neuroblastoma and other peripheral
nervous cell tumors (11%).4 Although survival rates for many of the most commonly
diagnosed cancers in children and youth continue to improve, it is also important to note
that approximately 14.6% of children experience a relapse within five years of
diagnosis.5
In addition, approximately two-thirds of childhood cancer survivors experience adverse
effects related to cancer treatments later in life, including: infertility; damage to major
organs such as the heart, lungs, kidneys and central nervous system; cognitive
impairments; psychosocial difficulties; as well as the development of subsequent
cancers due to treatment.6 For instance, it has been estimated that: “60% of childhood
cancer survivors suffer from at least one chronic condition and almost 30% have severe
or life-threatening conditions”.7
1 Canadian Cancer Society.
2 Canadian Cancer Society. Canadian Cancer Statistics 2019.
3 Canadian Cancer Society. Childhood Cancer Statistics.
4 Canadian Cancer Society. Childhood Cancer Statistics.
5 Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and C17. Cancer in Young People in Canada: A Report from the
Enhanced Childhood Cancer Surveillance System. 2017.
6 PHAC Cancer in Young People in Canada Program. Cancer in Children in Canada (0-14).
7 PHAC and C17. Cancer in Young People in Canada: A Report from the Enhanced Childhood Cancer Surveillance
System. 2017.
CIHR Investments in Pediatric Cancer Research
Between 2014-15 and 2018-19, CIHR has invested more than $32 million in research
related to pediatric cancer, including over $10 million in 2018-19 alone. In addition to
investments made in pediatric cancer research, it is important to note that CIHR invests
in numerous areas of cancer research where findings benefit children with cancer,
among others. In this regard, CIHR invested over $859 million in overall cancer
research over the past five years.
In April 2019, CIHR launched a Cancer Survivorship Team Grants funding opportunity
in partnership with the Canadian Cancer Society. It represents a joint commitment of
$10M for at least 4 research teams that will address recently identified gaps in cancer
survivorship research (including pediatric, adolescent and/or young adult survivorship)
such as adverse late and long-term effects associated with cancer treatments. To note,
the results of this competition are forthcoming.
In addition, it is important to note that CIHR is well connected to the Canadian cancer
research community. For instance, CIHR played a key role in the creation of the
Canadian Partnership
Against Cancer (CPAC) and is still very much engaged in the Partnership’s research
work. Further, CIHR played a pivotal role in building the Canadian Cancer Research
Alliance (CCRA), a coordinating voice for cancer research in Canada, which is
supported by CPAC. The Scientific Director of CIHR-ICR, Dr. Stephen Robbins, served
as CCRA Chair from 2017 to 2018. Furthermore, CIHR-ICR continues to work with
numerous cancer stakeholders, including the Canadian Cancer Society, Stand Up to
Cancer, Genome Canada, Canadian Indigenous Research Network Against Cancer and
others to support cancer research in Canada.
Pediatric Cancer Stakeholder Engagement
In April 2018, Advocacy for Canadian Childhood Oncology Research Network (Ac2orn)
and Helena’s hope sent the former Minister of Health a Pediatric Cancer proposal
endorsed by more than 30 cancer organizations. The proposal raised media and MP’s
attention and requested that the Government:
 Improve access to early phase clinical trials for pediatric cancer patients; and
 Establish a venue for discussions between pediatric cancer advocacy groups and
Health Canada to address issues facing these patients.
Also in April 2018, CIHR’s Executive Vice-President supported the Minister of Health in
a meeting with Ac2orn, Helena’s Hope, and C17 (Children’s Cancer and Blood
Disorders). Following this meeting and on behalf of the Health Portfolio, CIHR’s Institute
of Cancer Research (CIHR-ICR) organized a roundtable with Ac2orn, Helena’s Hope,
C17 and other stakeholders on December 12, 2018 to discuss roadblocks and
opportunities to improve access to clinical trials for children, adolescents and young
adults (CAYA) with cancer (with Health Canada contributing to the planning and
meeting). More recently, on November 4, 2019 CIHR-ICR participated in a second
pediatric cancer roundtable held at Health Canada with the same set of stakeholders.
Study National Dental Care
SYNOPSIS
 The Speech from the Throne and the mandate letter for the Minister of Health
committed the Government to work with Parliament to study the possibility of
national dental care
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to address the unmet dental care
needs of Canadians?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government of Canada is committed to working
collaboratively with the provinces and territories to
strengthen health care.
 Canadians have coverage for dental care through employee
health benefit plans and through federal, provincial, and
territorial dental programs.
 But we know there remain unmet needs for dental care in
Canada. That is why we welcome the Standing Committee
on Health’s decision to study the issue of dental care in
Canada.
 My mandate letter includes a commitment to support
Parliament in this work, which I am pleased to do, so that we
can better understand what the Government’s role may be in
helping to improve access to dental care in Canada.
 Dental care is only one aspect of improving the health care
of Canadians. Our Government is also committed to
improving access to primary care, mental health services,
home and palliative care, and implementing national
universal pharmacare for Canadians.
BACKGROUND
 In the December 5 Speech from the Throne and in the Minister of Health’s
mandate letter, the Government committed to exploring national dental care.
Dental Care in Canada
 According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.5 billion was
spent on dental services in 2017: 54% was covered through private insurance
($8.4 billion); 40% was paid out-of-pocket ($6.2 billion); and 6% was publicly
funded ($933 million).
 The majority of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans, which cover about two-thirds of Canadians.
 Good data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in
Canada. A group of non-government health organizations, led by the Canadian
Association of Public Health Dentistry, is coordinating an email campaign seeking
input from health professionals on the Government’s commitment to support
Parliamentary study of national dental care. The campaign suggests that 1 in 5
people (6 million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost,
and that only Canadians with financial resources or dental insurance can
experience good oral health.
 The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental
coverage for services not available under other federal, provincial, or territorial
programs. The federal government also provides dental services to Canadian
Armed Forces personnel and inmates in federal penitentiaries, and provides
dental coverage for some veterans and refugee claimants.
 The federal government further supports Canadians with private health insurance
by not including the value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of
employees. In addition, the income tax system provides assistance through the
Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical expenses
supplement available for working individuals with low incomes and high medical
expenses.
 PTs provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care for all
residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited
to select services for groups such as low-income groups, people with disabilities,
children and seniors.
 The Canada Health Transfer is providing $40.4 billion to the provinces and
territories in 2019-20. PTs can use these federal funds to support their dental
programs, along with their other health services.
New Democratic Party’s dental care proposal
 During the election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified
inequality and wasted spending related to dental care access as a priority,
arguing that care avoidance due to cost results in preventable oral health
emergency room spending. The NDP committed to address this issue through a
national, income-based “Denticare” plan that would be available in 2020. Most
dental care would be free for households earning under
 $70,000 annually, with a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between
$70,000 and $90,000. No mention is made of households earning above $90,000
annually.
 The NDP proposed that dental care would be added to the Canada Health Act,
and that the program would be administered by the federal government, or by
PTs upon agreement (in combination with existing PT dental programs).
Denticare coverage would be similar to the federal government’s Non-Insured
Health Benefits (NIHB) program for First Nations and Inuit persons. The NDP
considers its proposal “a down payment” on the goal of having all dental care
included in Canada's publicly funded health care system.
 The Parliamentary Budget Officer (PBO) costed the plan and said Denticare
would cost nearly $1.9 billion for 2020-2021, and drop to $824 million in 2021-
2022, with costs remaining relatively stable at $856 million by 2028-2029.
SGBA/Race and Diversity Research
SYNOPSIS
 The Government has committed to investing in science and innovation.
QUESTION
 What is the Government doing to support health research and researchers in
Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our government believes that investing in research and
innovation is critical to ensuring Canadians are healthier and
our economy stronger to move the country forward.
 That is why Budget 2018 proposed a historical investment of
nearly $4 billion over five years to support the next generation
of Canadian research and researchers, including $354.7
million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing, for
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to
increase its support for fundamental research.
 Budget 2019 further committed to ensuring that Canada’s
next generation of researchers are more diverse, better
supported, and have access to higher education to pursue
some of the worlds’ biggest health challenges.
 With these major investments, our Government demonstrates
its commitment to support a vibrant, equitable and diverse
research community that will help us address the major health
challenges of tomorrow.
 I am committed to fulfill my mandate commitments to work
closely with CIHR to integrate sex- and gender-based
analyses into health research, and create academic research
grants for studies on race, diversity and gender, for the
benefit of all Canadians.
 I am pleased to see that CIHR has engaged in a national
dialogue on future directions, key priorities, and focus areas
with key stakeholders across Canada’s health research
ecosystem, and look forward to the launch of its strategic plan
in June 2020.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2018
In Budget 2018, the Government of Canada called for changes to streamline and
modernize programs in support of research. It also proposed an historic investment of
nearly $4 billion in Canada’s scientists and researchers.
The government’s major investment includes the creation of a New Frontiers in
Research Fund, which will support international, interdisciplinary, fast-breaking and
higher-risk research. The Fund, valued at $275 million over five years and $65 million
per year thereafter, is open to researchers and networks of researchers across all
disciplines.
Budget 2019
Budget 2019 proposed an investment of $37.4M over 5 years and $8.6M per year
ongoing to Canada’s three research funding agencies (Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC), the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada (SSHRC)) to provide options for expanding the maximum duration of paid
parental leave supplements offered to students and postdoctoral fellows supported
directly and indirectly by CIHR, NSERC and SSHRC in order to help students who are
parents to integrate their research training with their family responsibilities at the time of
the birth or adoption of a child.
Budget 2018 committed to determine how to better support research trainees through
scholarships and fellowships. In response, Budget 2019 proposed an investment of
$114 million over five years, with $26.5 million per year ongoing, to NSERC, SSHRC,
and CIHR to create 500 more master’s level scholarship awards annually and 167 more
three-year doctoral scholarship awards annually through the Canada Graduate
Scholarship program. CIHR’s portion of this investment represents $32M over 5 years,
starting in 2019-20.
Strategic Planning Consultations
CIHR is developing a new strategic plan to guide its operations and investments from
2020–2025. As part of this process, CIHR has engaged in a national dialogue on future
directions, key priorities, and focus areas for CIHR since May 2019. This included a
series of engagement and consultation opportunities with key stakeholders across
Canada’s health research ecosystem. The Strategic Plan will be launched in June 2020,
to celebrate CIHR’s 20th anniversary.
National Institute for Women’s Health Research
SYNOPSIS
 The Minister of Health’s mandate letter includes a commitment to create a
National Institute for Women’s Health Research.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How will the Minister deliver on this commitment?
KEY MESSAGES
 Mr. Chair, women face unique challenges that need to be
specifically researched in order to improve their health
outcome.
 This includes cervical and ovarian cancer, gender-based
violence and health during pregnancy to name a few.
 In addition to these specific conditions, the creation of a
National Institute for Women’s Health Research will address
long-standing gaps in research that have undermined
biological differences between men and women.
 This dedicated investment will also allow to create new long-
term capacity in Canada to ensure future research will be
done on these issues.
 I am actively working with my portfolio and stakeholders to
define the best approach to create this new national institute.
 In addition to this commitment, I would like to highlight that
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research is working to
better integrate Sex and Gender Based Analysis in Health
Research.
BACKGROUND
The Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter includes the following commitment:
“Create a National Institute for Women’s Health Research, with the support of the
Minister for Women and Gender Equality and Rural Economic Development, that will
bring together experts in women’s health from across the country to tackle persistent
gaps in research and care using an intersectional approach.”
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
CIHR possesses significant assets, including its dedicated Institute of Gender and
Health and its expert Institute Advisory Board, to support priority setting and capacity
building in the area of women’s and girls’ health research.
Research on women’s health funded through the Institute for Women’s Health would
build on the investments and expertise that are already being supported by CIHR and
its IGH. This includes research in areas such as cervical cancer, gender-based
violence, ovarian cancer, women’s heart health, and women’s brain health. It also
includes initiatives to build capacity among women’s health researchers [e.g. the
Indigenous Gender and Wellness Initiative, the Women’s Health Clinical Mentorship
Grant, the Girls and Women’s Health Research Training Platform (forthcoming)], and to
foster the integration of sex and gender within the broader health research ecosystem
and deepen our understanding of how biological and social influences interact to affect
health and disease (e.g. the Sex- and Gender-Based Analysis Policy-Research
Partnerships, Sex and Gender Science Chairs).
Consideration
During FINA’s pre-Budget consultations 2020, the B.C. Women’s Health Foundation
submitted a brief that recommends “That the government provide funding in the amount
of $50 million in an initial capital investment, ongoing annual operating and research
funding of $25-40 million for the National Centre for Innovation + Excellence in
Women’s Health Research.”
Access to Sexual and Reproductive Health
SYNOPSIS
The Minister of Health’s Mandate Letter committed to the protection of “women’s sexual
and reproductive health rights” by ensuring “that Canadians have access to the full suite
of reproductive services and medications across the country.”
The right of all persons to make sexual and reproductive health (SRHR) choices is
enshrined in Canadian Law. The Health Portfolio’s works to advance SHRH in its
licencing of medical devices and drug therapies, interactions with PT governments
under the aegis of the Canada Health Act, and data collection.
This commitment has come under attack most recently in New Brunswick, where
Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to 3 approved hospitals (two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This
means that women who receive these services at Clinic 554 in Fredericton are required
to pay out of pocket. The NB Health Ministry has repeatedly stated publicly that the
government has no intention of changing its position on the issue.
POTENTIAL QUESTIONS
 Will the Minister enforce the Canada Health Act and penalise New Brunswick for
not covering abortion services in the private clinic in Fredericton?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government believes that Canadians should have
access to the full range of reproductive health services,
including abortion services.
 A woman should not face charges when seeking these
insured services at Clinic 554.
 The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges
for an insured service, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be
taken.
 My goal is to ensure access to insured health services, and if
 Health Canada integrates sex and gender-based
considerations in
New Brunswick works with Health Canada and eliminates
patient charges, it may be eligible for the reimbursement of
any deduction.
IF PRESSED ON MANDATE COMMITMENT TO IMPROVE ACCESS TO SURGICAL
ABORTION SERVICES:
 Our Government believes that Canadians should have
access to the full range of reproductive health services,
including abortion services.
 A woman should not face charges when seeking these
insured services.
 The Canada Health Act is clear: where there is evidence of
patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal health
transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
 If provinces that have received deductions eliminate patient
charges, they may be eligible for the reimbursement of any
deduction.
 My overall goal is to ensure that Canadians have access to
these medically necessary services.
IF PRESSED ON SGBA CONSIDERATIONS IN CLINICAL TRIALS AND DRUG
SUBMISSIONS…
 the approval of clinical trials and pharmaceutical drug
submissions. Our guidelines are internationally aligned, and
include the need to have a representative number of women
in drug clinical trials.
 The Department launched the Scientific Advisory Committee
on Health Products for Women in spring 2019 to hear from
patient advocates, physicians and researchers focused on
 Health Canada has provided guidance on the
reimbursement of expenses for donors of reproductive
tissues and surrogates under the
women’s health. The experts on this committee have
expertise in women’s health research, clinical trials, ethics,
and sex and gender-based analysis.
IF PRESSED ON THE PROHIBITIONS THAT PREVENT PAYMENT FOR DONOR
SPERM/OVA AND SURROGACY…
 While payment for donor sperm and eggs and payment to
surrogates is prohibited, Health Canada recognizes that the
reimbursement of expenses is an important part of
facilitating the responsible use of assisted human
reproduction.
 Assisted Human Reproduction Act. This guidance can be
found on Health Canada’s website.
 By clarifying the issue of reimbursement, Canadians may be
more encouraged to donate reproductive tissues.
 A regulatory pathway for directed donation was also
introduced that has made it easier for those who know their
donor to proceed with building their families even in the
event that their donor does not meet the screening and
testing criteria.
BACKGROUND
The right of all persons to make sexual and reproductive health choices is enshrined in
Canadian Law. The utilization of this right among marginalized communities is a
multifaceted problem that reflects broader issues within the healthcare system. The
Federal Government has taken steps to reduce marginalization through a suite of
initiatives to improve the social determinants of health, including increased transfers to
its Provincial and Territorial counterparts as well as new funding to improve the well-
being of Indigenous peoples and for poverty reduction.
Through the HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund, more targeted funding is
provided for awareness and education to strengthen community capacity to address
sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections (STBBIs) through a sexual health lens.
Community-based programs that address STBBIs and promote sexual and reproductive
health among First Nations and Inuit women are also available.
In addition, the Government has sought to increase the options available for women
seeking to end their pregnancies. For instance, restrictions governing the use of
Mifegymiso, a drug used to terminate pregnancy, were recently eased.
In an effort to improve reproductive choice, particularly for the LGBTQ2 community, the
Government has committed to developing regulations under the Assisted Human
Reproduction Act that will remove some of the barriers currently in place for assisted
human reproduction.
On data collection for contraceptive use, the Government collaborated with provinces
and territories to monitor the rate of occurrence of new STBBIs in Canada. The
Government supported the development of sexual health indicators by Canadian
experts. This contributed to a better understanding of the sexual health of Canadians
with the intent of informing health surveys, such as the Canadian Community Health
Survey.
The Federal Government does not typically provide direct funding to the PTs for specific
drugs, including contraceptives. The PTs are responsible for the delivery of health care
for their residents, such as determining which drugs are reimbursed and under what
conditions.
New Brunswick Case
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals
currently offer the service – two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that
women who receive these services at the private clinic in Fredericton are required to
pay out of pocket. In some cases, the clinic covers the cost on a pro bono basis. New
Brunswick is the last province with a private abortion clinic that refuses to provide
coverage for services delivered there. Patient charges for abortion services received in
private clinics are considered extra-billing and user charges under the Canada Health
Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the
Act. The lack of coverage for abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed
bilaterally with NB since 1995, without resolution.
The Morgentaler Clinic in Fredericton closed in July 2014. Clinic officials indicated New
Brunswick regulations preventing coverage of abortion services provided in private
clinics made the clinic financially unviable. A crowd-sourcing effort subsequently raised
sufficient funds and in January 2015, it reopened as Clinic 554. The clinic’s web-site
indicates abortion services cost between $700 and $850, depending on the stage of
pregnancy. It also indicates financial assistance may be available from the National
Abortion Federation and provides contact information. The clinic also offers primary
health care services and services to the LGBT community, all of which are covered
under the provincial health insurance plan, according to the clinic director. It claims a
roster of 3,000 patients.
Clinic 554, which is the only facility in the area providing surgical abortion services, may
close due to the lack of public funding for these services. In early July 2019, former
Minister Petitpas Taylor met with the NB Health Minister to discuss the accessibility and
comprehensive concerns related to this issue, including the patient charges being levied
by the clinic for abortion services. These concerns were reiterated by Minister Petitpas
Taylor, and then by the Prime Minister and Minister Hajdu, in late 2019. Nonetheless,
the NB Health Ministry has repeatedly stated publicly that the government has no
intention of changing its position on the issue.
Access to abortion services has improved in New Brunswick in recent years, under
policies initiated by the previous provincial government. In 2015, the province increased
the number of hospitals providing the service from two to three, eliminated the
requirements that two physicians provide a referral, and that the service be provided by
a specialist. In 2017, NB became the first province to provide universal coverage for
Mifegymiso, under the provincial health insurance plan.
There are CHA concerns regarding abortion services in other provinces. In Summer
2019, media reports indicated that Ontario women were encountering patient charges
for abortion services when they sought insured services in certain private clinics in the
GTA. Surgical abortions are an insured service under the Ontario Health Insurance
Plan. In Ontario these services are provided in hospitals and two types of private
facilities: licensed Independent Health Facilities (IHF), and non-IHF clinics. The Ministry
of Health only funds facility costs at the four clinics licensed as IHFs. Health Canada
has signaled to Ontario that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user
charges under the CHA.
Access to abortion services is challenging for women in a number of provinces, where
the distance travelled to seek surgical abortions or referrals for medical abortions can
be great. Greater geographic distribution of abortion services is an important access
concern.
Cannabis: Licensing and Security
SYNOPSIS
 Cultivating, processing and selling cannabis requires a licence under the
Cannabis Act.
 Regulations that set out strict rules controlling cultivation, processing and other
activities with cannabis were updated on October 17, 2019 to include new
controls governing edible cannabis, cannabis extracts and cannabis topicals.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Why does it take so long to get a cannabis licence?
 How are you keeping organized crime out of the legal market?
 Why are there so few small cannabis producers?
 Why does it take so long to get a cannabis research licence?
KEY MESSAGES
 Under the Cannabis Act, a federal licence is required to
cultivate, process and sell cannabis to provincial and
territorial retailers or to individuals who have the
authorization of their healthcare practitioner to access
cannabis for medical purposes.
 Applicants for a federal licence need to meet strict
requirements, including:
o Physical security controls
o Security clearances for key personnel, and
o Strict product quality control
 The processing times for applications depends on several
factors, including the quality, completeness, and complexity
of applications.
 In May 2019, Health Canada introduced changes to the
licensing process to improve efficiency and reduce wait
times for licence approval.
 To help support applicants, Health Canada has made
extensive guidance available on the regulatory requirements,
including on good production practices and physical security
controls.
IF PRESSED ON REPORTS REGARDING POTENTIAL SUSPENSION OR
REVOCATION OF A HEALTH CANADA LICENCE
 Ensuring the integrity of Canada's legal cannabis production,
distribution and sales system is a top priority for our
Government.
 In the event that a licence holder is found to be not compliant
with the law or regulations, Health Canada has a range of
enforcement tools at its disposal to protect public health and
safety, including licence suspension and revocation.
 As part of the established process for a licence suspension or
revocation, the company has the opportunity to provide
information that Health Canada should take into
consideration as part of its final decision-making.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER ORGANIZED CRIME HAS INFILTRATED LICENCE
HOLDERS
 I can assure you that Health Canada would not, under any
circumstances, issue a security clearance where the RCMP
has provided information of an association with organized
crime.
 There is a very rigorous security screening process in place
for all federally licensed facilities that produce cannabis.
 The screening process is similar to that which is in place for
other areas of sensitivity or national importance, such as the
handling of human pathogens or aviation security.
 Since the establishment of the medical regime in 2013,
Health Canada has had no evidence that organized crime
has infiltrated any of the more than 308 federal licence
holders.
IF PRESSED ON CANNABIS SUPPLY
 Our Government is committed to protecting the health and
safety of Canadians through the legalization and strict
regulation of cannabis.
 The Cannabis Act and its regulations took effect on October
17, 2018 and set out strict rules controlling cultivation,
processing and other activities with cannabis. This includes
strict requirements related to personnel and physical security
and product quality.
 Since October 2018, the number of licensed sites has more
than doubled from 132 to over 308 sites.
 As of October 2019, there were in excess of 1,700,000
square meters of active cultivation space. This is enough to
produce nearly two million kilograms of cannabis per year
once at full production, which is sufficient capacity to meet
demand.
IF PRESSED ON SECURITY CLEARANCE REQUIREMENTS
 The Cannabis Regulations expanded the list of roles that
require a security clearance including, among others, the
directors and officers of any parent company, in addition to
those of the licensed company.
 Health Canada has the authority to identify additional
positions and/or individuals in an organization who require a
security clearance.
 In addition, applicants for a federal licence are required to
submit organizational charts that describe who is responsible
for key functions such as inventory control, as well as a list of
all key investors.
 Individuals who have histories of non-violent, lower-risk
criminal activity (such as simple possession or small scale
cultivation of cannabis plants) may be able to participate in
the legal industry.
 This approach supports our Government’s objectives to
displace the illegal market and keep the profits from the sale
of cannabis out of the hands of criminals and organized
crime.
IF PRESSED ON NUMBERS OF LICENCES FOR SMALL PRODUCERS
 Our Government is committed to encouraging a diverse
market of large and small cannabis cultivators and
processors.
 The micro and nursery licences have regulatory requirements
and fees proportional to their size.
 As of February 21, 2020 there were 28 micro licence holders
and 5 nurseries.
 In 2019, Health Canada held in-person meetings in eight
cities and webinars with more than 500 prospective micro-
applicants to share information on the licensing process.
 Additional meetings with micro-applicants took place from
February 10 to 14 in various cities in British Columbia.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL TIMES FOR CANNABIS RESEARCH LICENCE
APPLICATIONS
 Health Canada is committed to promoting and enabling
research.
 In response to high demands, the Department has added
resources to process more research licence applications,
published a new plain-language application guide, and
implemented a risk-based review process.
 Health Canada has also introduced a new licence model
called an institution-wide licence. This will reduce the need to
seek individual approvals by giving qualified institutions
permission for multiple research projects.
 As of February 24 2020, Health Canada has issued 252
research licences, an increase of more than 150 since
summer 2019.
IF PRESSED ON OFFSHORE FUNDING
 Rules to protect against illegal funds being invested in
Canada or Canadian companies or industries and rules
governing beneficial ownership transparency are set out in a
number of different federal acts and associated regulations.
 Law enforcement authorities and a number of federal
government agencies have authorities and the tools to deter,
detect, prevent, investigate and prosecute financial crimes.
Investigations involving organized crime specifically,
including money laundering and other nefarious financial
activity, are generally conducted by the RCMP.
 Under the Cannabis Regulations, all officers and directors of
a company -- as well as a parent company -- must obtain a
security clearance and undergo thorough law enforcement
record checks before the company can be licensed.
 Also, the Cannabis Act provides the authority to require an
applicant to submit any additional information, including
financial information that pertains to the information in an
application.
BACKGROUND
 Since May 8, 2019, Health Canada requires new applicants for cultivation,
processing or sales for medical purposes licences to have a fully built site that
meets all the requirements of the Cannabis Regulations at the time of their
application.
 Health Canada implemented these adjustments following a review of the former
licensing process, which identified opportunities to better allocate resources. For
example, more than 70% of applicants who successfully passed Health Canada’s
initial paper-based review of their application over the previous three years had
not submitted their evidence package to demonstrate to the Department that they
have a built facility that met the regulatory requirements. As a result, a significant
amount of resources were being used to review applications from entities that
were not ready to begin operations, contributing to wait times for more mature
applications and an inefficient allocation of resources.
 The Department is working to establish additional service standards for the
review of applications, which will increase predictability for applicants.
 On October 17, 2019 The Regulations Amending the Cannabis Regulations
(New Classes of Cannabis) came into force which established the regulatory
controls to address the public health and public safety risks associated with
edible cannabis, cannabis extracts and cannabis topicals.
 Health Canada works closely with the RCMP to conduct a security screening
process that involves a criminal record check and the verification by the RCMP of
relevant files from other law enforcement agencies, as well as intelligence
gathered for law enforcement purposes. This information is assessed to identify
potential ties to criminal organizations and other risk factors.
Concussion
SYNOPSIS
Sports and recreational activities have many social and health benefits and are an
important part of the lives of children and youth in Canada. Concussions are more
common in some sports and recreational activities than others. Efforts are underway to
prevent, recognise and manage the public health issue of concussion in Canada.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes that too many children and
youth experience concussion during sports and recreation
activities, sometimes with tragic outcomes.
 Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, our
Government invested close to $34 million in research and
initiatives to improve the prevention, diagnosis and treatment
of traumatic brain injuries, including concussions.
 Our Government has also provided $2 million to Parachute,
a national injury prevention organization, to develop the first
Canadian Guideline on Concussion in Sport, return-to-school
and return-to-sport concussion protocols, and online training
for health professionals.
 I look forward to working with the Minister of Canadian
Heritage to implement a pan-Canadian Concussion Strategy
and raise awareness for parents, coaches and athletes on
concussion treatment.
BACKGROUND
Concussion is a recognised public health issue, which can result in short and long-term
effects on brain health. An estimated 46,000 children and youth (aged 5-19 years) were
diagnosed with a concussion by hospital emergency departments in 2016-17. Ice
hockey, rugby and ringette are the sports with the highest proportion of traumatic brain
injuries, including concussion, ranging from 27% to 44% of injuries in children and youth
aged 5-19 years, reported by select hospital emergency departments in 2016-17.
Public Health Agency of Canada
The Minister of Health has been mandated to work with the Minister of Canadian
Heritage to implement a pan-Canadian concussion strategy and raise awareness for
parents, coaches and athletes on concussion treatment.
Budget 2016 committed $1.4 million to support the development and implementation of
a harmonized approach with provinces and territories to concussion prevention,
detection and management in Canada. With PHAC funding, Parachute created the
Canadian Guideline on Concussion in Sport (2017) to present a harmonized approach
to concussion management, as well as online concussion medical training and return-
to-school and return-to-sport protocols (2018). PHAC also funded the SCHOOLFirst
project to provide information to Canadian teachers and school boards on best practices
for students returning to school after a concussion, and a new mobile app to help
parents manage their child's concussion.
In November 2018, PHAC provided Parachute, a national injury prevention
organization, with $1.18 million in funding to produce education and awareness
resources for parents and school and sport stakeholders to support Canadians in their
return to school, sport and daily activities post-concussion, as well as resources for
medical and allied health professionals.
On May 23, 2019, PHAC released the “Understanding and Awareness of Sport-Related
Concussions, With a Focus on Youth” public opinion research. The results suggest that
the pan-Canadian concussion guideline is beginning to prove effective in comparison to
baseline research commissioned by PHAC in 2017-2018.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
CIHR investments of $34 million (2014-2019), including $7.6 million in 2018/19,
supported research on traumatic brain injuries, including concussions. For example,
$3.7 million was awarded to Dr. Keith Yeates at the University of Calgary to improve
prevention, diagnosis and treatment options. Investments in 2020 will include $1.5
million to establish and guide a national concussion research agenda and improve
coordination among key players from research, prevention and treatment.
Canadian Heritage
As part of $30 million provided to Sport Canada in Budget 2019 to ensure a safe and
healthy sport system, $800,000 annually for five years will be provided to national sport
organizations to address concussion through prevention.
Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT) Considerations
The Government of Canada works with FPT Ministers responsible for sport, physical
activity and recreation (SPAR) on harmonizing approaches for concussion prevention
and management in sport. In February 2019, SPAR Ministers re-affirmed that
concussions are a major public health concern and committed to take additional action
to increase awareness, prevention, detection, management, and surveillance of
concussions. Jurisdictions agreed to work to implement an annual concussion
awareness day, in collaboration with the sport sector.
Ontario is the only province that has concussion specific legislation in force. Rowan’s
Law, 2018, requires sport organizations to have concussion protocols in place and
proclaims Rowan’s Law Day to be observed annually on the last Wednesday in
September. The law also amends the Ontario Education Act to authorize the Minister to
establish and require boards to comply with policies and guidelines on student
concussions.
Parliamentary Business
During the previous Parliament, the House of Commons Standing Committee on Health
(HESA) established a Subcommittee to undertake a study on sport-related concussions.
In June 2019, HESA tabled the Subcommittee’s report entitled “Tackling the Problem
Head-on: Sports-Related Concussions in Canada”.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research – Men Who Have Sex with Men
(MSM)
SYNOPSIS
 On April 30, 2019, Health Canada issued regulatory authorizations to Canadian
Blood Services (CBS) and Héma-Québec (HQ) to change their blood donor
deferral period for men who have sex with men (MSM) from one year to three
months. This regulatory decision came as a result of proposals submitted by both
CBS and HQ to Health Canada and was based on the latest scientific evidence.
CBS and HQ implemented this policy on June 3, 2019.
 In June 2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen
the evidence base supporting a non-discriminatory approach to blood donations.
Results of several of these research projects have been published, while others
are expected to be available between now and winter 2020 to inform potential
future changes to blood donation policies.
 To continue to support a safe and non-discriminatory approach to blood
donation, Budget 2019 proposed to provide $2.4 million over three years, starting
in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of
blood plasma.
 Canada’s blood system is internationally recognized for its high safety standards.
It is, and will continue to be, one of the safest blood systems in the world.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 When will the government eliminate the blood donor deferral for gay men?
KEY MESSAGES
 Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
 I’m proud that our government further reduced barriers
preventing men who have sex with men from donating blood
by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-
Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral period for
donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million to Canadian Blood Services, in
collaboration with Héma-Québec, to further advance
research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting
in 2019–20, for additional research specific to reducing
barriers to the donation of plasma.
 The Department remains open to assessing future changes
to the MSM donor deferral policy, including its elimination,
provided that submissions are received from the blood
operators and are supported by scientific evidence.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada’s approval of the change in no way
compromises the safety or quality of Canada’s blood supply.
 There is no international scientific consensus regarding
donor deferral periods for MSM. Health Canada is aware
that certain jurisdictions have adopted policies based on the
recent sexual history of the donor while not having MSM-
specific deferral periods.
 This change is in line with other jurisdictions that have
implemented a three-month deferral period for MSM:
England, Scotland and Wales.
 I will work with the Minister of Diversity and Inclusion and
Youth, and in partnership with Canadian Blood Services and
Héma-Québec, to build on existing progress to implement a
behaviour-based model of donation that eliminates the blood
ban for men who have sex with other men.
To implement this behavior-based model of donation, Health

Canada has allocated $5.4M to further advance research
that Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec can use to
build on the evidence required.
If pressed on the Karas’ Human Rights complaint:
 This matter is presently before the court and further details
of Canada’s legal position will be provided to the court.
 Cette affaire est actuellement devant le tribunal et des
détails supplémentaires sur la position juridique du Canada
seront communiqués au tribunal.
BACKGROUND
 In Canada: There are no regulations prohibiting MSM and other groups from
donating blood. Donor deferrals are policy decisions of the blood operators.
However, under Canada's Blood Regulations, CBS and HQ are required to make
submissions to HC for any changes to their processes. HC must evaluate and
authorize any changes before they can be implemented. HC has no authority to
mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed due to perceived
discriminatory aspects.
 The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with
another man even once since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC
authorized a request from CBS and HQ to change its MSM deferral criteria to a
five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and HQ, to change the blood donor deferral period for MSM
from a five-year to a one- year deferral period. On April 30, 2019 HC authorized a
submission from CBS and HQ to further reduce the MSM deferral period to three-
months.
 Over the past six years, the MSM blood donor deferral period in Canada
changed from a lifetime restriction to a three-month waiting period. At no time
was the safety of Canada’s blood system compromised. There has not been a
single known case of HIV infection from blood transfusion in Canada in 25 years.
 There are two main blood donor deferral strategies used internationally to
address the risk of HIV and other disease transmission. The first and most
common is a time-based deferral based on the higher-risk activities of specific
populations, such as the MSM deferral currently applied in Canada. The second
is an individual-based deferral that looks at higher-risk activities on a donor-by-
donor basis. This is often referred to as a behaviour-based deferral and when
used instead of MSM, this usually includes questions on new partners or multiple
partners of either sex.
 HC continues to engage with CBS and HQ and receive information on research
findings as they become available.
 In June 2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen
the evidence base supporting a non-discriminatory approach to blood donations.
Results of these research projects are expected to be available between now
and the winter of 2020 to inform future changes to blood donation policies. To
continue to support a safe and non-discriminatory approach to blood donation,
Budget 2019 proposes to provide $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–
20, for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma.
International trends:
 There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for
MSM. Some countries, such as Austria and the Ukraine, maintain indefinite
deferral periods, while other countries, including the United States, Australia and
France, have one-year deferral periods. In November 2017, a 3 month deferral
was adopted by England, Scotland and Wales. Some countries, such as Spain
and Italy, do not have MSM-specific deferral periods. For example, in Italy the
donor screening includes a face-to-face interview in a private and confidential
location by a trained physician who is responsible for donor selection.
Medical Assistance in Dying (MAID)
SYNOPSIS
 In June 2017, federal and provincial assisted dying legislation were challenged in
a Quebec Superior Court by two individuals (Truchon/Gladu) who claimed that
the federal requirement that an individual’s natural death be reasonably
foreseeable and the provincial requirement for a person to be at the end of life
were in violation of the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
 On September 11, 2019, the Quebec Superior Court ruled in favour of the
plaintiffs and found both the federal and provincial criteria invalid. The effect of
the judgement was suspended for 6 months (i.e., until March 11, 2020). The
decision applies only in Quebec. If legislative changes are not passed prior to
this date, there would be a difference in eligibility for MAID between Quebec and
the rest of Canada.
 The Government of Canada and the Quebec provincial government did not
appeal the decision. On February 21, 2020, the Government of Canada filed a
motion to request a 4-month extension, which if granted, would extend the
deadline to July 11, 2020.
 On February 24, 2020, the Government tabled draft legislation in response to the
Quebec Court’s decision. The proposed amendments were informed by online
public consultations and roundtables with experts and stakeholders held in
January and early February, as well as nearly four years of MAID experience in
Canada.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 How has the Government responded to the Quebec Superior Court decision?
KEY MESSAGES
 On February 24th, our Government tabled proposed changes
to the Criminal Code provisions on MAID.
 The proposed amendments not only respond to the Quebec
Court decision on Truchon, but also address issues for
which there was consensus among Canadians, and a clear
path forward.
 Recognizing that Canadians have diverse and evolving
views on this sensitive issue, our Government consulted with
the public and key stakeholders which greatly informed the
proposed changes.
We believe the amendments achieve our goal to facilitate

access for individuals who are eligible for MAID, while
continuing to provide protection for vulnerable people.
If pressed on the decision to permit only the narrow form of advance requests as
part of the revised federal legislation.
 Both the online and roundtable consultations revealed strong
support for permitting advance requests for persons who are
near the end of life.
 The proposed amendments would allow persons who are
assessed and approved for MAID, whose death is
reasonably foreseeable and who may lose capacity to
consent before the procedure, to waive final consent for
MAID.
 The Council of Canadian Academies expert panel report on
the topic noted greater complexity associated with broader
forms of advance requests. This issue could be considered
during the parliamentary review of MAID legislation,
expected to take place later this year.
If pressed on the decision to exclude persons suffering solely from mental illness
from receiving MAID under the revised legislation.
 The Council of Canadian Academies developed a report on
requests where a mental disorder is the sole medical
condition. It highlighted the many complexities of extending
eligibility to this population.
 Many of these concerns have been noted by psychiatrists
and mental health organizations and were reiterated during
the recent
 federal roundtable consultations.
 The unique considerations for MAID requests by persons
with a mental illness require further discussion and public
debate, which could form part of the parliamentary review
that is expected to take place later this year.
If pressed on efforts to support individuals requesting MAID in faith-based
institutions.
 Health care delivery is a provincial and territorial
responsibility.
 Most provinces and territories have implemented care
coordination systems for patients and healthcare providers
to support MAID access for eligible Canadians without
infringing on the conscience rights of providers.
 We will continue to work with the provinces and territories to
support MAID access to eligible Canadians.
BACKGROUND
REASONABLY FORESEEABLE NATURAL DEATH DECLARED INVALID IN QUEBEC
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Québec found in Truchon v. Canada that the
“reasonable foreseeability of natural death” requirement in the federal legislation and the “end-
of-life” requirement contained in Quebec’s legislation were unconstitutional. The remaining
eligibility criteria are unchanged.
On February 24, 2020, the Government tabled proposed amendments to the Criminal Code
provisions on MAID which:
 remove the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order
to be eligible for MAID, while excluding eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental
illness;
 introduce a two-track approach to safeguards based on whether or not a person’s natural
death is reasonably foreseeable:
 allow “waiving of final consent” for eligible persons whose death is reasonably foreseeable
and who may lose capacity to consent before MAID is provided; and
 expand data collection through the federal monitoring regime to provide a more complete
picture of MAID in Canada
The parliamentary review of the legislation will provide an opportunity to undertake a
comprehensive review of all aspects of the legislation as well as the state of palliative care in
Canada. As outlined in the current legislation, the law must be referred to one or more
Parliamentary Committees by June 2020.
OTHER CONSIDERATIONS: ADVANCE REQUESTS
Advance requests are not possible under the current law, as individuals must provide final
consent immediately prior to receiving MAID. There is strong public support for advance
requests, especially for persons who have been assessed and approved for MAID and are near
death.
In December 2018, the Government tabled reports on independent reviews conducted by the
Council of Canadian Academies on three complex issues on MAID: advance requests,
requests by mature minors and requests where a mental disorder is the sole underlying
condition. The report on advance requests found that there are many complexities associated
with these types of MAID requests.
The Quebec government signaled its openness to considering expansion of its provincial end-
of-life care legislation to include advance requests by commissioning an expert panel report on
the topic. The report, released November 29, 2019, makes recommendations for how current
QC legislation could include advance requests for MAID under certain circumstances, for
individuals who lack capacity to provide consent. On January 27, 2020, the Quebec government
launched a non-partisan public consultation on the issues examined in the report.
MAID MONITORING REGIME
The Regulations for the Monitoring of MAID came into force in November 2018 and set out the
framework for mandatory reporting for all physicians, nurse practitioners and pharmacists who
participate in MAID.
As per the Regulations, data is now being collected on all assessments for and the provision of
MAID, to provide a full picture of MAID in Canada. The federal monitoring regime provides the
only consistent and comparable national data set on MAID.
The Regulations require the federal Minister of Health to produce a report at least once a year
using the information collected on MAID. The first report is expected in spring 2020 and will
report on a full year of data collected under the new regime.
Pesticide Regulation
SYNOPSIS
 The Minister of Health’s mandate letter includes the following commitment: “With
the support of the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food and the Minister of
Environment and Climate Change, work to ensure that the Pest Management
Regulatory Agency makes timely science-based decisions to support the safe
and sustainable use of effective pesticide products in Canada.”
 Health Canada’s pesticide re-evaluation program has been criticized for a
number of years by a broad range of stakeholders including manufacturers,
growers and non-governmental organizations. Recently, they submitted a joint
letter to Ministers of Health and Finance, calling for an increase in PMRA’s
capacity to address their shared concerns.
 In Fall 2018, Health Canada initiated a review of the re-evaluation program that
included a wide stakeholder consultation before proposing a path forward.
Further stakeholder consultations are planned in March 2020.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 Given the concerns with the pesticide re-evaluation program, how will the
government ensure the Pest Management Regulatory Agency makes timely
decisions that support the safe use of pesticides in Canada?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously.
Science-based decision-making will continue to be at the
core of pesticide regulation. Similarly, health and
environmental protection will continue to be paramount in
making those decisions.
 Health Canada is currently undertaking a review of the
pesticide program with the objective of increasing both its
efficiency and effectiveness. Consultations across the
country are underway.
 With support of the Minister of Environment and Climate
Change and the Minister of Agriculture and Agri-Food, we
plan to begin implementing a new approach to pesticide
regulation later this year.
IF PRESSED…
 Health Canada is proposing broad changes to its pesticide
regulatory system in order to improve health and
environmental protection by transitioning to a proactive,
integrated risk-management approach across a pesticide
product’s entire lifecycle.
 Implementation of a new system is targeted to begin in
December 2020. The new system would address many
stakeholder concerns with the pesticide re-evaluation
program.
BACKGROUND
 Since 2003, and most recently in 2015, the Commissioner of Environment and
Sustainable Development reiterated concerns (from a previous audit) with the
pace of PMRA’s pesticide re-evaluations to prevent unacceptable risks to
Canadians and the environment. These views are shared by non-governmental
organizations (NGOs).
 Pesticide manufactures and user groups (e.g., agriculture) are vocal regarding
their concerns with the pesticide re-evaluation program, including insufficient
consultation and short timelines to produce additional information.
 In November 2019, a broad-based group of stakeholders representing
manufacturers, growers and NGOs issued a joint letter to the Ministers of Health
and Finance in order to reiterate concerns regarding PMRA’s capacity to keep
pace with increasing workload and calling for increased funding, particularly with
respect to post-market re-evaluation of pesticides.
 Through the Treasury Board of Canada Secretariat led targeted regulatory
reviews of Agri-food and Aquaculture sector in 2018, and again as part of its
submission to the 2019 Round Two Targeted Regulatory Review process,
stakeholders have identified the need for an improved post-market (re-
evaluation) process.
 Since initiating a review of the pesticide re-evaluation program in fall 2018,
PMRA has consulted with a broad range of stakeholders, including provinces,
non-government organizations and other federal departments, to understand
their views regarding the re-evaluation programs of the PMRA and other
regulators.
 On February 4, 2020, PMRA presented the proposed new direction for pesticide
regulation to the Health Minster’s Pest Management Advisory Council. This new
approach includes transitioning to a proactive, integrated risk-management
approach across a pesticide product’s entire lifecycle. Stakeholders on the
council indicated they were pleased with the direction of the program, noting the
importance of appropriate funding.
 Further stakeholder consultations are currently ongoing.
Protecting People and the Environment
SYNOPSIS
 The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA) is Canada’s key
statute aimed at preventing pollution and protecting the environment and human
health. The Standing Committee on the Environment and Sustainable
Development’s reported in June 2017 on their review of CEPA, making 87
recommendations to improve the Act.
 Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC) has indicated that they are
working towards having a CEPA reform Bill introduced by December 2020.
 The Minister of Health and the Minister of Environment and Climate Change
share responsibility for administering the parts of CEPA that govern the
assessment of new and existing substances and management of risks
associated with those deemed toxic, including chemicals, polymers, products of
biotechnology and air pollutants.
 As the Chemicals Management Plan (CMP) is largely driven by obligations and
authorities set out in CEPA, certain key amendments to the Act would further
enable a more efficient and effective chemicals management program in order to
address new and emerging issues in the future.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government of Canada doing to strengthen the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999?
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government is committed to modernizing the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999 to better protect the
health of Canadians and the environment.
 Health Canada supports Environment and Climate Change
Canada by working in close collaboration to develop
proposals to further strengthen Canada’s world class
chemicals management regime.
 This work is being informed by the important
recommendations identified by the Standing Committee on
Environment and Sustainable Development to strengthen
the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999.
 This is being done in concert with work to renew the
Chemicals Management Plan (CMP).
BACKGROUND
 The Standing Committee on Environment and Sustainable Development (ENVI)
reviewed CEPA in 2016-17, making a number of recommendations that could
influence future directions on chemical management. While the ENVI concluded
that the Act was fundamentally sound, key recommendations included: putting
greater focus on vulnerable populations and regions, incorporate the effects of
exposure to multiple chemicals, and measures to encourage industry to migrate
towards safer alternatives, among others. Many of the Committee’s
recommendations are being addressed through program implementation, but
some could require CEPA amendments.
 Environment and Climate Change Canada will lead the coordination of work
related to CEPA reform.
 The Chemicals Management Plan (CMP) was established in 2006 to protect
Canadians and the environment from harmful chemicals through a predictable,
science based program. The CMP is largely driven by obligations and authorities
set out in CEPA, which necessitates a process for information gathering,
research, assessment and management of substances.
 The CMP is widely acknowledged as a world-leading chemicals management
program.
SEAFOOD TRACEABILITY PROGRAM
SYNOPSIS
 On October 16, 2019, Oceana Canada released its most recent report on
seafood fraud in Canada. Using DNA testing, Oceana has determined that
Montreal has one of the highest rates of seafood mislabelling in Canada at 61%.
Oceana’s multi-year reports have concluded that 47% of the 427 samples taken
from across Canada were mislabelled (Victoria 67%, Toronto 59%, Ottawa 46%,
Halifax 38% and Vancouver 26%).
POTENTIAL QUESTION
 What is the Government doing about the Oceana reports on seafood fraud and
mislabelling?
KEY MESSAGES
 The Government is committed to protecting Canadians from
food misrepresentation.
 The Government will work with all stakeholders to identify
potential regulatory and non-regulatory measures to
enhance traceability of the supply chain and provide greater
assurance that food products, including fish and seafood,
are accurately labelled.
 Meanwhile, food safety and labelling requirements in Safe
Food for Canadians Regulations continue to apply to fish
and seafood operators and products.
IF PRESSED ON THE OCEANA REPORT
 The Government takes issues of food misrepresentation
seriously.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency will use the new
Oceana report as a source of information on fish
misrepresentation in Canada.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency has invited Oceana
to share more information on their findings and to file a
complaint about any specific products or companies, so that
appropriate follow up or referral to the appropriate authority
can occur. This type of transparency could be very helpful in
informing inspection activities.
IF PRESSED ON TRACEABILITY
 Canada has been recognized internationally for having one
of the best food safety systems in the world.
 The traceability requirements in the new Safe Food for
Canadians Regulations support food safety. They bring all
food businesses that import, export or trade interprovincially
to the same international standard set by Codex
Alimentarius.
 Traceability requirements that require food businesses to
keep records — one step forward, one step back —will allow
a food to be followed from one point in the supply chain to
another, which also supports follow up on food
misrepresentation issues.
BACKGROUND
Background on Food Fraud
Food fraud is the deliberate misrepresentation of a food, usually for economic gain, and
can also have health or safety implications. Globally, this is a growing concern.
Addressing the issue of food misrepresentation requires a collective effort and
engagement by industry partners, government departments, the scientific community,
consumers, the non-government sector, and international partners.
The Food and Drugs Act and the Safe Food for Canadians Act prohibit the sale of food
labelled or advertised in a manner that is false, misleading, or likely to create an
erroneous impression. In cases of non-compliance, Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(CFIA) takes appropriate action.
The CFIA is using the funding under the Food Policy for Canada to tackle food fraud
provided through Budget 2019 to expand its capacity to detect and address deceptive
practices and food misrepresentation through targeted inspection and better intelligence
gathering.
Canada is also working with its domestic and international partners to address food
misrepresentation.
Traceability
The Safe Food for Canadians Regulations requires food businesses that import, export
or trade interprovincially to keep records that allow a food to be traced—one step back
and one step forward to the point of retail. Being able to track the path of a food in the
supply chain can significantly reduce the time it takes businesses to remove unsafe
food from the market. The traceability requirements could also facilitate trace-back
during an investigation on food misrepresentation.
All foods, including seafood products, must also have a label with information that is
widely recognized as necessary for public health or consumer protection, such as a
common name, ingredients list, nutrition facts table, lot code, and principal place of
business where the food was manufactured.
Currently, additional information, such as the location of catch or the type of fishing gear
used, can be voluntarily provided on the label, provided this information is truthful and
not misleading. The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is working with industry and
non-government organizations to better understand the complex international seafood
supply chain.
To combat illegal and unregulated fishing activities, which are likely a key contributor to
seafood fraud, Canada will continue to work with like-minded, responsible fishing
nations to develop new strategies, including “boat-to-plate” traceability programs. The
government will also work with domestic organizations, such as the fish processors and
retail and restaurant associations, to ensure that they fully understand the gravity of
species misrepresentation.
Addressing Antimicrobial Resistance
SYNOPSIS
Antimicrobial-resistant infections are becoming more frequent and increasingly difficult
to treat. The antibiotics we rely on for common infections, such as pneumonia and strep
throat, are becoming less effective, resulting in serious illness and death. Already, 1 in 4
bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of antibiotic treatment and in 2018
approximately 5,400 Canadians died from a resistant infection and there were an
additional $1.4 billion in hospital costs.
KEY MESSAGES
 Our Government recognizes that antimicrobial resistance is
increasing worldwide and is posing a serious and growing
threat to the Canadian healthcare system.
 We are acting to preserve the effectiveness of antibiotics
that Canadians rely on and prevent the spread of drug
resistant infections.
 The Government is supporting research, surveillance,
awareness, and education measures.
 A pan-Canadian Action Plan on antimicrobial resistance will
coordinate Canada’s response to AMR for greatest impact.
We will continue to provide federal leadership to reduce
antimicrobial resistance and protect the health of Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) is characterized by a decline in the effectiveness of
antimicrobial drugs in treating an infection. Without effective antimicrobials, our ability to
fight infectious diseases will significantly decline. For example: routine medical
procedures, joint replacements and even chemotherapy for cancer patients, that
depend on antibiotics, will become more risky for Canadians.
The Council of Canadian Academies released a report on November 12, 2019,
commissioned by the Public Health Agency of Canada, that describes the serious threat
of antibiotic resistance. Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of
antibiotic treatment and last year approximately 5,400 Canadians died from a resistant
infection. Projections of growth to 40 percent resistance by 2050 and 400,000 deaths
are plausible according to these experts.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
The Government of Canada outlined its commitment to addressing AMR in the Federal
Framework on AMR and its supporting Action Plan. In July 2018, the first Progress
Report on the Federal Action Plan was released and can be found at Canada.ca.In
recognition of the global public health threat, the Government of Canada identified AMR
as a priority in the Prime Minister’s mandate letter to the Minister of Health. With support
from the Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry, the Minister of Agriculture and
Agri-Food and the Minister of Environment and Climate Change, the Health Portfolio is
responding to the serious and growing public health threat posed by antimicrobial
resistance by developing and implementing actions with partners to preserve the
effectiveness of the antimicrobials that Canadians rely on every day.
Recognizing that the federal government cannot reduce the threat of AMR alone and
consistent with our international partners, the Government of Canada led efforts with
provinces, territories, and external stakeholders to develop the pan-Canadian AMR
Framework, which was released in September 2017. Work is currently underway on a
pan-Canadian AMR Action Plan that will identify concrete actions, to address this
complex issue across the human, animal health, and agri-food sector. It is being
developed in consultation and with input from all partners. Its release is planned for
2020.
The Government of Canada is taking action to address AMR by:
- Strengthening surveillance systems to help identify new threats or changing
patterns of AMR in humans and animals;
- Strengthening the stewardship of antimicrobials in human and veterinary
medicine, as well as regulatory and policy changes governing human and veterinary
drugs;
- Collaborating with national and international partners to advance policy,
research and innovation in both Canada and abroad, including research on
diagnostics, new antimicrobials and alternatives to the use of antimicrobials in
human and veterinary medicine
The Government of Canada has invested a total of $203 million in the past 10 years to
support domestic action on AMR. More specifically,
- The Public Health Agency of Canada has invested approximately $50 million on
AMR policy leadership, surveillance and stewardship over 10 years;
- The Canadian Institutes of Health Research has invested $125 million in AMR
research over the past 5 years to strengthen research in areas such as antimicrobial
discovery, target identification, alternatives, diagnostics, surveillance, and
stewardship. CIHR also provides funding to Canadian scientists to participate in
international AMR research efforts under the Joint Programming Initiative on
Antimicrobial Resistance;
- Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada has invested more than $37 million over the last
10 years to support industry-led research initiatives to accelerate the pace of
innovation and address some of the AMR challenges in agriculture;
Regulatory and Policy Changes
In May 2017, amendments to the Food and Drug Regulations related to AMR in the
veterinary drug context were published in Canada Gazette, Part II. These new
regulations are aimed at increasing antimicrobial stewardship and promoting the
prudent use of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) in animals by:
 Collecting antimicrobial sales information;
o The data collection system has been implemented and the first year of
data have been received and are being analyzed.
 Increasing the oversight of active pharmaceutical ingredients for veterinary use;
 Controlling the “own use” importation of veterinary drugs and;
 Facilitating access to low risk veterinary health products in order to increase
animal health and welfare;
In support of these regulations, Health Canada has also undertaken complementary
policy measures, which include:
 Removing growth promotion claims from MIA labels; and,
 Requiring all MIAs for animals be sold pursuant to a prescription from a
veterinarian.
Health Canada requires AMR stewardship statements in the labelling of all antibiotics
for human use to help increase awareness and encourage prudent use. Additionally,
Health Canada released a Pathogens of Interest List that will help inform companies of
the bacterial pathogens in most urgent need of innovative therapeutic products in
Canada. Health Canada has also sponsored a challenge under the Innovative Solutions
Canada program, where up to $1 million is available to innovators and entrepreneurs to
support the development of new, easy-to-use and cost effective, point-of-care
diagnostic tools to help combat the rise of AMR.
International Activities
In May 2015, the World Health Organization’s (WHO) member states, including
Canada, endorsed the WHO Global Action Plan on AMR, which calls on countries to
develop multisectoral national action plans to address AMR. Canada supports the
ongoing collaborative leadership of the WHO, the World Organization for Animal Health,
and the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, via a One Health
approach, to address AMR.
At the United Nations General Assembly high-level meeting on AMR in September
2016, world leaders endorsed a political declaration that recognized the need for
stronger surveillance systems, strengthened regulation of antimicrobials, improved
awareness, and innovative alternative treatments and diagnostics.
In 2017, the Government of Canada also made a one-time investment of more than $9
million to support the World Health Organization’s Global Action Plan on AMR. This
initiative aims to ensure, for as long as possible, continuity of successful treatment and
prevention of infectious diseases with effective and safe medicines that are quality-
assured, used in a responsible way, and accessible to all who need them.
Parliamentary Business
The Standing Committee on Health (HESA) tabled their 16th Report entitled: A Study on
the Status of Antimicrobial Resistance in Canada and Related Recommendations on
May 1, 2018. The Government Response to the Committee’s report was tabled on July
18, 2018 and is available on-line at the House of Commons website.
TRANSFER FROM CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO FACILITATE THE SHARING OF
INFORMATION AND ADDRESS FOOD FRAUD
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada receiving $618,481 from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to
build on existing programming in order to increase the Federal government’s oversight
of food misrepresentation in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Health Canada is responsible for administering the health and safety
provisions of the Food and Drug Regulations and associated standards,
policies and guidelines for the safety and nutritional quality of food sold in
Canada.
 Health Canada also conducts health risk assessments, provides laboratory
services, and provides expert advice to industry, consumers, and food
safety partners on foodborne risks and hazards.
 Through this transfer, Health Canada will provide support to the Canadian
Food Inspection Agency to address food misrepresentation and reduce
food safety risks to Canadian consumers.
KEY FACTS
 A financial arrangement, which is in accordance with the federal government’s decision
regarding A food Policy in Canada, has been made such that the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency will initiate budget transfers of $618,481 annually and in perpetuity through 2019-
2020 Supplementary Estimates (B) and the 2020-21 Annual Reference Levels Update to
Health Canada.
BACKGROUND
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s mandate is to administer and enforce legislation
as provided for in section 11 of the Canadian Food Inspection Agency Act, while Health
Canada's mandate is to help Canadians maintain and improve their health.
 Through an agreement, Health Canada provides support to the Canadian Food Inspection
Agency to implement enhanced activities to address food misrepresentation and reduce
food safety risks to Canadian consumers in respect of misrepresented food.
 Health Canada’s activities that support the Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s food
misrepresentation programming include:
o Conducting health risk assessments resulting from increased inspection and
oversight of food misrepresentation
o Providing health risk opinions related to food misrepresentation programming or
investigations
o Developing and validating analytical methodology
o Conducting environmental scanning and gathering domestic and international
information/data on existing and emerging potential health risks relating to food
misrepresentation, and
o Conducting analysis of the food supply to identify potential risks and trends
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 618.5 618.5 0 0 0 618.5
Total Funding 0 0 618.5 618.5 0 0 0 618.5
Allocation of Funds
 The funding will be provided to address food misrepresentation and reduce food safety risks
to Canadian consumers
Anticipated Results
 Established as per the agreement between the partners in Annex A: Delivery and Expected
Results of the Food Fraud Memorandum of Understanding.
Monitoring and Measurement
 Health Canada ensures the timely completion of deliverables and appropriate utilization of
funding through continuous monitoring and program management.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency and Health Canada work collaboratively to facilitate
communication and coordination of activities, establish costed work plans, timelines for
delivery of activities, annual progress reports, and performance reviews.
 Health Canada provides the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with planned budgets and
activities by April 30 of each fiscal year.
 Health Canada will also provides the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with an annual
report, for the previous fiscal year, regarding the activities, performance indicators, and
targets (including but not limited to Annex “A”), under this Memorandum of Understanding,
by May 31 of the following fiscal year.
Evaluation
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency will conduct a five year assessment in 2023-2024
on the delivery of costed activities, performance indicators and targets (including but not
limited to Annex “A”). The assessment will review Health Canada delivery of activities under
this Memorandum of Understanding, and a copy will be provided to the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency by June 1, 2024. This assessment will be used by the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency as evidence in its five year evaluation plan as per the Treasury Board
Policy on Results.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF INDIGENOUS SERVICES
TO THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PROVIDE MICROBIOLOGICAL
AND PHYSICAL-CHEMICAL TESTING OF DRINKING WATER IN FRIST
NATIONS COMMUNITIES
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada receiving $487,785 from the Department of Indigenous Services
to provide microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation
communities in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Department of Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) transfers funds to the Health
Canada Regulatory Operations and Enforcement Branch (ROEB) – Laboratories
Directorate for expenses related to microbiological and physical-chemical testing
(e.g. metals) of drinking water sampled from First Nations Communities in Quebec to
support the distribution of clean, safe and reliable drinking water to First Nations
communities in Quebec.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada’s ROEB Laboratories have been providing this service for over two
decades. In 2019-2020, the ROEB laboratories conducted approximately 3000
microbiological analyses and 2000 physical-chemical analyses for drinking water to
date, as well as for recreational water (i.e., beaches and pools) from First Nations
Communities in the Quebec region.
 These analyses include testing in multiple areas (e.g., pathogens, metals, pH, colour,
turbidity, etc.) and results from these analyses are used to communicate water quality,
and take actions as required (i.e., boil water advisories, closing beaches or pools) to
ensure health and safety of First Nations Communities.
 First Nations Communities in other provinces have similar testing done using private
laboratories for various reasons (e.g., proximity given 48 hour requirements for certain
testing, accreditation requirements at the provincial level).
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 In collaboration with the Department of Indigenous Services Canada, Health Canada is
supporting the distribution of clean, safe and reliable drinking water to First Nations
communities through regularly monitoring all public available drinking water systems
(including 29 public potable water systems and 12 semi-public systems in 26 First Nations
communities). The monitoring services are free of charge to First Nations communities’
residents upon their request.
 These services have been provided by Health Canada laboratories for over 20 years. An
ongoing service agreement was signed on April 2018 to detail the roles and responsibilities
and includes expenses related to the testing of drinking water from First Nations
communities. The financial details for this agreement are reviewed on a yearly basis to
confirm the cost of testing and include new requirements, if necessary.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 487.8 487.8 0 0 0 487.8
Total Funding 0 0 487.8 487.8 0 0 0 487.8
Allocation of Funds
 The funds will be provided to Health Canada to provide microbiological and
physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities in
Quebec.
Anticipated Results
First Nations communities have access to reliable test results for drinking water quality.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENCE TO
VARIOUS ORGANIZATION FOR THE CANADIAN SAFETY AND
SECURITY PROGRAM
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada receiving $341,000 from the Department of National Defence for
the Canadian Safety and Security Program in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates
(B)?
RESPONSE
 The objective of the Canadian Safety and Security Program is to
strengthen Canada’s ability to anticipate, prevent, prepare for, respond
to, and recover from acts of terrorism, crime, natural disasters, and
serious accidents through the convergence of science and technology
with policy, operations and intelligence.
 Health Canada is responsible for delivering Canada’s radiation
surveillance capability under the international Comprehensive Nuclear
Test Ban Treaty, and for broader environmental radiation monitoring.
 Health Canada also contributes to other Government of Canada
initiatives related to nuclear non-proliferation and nuclear security.
 Canadian Safety and Security Program funding will be used to
purchase scientific equipment that will improve the Department’s
ability to detect and identify illicit nuclear activities and other nuclear or
radiological events.
KEY FACTS
 Under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty (CTBT) Implementation Act, the
Minister of Health is responsible to establish or designate facilities and laboratories and, if
necessary, operate, maintain, equip and upgrade them to perform analyses of samples
from radionuclide monitoring stations that are part of the CTBT’s International Monitoring
System.
 Health Canada’s radiation protection program has received CSSP funding in the past to
support its mandate for nuclear emergency preparedness and response.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The objective of the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP) is to strengthen
Canada’s ability to anticipate, prevent, prepare for, respond to, and recover from acts of
terrorism, crime, natural disasters, and serious accidents through the convergence of
science and technology with policy, operations and intelligence.
 Health Canada is responsible for delivering Canada’s radiation surveillance capability under
the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, and for broader environmental radiation
monitoring. The CTBT is an international treaty that bans all nuclear explosions, for both
civilian and military purposes, in all environments.
 Health Canada is also responsible for coordinating the federal response to a nuclear
emergency that could impact Canadians, and contributes to other federal nuclear safety
and security initiatives.
 Gamma ray spectrometry is a key technology employed by specialized laboratories for
detecting and measuring radiation for nuclear security and disarmament treaty verification
applications. Through this method, the detection of certain radioactive elements can be
indicative of nuclear events ranging from nearby nuclear incidents to a nuclear weapon test
detonation elsewhere on the globe.
 For this purpose, CSSP is providing, through a competitive process, capital funding
($341,000) for the purchase of high resolution gamma ray spectrometers and related
supporting hardware and software.
 The equipment will be integrated into Health Canada’s existing radioanalytical laboratories
and radiological surveillance programs, and will also be used as a contribution to multi-
departmental collaboration projects supporting Government of Canada nuclear safety and
security initiatives.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 341.0 0 341.0
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 341.0 0 341.0
Allocation of Funds
 The funds will be used to acquire scientific equipment that will improve the detection of low
levels of radiation in environmental samples
Anticipated Results
 The scientific equipment will improve the Department’s ability to detect and identify illicit
nuclear activities and other nuclear or radiological events, thereby contributing to the safety
and security of Canada.
TRANSFER FROM THE NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL OF CANADA
TO VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS FOR GENOMICS RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada receiving $250,000 from the National Research Council to
support advancements in genomics research and development in the 2019-20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 In collaboration with the National Research Council, Health Canada is
advancing genomics research to better understand how food
production contributes to antimicrobial resistance, and to explore
strategies for reducing this resistance
 In order to support activities associated with antimicrobial resistance,
the National Research Council agreed to provide funding to Health
Canada as part of its overarching initiative to advance genomics
research and development.
KEY FACTS
 A financial arrangement between Health Canada and the National Research Council, in
accordance with the Genomics Research & Development Initiative, sees the National
Research Council initiating a budget transfer of $250,000 through the 2019-2020
Supplementary Estimates (B) and another $235,000 in fiscal year 2020-2021 through the
Annual Reference Level Update (ARLU).
BACKGROUND
 Resistance to antimicrobial medicines (antimicrobial resistance) is an important
contemporary public health challenge. In particular, the development of resistance to
antimicrobials by bacterial pathogens poses a great threat to human and animal health.
 In response to this challenge, the federal government has developed The Federal Action
Plan on Antimicrobial Resistance and Use in Canada (March 2015), which has three pillars:
surveillance, stewardship, and innovation. The interdepartmental Genomics Research and
Development Initiative project was identified in the Action Plan as part of the Federal
component of the innovation pillar.
 Health Canada’s activities that support the National Research Council’s advancements in
genomic research and development include:
o leveraging departmental expertise to perform integrated analysis leading to an
improved understanding of the key factors that drive the dissemination of
resistant organisms and antimicrobial resistance (AMR) from food production
systems to the human population;
o performing integrated analysis of genotypic and phenotypic data for genome-
sequenced isolated to assess the accuracy of genotypic predictions and
generating improved intelligence on the genetic basis for AMR in resistant
bacteria;
o assessing AMR genes for association with genetic elements that confer mobility
and conducting comparative metagenomics analysis of samples from the food
production systems under different management practice to assess the effect on
the resistome and mobilome.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 250.0 250.0 0 0 0 250.0
Total Funding 0 0 250.0 250.0 0 0 0 250.0
Allocation of Funds
 The funds will be used to support activities associated with antimicrobial resistance
as part of the overarching initiative to advance genomics research and development
Anticipated Results
 It is anticipated that this project will result in a deeper understanding of the critical activities
that contribute to AMR development in food production systems, and critical exposure
pathways by which AMR bacteria reach humans.
 It is also anticipated that this project will contribute to the validation of economically
sustainable technologies, practices and policies to mitigate AMR development in food
production systems.
 It is expected that the research conducted under this project will provide information
regarding:
o the relationship between specific agricultural practice and the burden of AMR in
food producing animals and their environment
o the relationship between exposure to AMR of agricultural origin and the
acquisition of AMR by pathogens in humans, animals or the broader
environment; and
o how genomics information be integrated into risk assessment models to inform
desirable policies and practices.
Monitoring and Measurement
 Health Canada has put in place management approaches to ensure timely completion of
deliverables and appropriate utilization of funding.
 Health Canada works collaboratively with other project participants to facilitate
communication and coordination of activities, establish work plans, leverage resources,
establish timelines for delivery of activities, and complete regular progress reports.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND
GOVERNMENT SERVICES TO VARIOUS ORGANIZATIONS, TO
IMPLEMENT AND SUPPORT CLUSTER MANAGEMENT OFFICES AS
PART OF THE FEDERAL SCIENCES AND TECHNOLOGY
INFRASTRUCUTRE INITIATIVE
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada receiving $177,678 from the Department of Public Works and
Government Services to support the Federal Sciences and Technology Infrastructure
Initiative (Now Laboratories Canada) in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Health Canada is participating in the Laboratories Canada Initiative
formerly announced as the Federal Science and Technology
Infrastructure Initiative in Budget 2018.
 Departments have been clustered around a series of common science
objectives and are in the planning phase for this initiative led by Public
Services and Procurement Canada who received the Budget allocation
for the initiative.
 Health Canada is participating in two clusters. The amount of $177,678
annually beginning in 2019-2020 and ending in 2022-2023 has been
transferred to Health Canada from PSPC to support effective
coordination to meet Laboratories Canada execution schedule and
Health Canada’s requirements.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada will receive $177,678 annually, beginning in 2019-2020 and ending in 2022-
2023.
 Total funding over the period is $710,712.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 Federal Sciences and Technology Infrastructure Initiative, now called Laboratories Canada
will create a world-class, national network of federal laboratories to support evidence-based
decision-making, collaboration with partners, and innovation in core program delivery,
including regulatory responsibilities.
 Laboratories Canada is an ambitious 25-year plan to revitalize federal science.
o Whole-of-government, transformative initiative
o Driven by science outcomes.
 This initiative represents a significant opportunity to create positive and lasting change, to
better support and enable federal science now and into the future.
 Laboratories Canada will:
o create a framework for collaboration that will drive the federal science community
and the next generation of scientists.
o develop infrastructure and greater access to common tools to enable leading-
edge science.
o leverage partnerships with academia, industry, other governments, and key
players in research and innovation.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 177.7 177.7 0 0 0 177.7
Total Funding 0 0 177.7 177.7 0 0 0 177.7
Allocation of Funds
 The funding will be used to coordinate Health Canada’s participation in the Laboratories
Canada initiative. It will support timely responses to information requests from Laboratories
Canada and the Regulatory and Security Science Cluster.
Anticipated Results
 To support effective coordination to meet Laboratories Canada execution schedule and
Health Canada’s requirements.
Monitoring and Measurement
 Diligent financial management will be used to monitor the expenditures against the funding
budget.

TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE
ECONOMIC DEVELPMENT AGENCY OF CANADA FOR THE REGIONS
OF QUEBEC TO HOST THE 2019 INTERNATIONAL ECONOMIC
FORUM OF THE AMERICAS
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $35,000 to the Economic Development Agency of
Canada for the Regions of Quebec to host the 2019 International Economic Forum of
the Americas in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Health Canada has agreed to support the Economic Development
Agency of Canada for the Regions of Quebec (CEDQ) in hosting a
special panel at the 2019 International Economic Forum of the
Americas under the theme “Embracing Change”.
 The Department has agreed to support a special panel on how
government and industry can work together to advance health
innovation while improving Canada’s health system and fostering
economic growth.
 This funding will also help the Conference defray the expense of
putting on the panel and bringing in speakers from abroad.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada provided $25,000 to this organization during the 2017-18 fiscal year to
support a special panel at the 2017 International Economic Forum of the Americas under
the theme “A new World: Managing Change”.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The Conference of Montreal, presented for the first time in 1995 by the International
Economic Forum of the Americas, is committed to heightening knowledge and awareness
of the major issues concerning economic globalization, with a particular emphasis on the
relations between the Americas and other continents.
 The Conference also strives to foster exchanges of information, to promote free discussion
on major current economic issues and facilitate meetings between world leaders to
encourage international discourse by bringing together Heads of State, the private sector,
international organizations and civil society.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (35.0) (35.0) 0 0 0 (35.0)
Total Funding 0 0 (35.0) (35.0) 0 0 0 (35.0)
Allocation of Funds
 The funding will be provided by Health Canada to support a special panel at the 2019
International Economic Forum of the Americas under the theme “Embracing Change”.
Anticipated Results
 The opportunity to explore how government and industry can work together to advance
health innovation while improving Canada’s health system and fostering economic growth.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO CANADIAN
INSTITUES FOR HEALTH RESEARCH TO ADVANCE POLICIES THAT
PROMOTE SCIENCE AND EVIDENCE-BASED DECISION MAKING
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $58,000 to Canadian Institutes for Health Research
to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making in the
2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
• The transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is to support the
Scientific Director of the CIHR Institute of Gender and Health, to hold the position
of Departmental Science Advisor (DSA) for Health Canada for two-years
commencing on October 1st, 2019.
• A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) in the amount of $58,000 in operating
funds in 2019-2020 for a total of $236,200 between Health Canada and the CIHR
has been signed.
• The transfer of funding will ensure the department receives advice from the DSA
on complex science issues where independent consideration would be beneficial
to advance policies that promote science and evidence based decision-making.
KEY FACTS
 It provides for Dr. Cara Tannenbaum, the Scientific Director of the CIHR Institute of
Gender and Health, to hold the position of Departmental Science Advisor (DSA) for
Health Canada for two-years commencing on October 1st, 2019.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 As the DSA, Dr. Tannenbaum will advise on complex science issues where independent
consideration would be beneficial, participate in the network of DSAs that supports Dr.
Nemer (as Chief Science Advisor), and assist as appropriate with functions such as the HC-
PHAC Research Ethics Board, oversight of scientific integrity, science communication and
liaison on specific science matters with CIHR. Dr. Tannenbaum will also be asked to share
her insights and advice from her areas of academic expertise.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (58.0) (58.0) 0 0 0 (58.0)
Total Funding 0 0 (58.0) (58.0) 0 0 0 (58.0)
Allocation of Funds
• HC will transfer its contribution to CIHR through the 2019-20 Supplementary
Estimates B. The funding for future years will flow through Estimates Process.
• The total funding is $236,200 commencing October 2019 with the allocation of
$58,000 for 2019-2020.
Anticipated Results
• The funding will support the services of Dr. Tannenbaum, who will advise on
complex science issues where independent consideration would be beneficial,
participate in the network of DSAs that supports Dr. Nemer (as Chief Science
Advisor), and assist as appropriate with functions such as the HC-PHAC
Research Ethics Board, oversight of scientific integrity, science communication
and liaison on specific science matters with CIHR.
Monitoring and Measurement
 The management of funding and the performance are managed through agreed upon
MOU to ensure that the collaboration achieves its objectives.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA TO EXPAND HEALTH INFORMATION
IN THE CLIMATE ATLAS OF CANADA
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $75,000 to Public Health Agency of Canada to
contribute to a climate change and health project with the Prairie Climate Center to
develop health content in the Climate Atlas of Canada in the 2019-20 Supplementary
Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Prairie Climate Centre (PCC) at the University of Winnipeg produces
the Climate Atlas of Canada (“The Climate Atlas”), a national, bilingual,
public education online tool to share information on climate change in
Canada.
 Through its contribution to the Climate Atlas, Health Canada is supporting the
addition to the Climate Atlas of new air quality and health information for
Canadians. Using the transfer from Health Canada, the Public Health Agency
of Canada will fund this work through their established, multi-year grant
mechanism with the PCC.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada and PHAC both have a role to help Canadians maintain their
health and to prepare for and adapt to new health risks resulting from climate
change.
 Both Health Canada and PHAC identified an opportunity to add public health
content to the Climate Atlas. PHAC funded the addition of content related to
foodborne, infectious and zoonotic disease risks from climate change, and
Health Canada funded content related to air quality and climate change.
 PHAC has an existing multi-year agreement with PCC to incorporate health
messaging into their climate change public education tool. The transfer of funds to
PHAC allows for increased efficiency and lessened administrative burden for the
funding recipient (PCC).
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 HC provides Canadians with information on health effects related to air quality. The
PCC Climate Atlas is a highly effective tool to engage Canadians, and share health
information related to air quality and effects of climate change on health risks.
 Presenting air quality and health information in the Climate Atlas will equip
Canadians with the information they need to understand their health risks, make
informed decisions, and take appropriate action to preserve and improve their
health.
 The end result will be that new air quality and health information is available to
Canadians through the Climate Atlas of Canada.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (75.0) (75.0)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 (75.0) (75.0)
Allocation of Funds
 This transfer will ensure that the PCC agreement also includes Health Canada’s
objectives for the Climate Atlas for 2019-20.
Anticipated Results
 Canadians will be provided with information on health effects related to air quality.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA FOR THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE
OF DRUGS AND CRIME
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $96,682 to Public Health Agency of Canada for the
United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates
(B)?
RESPONSE
 Stigma can have a major impact on the life of people who use drugs,
people who are in recovery and their friends and family, negatively
affecting their quality of life and hindering their access to health, care
and social services.
 At the 61st session of the Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND),
Canada sponsored a resolution on stigma that was adopted by Member
State consensus, entitled, “Promoting non-stigmatizing attitudes to
ensure the availability, access and delivery of health, care and social
services.”
 As part of the resolution, Member States agreed to report on their activities
related to policies or actions they implemented that help to reduce stigma
faced by people who use drugs.
 The United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime estimated that it would cost
approximately $74,000 U.S dollars to gather data from Member States and
conduct an analysis to be reported at CND in March 2020.
 The Controlled Substances and Cannabis Branch of Health Canada
transferred $96,682.00 Canadian dollars (factoring exchange rate) to the
Public Health Agency of Canada’s International Health Grants Program to
provide funding to the UNODC for reporting on the stigma resolution.
 The UNODC has recently completed its analysis of Member State
responses, and will table a report at the March 2020 CND meeting.
 Canada’s support of this project will help to raise more awareness of
stigmatising attitudes; what countries can do to address the issue
domestically; and in turn help shape international drug policy to better
reflect human rights and public health considerations.
KEY FACTS
 Resolutions adopted at CND generally include an estimate on extra-budgetary costs to
implement the agreed upon actions outlined in the resolution. Extra-budgetary funding is
generally provided by the lead country. Canada was the lead for the stigma resolution.
 The Controlled Substances and Cannabis Branch does not have an appropriate
mechanism to transfer funds to international organizations directly from the Branch. PHAC
however manages the International Health Grants Program, a mechanism by which
international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio can be funded.
BACKGROUND
 At the 61st session of the CND, Canada sponsored a resolution on stigma that was
adopted by consensus and co-sponsored by 19 Member States, entitled, “Promoting non-
stigmatizing attitudes to ensure the availability, access and delivery of health, care and
social services.”
 The resolution called for CND Member States to report on their initiatives and activities
aimed to reduce stigmatising attitudes faced by people who use drugs.
 Funding was provided to the UNODC to develop the report based on Member State input.
UNODC activities to develop the report included:
o Distribution of an online questionnaire to Member States to obtain information on
what they have done to reduce stigmatising attitudes faced by people who use
drugs prior to and after the adoption of the stigma resolution in 2018; and
o Compilation and analysis of survey findings to develop a report that will be tabled at
the 63rd session of CND in March 2020 for Member States.
 In FY 2018/19, supplementary estimates (B) funding in the amount of $215,000 Canadian
dollars was provided to the UNODC under the same International Health Grants Program
mechanism to support a technical consultation meeting with stigma experts and
researchers. A report on outcomes from the meeting is currently being drafted by the
UNODC and is expected to be finalized by the end of 2020.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (96.7) (96.7) 0 0 0 (96.7)
Total Funding 0 0 (96.7) (96.7) 0 0 0 (96.7)
Allocation of Funds
 Funds to support UNODC efforts were allocated using PHAC’s International Health Grants
Program, which functions as an international transfer mechanism for the Health Portfolio to
fund projects with international organizations.
Anticipated Results
 It is anticipated that the tabling of the report at the March 2020 CND by the UNODC, will
allow Member States to have a better understanding of what other countries are doing to
reduce stigmatising attitudes, and learn from any best practices that they can potentially
implement within their own jurisdictions.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES FOR THE CLIMATE
CHANGE ADAPTATION PROGRAM
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $100,000 to the Department of Natural Resources to
support climate change adaptation program in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates
(B)?
RESPONSE
 Through Budget 2017, the Government of Canada is investing $29M
over 11 years, including $5.2M under the Climate Change and Health
Adaptation Capacity Building Contribution Program, to support the
Canadian health sector to prepare for and respond to the impacts of
climate change.
 A total of $100,000 in contribution funding to Natural Resources Canada
will provide support to their Climate Change Adaptation Program in an
effort to maximize climate change adaptation activities with positive
economic and health determinant outcomes.
 A changing climate presents a wide range of challenges and opportunities
across multiple government programs. The Canadian economy,
infrastructure, health and social well-being are already being impacted, and
these impacts will continue in the future.
 Adapting to these impacts requires collaborative action across government
departments to reduce the impacts of climate change.
KEY FACTS
 Through Budget 2017, Health Canada’s Healthy Environments and Consumer Safety
Branch (HECSB) secured $29M over 11 years to support climate change and health
adaptation that includes $5.2M under the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity
Building Contribution Program.
 $100,000 of these contribution funds from the Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at
Health Canada (Vote 10; Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building
Contribution Program) was provided to NRCan.
 NRCan’s Grants and Contribution program supports capacity building for climate change
adaptation through providing funding to provincial governments, universities, and other key
stakeholders. Contributions from Health Canada to this program will support integrating
health considerations into these broader initiatives and linking health into actions in other
sectors.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 With climate change, it is predicted that the frequency, severity and duration of extreme
weather events will increase in Canada and they will be associated with increased illness
and deaths. As part of the federal government’s efforts to help Canadians adapt to the
impacts of climate change, the Climate Change and Innovation Bureau (CCIB) at Health
Canada is mandated to protect Canadians from the health impacts of climate change by
building capacity at the local and regional levels.
 Health Canada established the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building
Contribution Program, which aims to fund projects that enable capacity building and
adaptation to help the health sector to prepare, prevent, and respond to the impacts of
climate change on the health of Canadians and the health system.
 The purpose of the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building Contribution
Program is to address two key areas: 1) Capacity Building; 2) Monitoring and Surveillance
 NRCan is the Government of Canada program lead on climate change adaptation and
delivers broad programs to support advancing climate change adaptation action and
capacity across Canada. It is recognized that supporting broad climate change adaptation
projects will encourage broad co-benefits to health. Funding to NRCan supports
addressing broader climate change issues that indirectly affect human health and helps
connect health considerations to action in other sectors.
 NRCan’s funding supports adaptation projects across jurisdictions in Canada and to reduce
community vulnerability to climate change. The results of this collaboration will further
strengthen the Federal Government’s position to build resilience by investing in climate
change adaptation programs under the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth and
Climate Change.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (100.0) (100.0)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 (100.0) (100.0)
Allocation of Funds
 Funds allocated will support NRCan’s climate change adaptation activities through their
Climate Change Adaptation Program.
Anticipated Results
 Maximize climate change adaptation activities with positive economic and health
determinant outcomes through NRCan’s Climate Change Adaptation Program

TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA TO DEVELOP INTERNATIONAL
SCIENTIFIC ADVICE ON FOOD ALLERGENS
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $110,000 to Public Health Agency of Canada to
support the development of international scientific advice related to allergens in the
2019-20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
• Health Canada secured funding in Budget 2019 to support its international
involvement in expert advisory committees and consultations, to inform
the development of food standards including for allergens.
• To support the provision of expert advice at the international level, Health
Canada is required to transfer funds to the Public Health Agency of
Canada, who is responsible for managing the International Health Grants
Program.
KEY FACTS
 Based on an agreement with the Public Health Agency of Canada, Health Canada
transferred $110,000 in Vote 1 via Supplementary Estimates in 2019-2020.
BACKGROUND
 The Codex Alimentarius Commission has requested the joint (Food and Agriculture
Organization and World Health Organization) scientific advice program to provide scientific
advice with regards to allergens. The issue of allergens in food has been considered by the
Codex Committee on Food Labelling on a number of occasions since 1993. The list of food
and ingredients known to cause hypersensitivity in the Codex standard is currently
outdated. There have been many scientific developments in food allergens over past
decades. As our understanding of food allergens and their management continues to
evolve, there is a need to review and revise the Codex standard to include the evidence-
based consumer understanding of allergens from the scientific experts.
 The Food and Agriculture Organization and the World Health Organization jointly operate
the food safety scientific advice program and are the sole preferred source of scientific
advice of the Codex member states. They are the guarantors for delivering independent,
neutral, fair and objective scientific advice to the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
 To maintain the independence of scientific advice from the Food and Agriculture
Organization and World Health Organization, international experts are selected to
contribute to this project only in their individual scientific capacity. An expert cannot and will
not represent the government of country of which he or she is a citizen, or the institution
with which he or she is associated. As such, any Canadian-based organizations would not
be eligible to share and influence the scientific advice in the area of food allergens.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (110.0) (110.0) 0 0 0 (110.0)
Total Funding 0 0 (110.0) (110.0) 0 0 0 (110.0)
Allocation of Funds
 Health Canada is transferring the funds to support the development of international scientific
advice related to allergens
Anticipated Results
The scientific advice generated by the ad hoc expert consultation will be the basis for
the development of international food standards and guidelines relating to food
allergens by the Codex while building capacity in the health, safety and trade of food at
national and international levels.
Health Canada’s food allergen labelling regulations are based on the Codex standard.
Health Canada would benefit by leveraging the resulting Food and Agriculture
Organization and World Health Organization scientific advice from this project in its own
risk assessments and if appropriate, in enhancing Canada’s current food allergen
labelling regulations.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF INDIGENOUS SERVICES TO DEVELOP
DISTINCTIONS-BASED HEALTHY EATING TOOLS FOR INUIT TAPIRIIT
KANATAMI
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $120,000 to the Department of Indigenous Services
to support the development of distinctions-based healthy eating tools for Inuit Tapiriit
Kanatami in the 2019-20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
• When Canada’s Food Guide was launched a year ago, Health Canada and
Indigenous Services Canada committed to working with Indigenous Peoples
to support the development of distinctions-based healthy eating tools for First
Nations, Inuit and Métis.
• To support this commitment, Health Canada agreed to provide funding to
Indigenous Services Canada to support Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami in its efforts.
• Indigenous Services Canada will provide the funding to Inuit Tapiriit Kanatami
through its existing funding arrangement to support this work.
KEY FACTS
 Healthy eating is a primary determinant of health. The intake of traditional food among
Indigenous Peoples, even in limited amounts, has been shown to improve diet quality.
BACKGROUND
 Helping Canadians make healthy choices in their day-to-day lives is part of Health
Canada’s core responsibilities. Health begins with the initial choices we make of what to put
into our bodies, including food.
 The Food Guide is Canada’s authoritative policy on healthy eating advice for Canadians. It
helps them choose foods that improve health, meet nutrient needs and reduce risk of diet-
related chronic diseases and conditions, such as obesity, heart disease, and type 2
diabetes.
 The new Canada’s food guide was released in January 2019, following an extensive review
of the best available evidence and consultations with Canadians, partners and
stakeholders. It is relevant to all Canadians, and is inclusive of Indigenous peoples.
 The integration of Indigenous considerations has been informed through engagement with
Indigenous academics, health professionals and National Indigenous Organizations.
Canada’s food guide recognizes that traditional food—and the way it is obtained—is
intrinsically linked to culture, identity, way of life, and thus overall health.
 As part of reconciliation, the Government of Canada acknowledges that program and
policy-making must support self-determination, as well as recognize the distinct nature and
lived experience of First Nations, Inuit and Métis. This is why Health Canada and
Indigenous Services Canada have committed to working with Indigenous Peoples to
support the development of distinctions-based healthy eating tools for First Nations, Inuit
and Métis.
Funding
Funding (000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (120.0) (120.0) 0 0 0 (120.0)
Total Funding 0 0 (120.0) (120.0) 0 0 0 (120.0)
Allocation of Funds
 These funds, and an additional $65,000 in 2020-2021, will be used to support engagement
activities to help inform the development of healthy eating tools for Inuit. The funding will
support:
 Regional engagement sessions to inform regional priorities
 A national meeting to determine national priorities
 Planning and coordination of meetings and development of discussion guide
Anticipated Results
A final report will be prepared on priorities for the development of healthy eating tools for Inuit.
TRANFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA FOR THE ORGANISATION FOR
ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT WORK ON
CHEMICALS MANAGEMENT AND PESTICIDES
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $150,000 to Public Health Agency for the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development for work on chemicals
management and pesticides in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Both Canada’s Chemicals Management Plan and the Pesticide Program
have placed Heath Canada at the forefront as a world leader in the
sound management of chemicals and pesticides, for the protection of
the health and safety of Canadians and their environment.
 Implementation of regulatory systems that are science-based, rigorous
and comprehensive can be time-consuming and costly.
 Health Canada’s support of the Organisation for Economic Cooperation
and Development’s work on chemicals management and pesticides
facilitates collaboration among member countries to support the
development of high-quality tools and methods that advance the
assessment and management of risks to human health and the
environment.
 A 2010 study estimated that the savings from OECD’s chemicals
management work is worth ten times the cost.
 The transfer of this $150,000 to the OECD will support Canada’s
chemicals management and pesticide regulatory work, and provide
good value for Canadian taxpayers.
KEY FACTS
 Launched in 2006, Canada’s Chemicals Management Plan (CMP) is a Government of
Canada initiative aimed at reducing the risks posed by chemicals to Canadians and their
environment. The Minister of Health and the Minister of Environment and Climate Change
are jointly responsible for the CMP, which builds on previous initiatives by assessing
chemicals used in Canada and by taking action on chemicals found to be harmful to human
health and/or the environment.
 Beginning in 2016, the Government of Canada committed $493.3M over five years to the
third phase of the CMP.
 In 2019-20 Health Canada transferred $150,000 to the Public Health Agency’s International
Health Grants Program (IHGP) to support the OECD’s Environmental Health and Safety
Programme’s work on advancing the development of innovative assessment methodologies
for the regulation of chemicals and pesticides, and to update test guidelines that integrate
emerging science.
BACKGROUND
Since the launch of the CMP in 2006, Canada has:
 addressed 3,621 of the 4,300 chemicals identified as priorities for attention by 2020-
2021, including draft and final assessments;
 found 456 existing chemicals to be harmful to the environment and/or human health;
 implemented over 90 risk management actions for existing chemicals (additional
tools are in development); and
 received approximately 6,160 notifications for new substances prior to their
introduction into the Canadian market. These notifications have been assessed and
over 298 risk management actions have been taken, when necessary, to manage
potential risks to Canadians and their environment
The OECD, through the Environment, Health and Safety (EHS) Programme, is a key partner in
the global sound management of chemicals. The purpose of this transfer is to provide a grant to
the OECD’s Environmental Health and Safety Division and the OECD Working Group on
Pesticides. The grant is intended to support health-related policy, technical and scientific
activities that help Canada maintain the highest standards for the sound management of
chemicals, including pesticides, to protect the health and safety of Canadians and their
environment.
Implementation of regulatory systems that are science-based, rigorous and comprehensive
can be time-consuming and costly. The OECD EHS Programme assists member countries in
developing and implementing high-quality chemicals management policies and instruments to
advance the assessment and management of risks to human health and the environment that
may be posed by chemicals, and to increase the efficiency of chemicals management
programmes for both government and industry.
A 2010 study estimated that the savings to government and industry from the work of the EHS
Programme is worth ten times the cost. Health Canada’s chemicals risk assessment activities
and PMRA’s regulatory activities will be supported in practical and concrete ways, as the EHS
Programme seeks to advance the development of innovative chemical assessment
methodologies for the regulation of chemicals and pesticides, and to update test guidelines that
integrate emerging science.
Health Canada does not have an appropriate mechanism to transfer funds to international
organizations directly. PHAC manages the International Health Grants Program (IHGP), a
mechanism by which international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio can
be funded.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 (150.0) (150.0) 0 0 0 (150.0)
Total Funding 0 0 (150.0) (150.0) 0 0 0 (150.0)
Allocation of Funds
 Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Healthy Environments
and Consumer Safety Branch (HECSB) are jointly providing funding for this grant to the
OECD through PHAC’s International Health Grants Program.
 PMRA is providing $100K to the Working Group on Pesticides for the development of
common approaches for the: identification of chemical substances; identification of data
requirements for regulation; advancement of work on digital risk assessment; and new
digital and mechanical technologies for applying pesticides (e.g. drones).
 HECSB is providing $50K to the Environmental Health and Safety Division for the
development of standard test guidelines and novel approaches and methods for risk
assessment.
Anticipated Results
 Advancing scientific knowledge and technical capacity for the sound management of
chemicals and pesticides to protect the health and safety of Canadians and their
environment.
 Key Project activities include:
o Development of internationally accepted methods for assessing the potential
effects of chemicals on human health and the environment, including new
approaches to support alternatives to animal testing. Areas of focus this year
include skin sensitivity, chronic toxicity, neurotoxicity, distribution and metabolism of
chemicals in the body and guidelines for interpreting biomonitoring data.
o Developing guidance to harmonize approaches and considerations for assessing
the risks of pesticides. Areas of focus this year include bio-pesticides and pesticide
residues in honey.
Monitoring and Measurement
 The International Health Grants Program (IHGP) facilitates the Health Portfolio’s
participation in international activities, strengthens collaboration, and promotes
understanding of global health issues of priority to Canada.
 The proposal was thoroughly reviewed by the Office of International Affairs for the Health
Portfolio (OIA), in consultation with relevant program leads at the Healthy Environments
and Consumer Safety (HECS) Branch and the Pest Management Regulatory Agency
(PMRA) at Health Canada, on the scope of the planned activities to ensure policy
coherence and alignment with the Health Portfolio’s priorities.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA FOR THE WORLD HEALTH
ORGANIZATION ECONOMIC EVALUATION OF THE IMPACT OF
CLIMATE CHANGE ON HEALTH AND HEALTH SYSTEMS
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $179,562 to the International Health Grants Program
administered by Public Health Agency of Canada to support climate change and health
initiatives in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Climate change is already having an impact on the health of Canadians and
on the health system. Understanding the costs of these impacts is critical
to be able to plan for and manage them effectively.
 A total of $179,562 funding is being provided to the Public Health Agency
of Canada in fiscal year 2019-20 to administer a grant to the World Health
Organization to support work to be done to assess the economic burden of
climate change cause by its impacts on health and health systems.
 This will provide us with a greater understanding of the economic impacts
as a result of climate change in the Canadian context.
KEY FACTS
 Through Budget 2017, Health Canada received $29M over 11 years that
includes $5.2M under the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity
Building Contribution Program. This includes supporting monitoring and
surveillance activities, such as the economic costs of health and health
system impacts of climate change.
 $179,562 is being provided as a sum of $101,562 in contribution funds and
$78,000 in grant funds from the Climate Change and Innovation Bureau at
Health Canada (Vote 10; Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity
Building Contribution Program).
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) manages the International
Health Grants Program (IHGP), a mechanism by which international
projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio can be funded.
 The funds are being transferred to PHAC’s Vote 10 for the class of grants
listed in the Estimates as “Grants to eligible non-profit international
organizations in support of their projects or programs on health.”
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 With climate change, it is predicted that the frequency, severity and duration of
extreme weather events will increase in Canada and they will be associated with
increased illness and deaths. As part of the federal government’s efforts to help
Canadians adapt to the impacts of climate change, the Climate Change and
Innovation Bureau (CCIB) at Health Canada is mandated through a Treasury Board
(TB) Submission approved in 2017 to protect Canadians from the health impacts of
climate change by building capacity at the local and regional levels.
 The purpose of the Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building
Contribution Program is to address two key areas: 1) Capacity Building; and 2)
Monitoring and Surveillance.
 The Monitoring and Surveillance initiative focuses on the development of national
monitoring and surveillance activities to better understand and track climate change-
related health and health sector impacts in Canada, including their economic costs.
 Capacity in this area is very limited in Canada and therefore engaging the World
Health Organization to lead this work will allow Canada to leverage international
expertise.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (179.6) (179.6)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 (179.6) (179.6)
Allocation of Funds
• Transfer of $179,562 from the Department of Health to Public Health Agency of
Canada for the World Health Organization economic evaluation of the impact of
climate change on health and health systems.
Anticipated Results
 Build the capacity for health economic assessment at multiple levels of decision making
including through:
o Developing an overall health, climate change and economic framework to help
policy makers understand and access the health savings, gains, and costs of
climate actions, including for efforts to prepare health systems for future impacts.
o Assembling existing economic assessment tools to help inform decisions on health
adaptation to climate change, and the health gains of mitigation actions, and,
o Carrying out a policy simulation exercise to assess the economy-wide effect of
various alternative climate adaptation and mitigation policies (e.g. Nationally
Determined Contributions under the United Nationals Framework Convention on
Climate Change), including effects on the health sector itself, as well as indirect
impacts on health from action in other sectors.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE
DEPARTMENT OF INDIGENOUS SERVICES FOR PUBLIC EDUCATION
ON CANNABIS IN INDIGENOUS COMMUNITIES
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $354,495 to to the Department of Indigenous
Services for public education on cannabis in Indigenous communities in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Public education efforts are a fundamental part of the Government of
Canada’s public health approach to legalizing and strictly regulating
cannabis.
 Through Budget 2018, the Government of Canada committed $62.5M to
support Indigenous organizations and community-based organizations
in educating their communities on the risks associated with cannabis
use.
 To date, approximately $8M has been committed to Indigenous
organizations to support evidence-informed, community-led and
culturally appropriate public education on the health effects of
cannabis.
 Funding in the amount of $354,495 is being transferred to Indigenous
Services Canada (ISC) and ISC is providing these funds to Nishnawbe
Aski Nation (NAN) through its existing Contribution Agreement with
that organization. NAN is using the funds to undertake a
comprehensive, multi-faceted cannabis public education campaign in
all 49 NAN communities.
KEY FACTS
 Budget 2018 cannabis public education funds generally flow through Health Canada grants
and contributions via the Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP). In some
instances, Indigenous organizations are provided funding through transfers to ISC. Given
that NAN was provided funding in 2018/19 to undertake cannabis public education activities
via an interdepartmental transfer, NAN indicated a preference to use the same mechanism
to receive funds to complete the 2019/20 activities.
BACKGROUND
 Public education and awareness efforts are fundamental to achieving the Government of
Canada’s objective of protecting public health and safety, especially for youth living on
reserve and in northern communities, where rates of cannabis use are particularly high.
 The Government is making significant investments to help ensure that Indigenous
communities and the general public understand the health and safety risks of cannabis use.
 As announced in Budget 2018, the Government is investing $62.5 million over five years to
support the involvement of Indigenous and community-based organizations in educating
their communities on the risks associated with cannabis use. This money is being provided
through the SUAP grants and contributions program.
 To date, approximately $8M has been committed to Indigenous organizations to support
evidence-informed, community-led and culturally appropriate public education on the health
effects of cannabis. Organizations funded include the Métis Nation of Ontario, the Native
Women’s Association of Canada, Ngwaagan Gamig Recovery Centre Inc., Nishnawbe Aski
Nation, Pauktuutit Inuit Women of Canada, Thunderbird Partnership Foundation, and
Whitefish River First Nation.
 In some instances, Indigenous organizations are provided funding to undertake cannabis
public education activities through transfers to ISC, and subsequent amendments to
existing Contribution Agreements. NAN received funding in 2018/19 though this
mechanism, and initiated a comprehensive and multi-faceted public education campaign,
with scheduled workshops across all 49 NAN communities. This work will be finalized with
an additional transfer in 2019/20 in order that NAN may complete community engagement
activities which are contributing to the development of culturally relevant public education
and harm reduction materials for all NAN communities.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (354.5) (354.5)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 (354.5) (354.5)
Allocation of Funds
 Indigenous Services Canada has amended the current funding arrangement with NAN to
provide funding received from Health Canada, in its entirety, to NAN, in order to complete
the implementation of a comprehensive and multi-component public education and
awareness campaign for the NAN on cannabis and its legalization.
Anticipated Results
An Annual Activity Report will be submitted by NAN to ISC which will then be forwarded to Health
Canada for review.
Monitoring and Measurement
Monitoring and measurement will take place as per the existing Contribution Agreement
between ISC and NAN.
Evaluation
Evaluation activities will take place as per the existing Contribution Agreement between ISC and
NAN.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO THE ROYAL
CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE TO IMPLEMENT REGULATIONS ON
ACCESS TO CANNABIS FOR MEDICAL PURPOSES
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $460,058 to the Royal Canadian Mounted Police to
implement regulations on access to cannabis for medical purposes in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The purpose of the Cannabis Act is to protect the health and safety of
Canadians, including by preventing youth from accessing cannabis
and displacing the illegal cannabis market.
 As part of the licensing of cannabis cultivation and processing under
the Cannabis Act, certain individuals must obtain a security clearance
from Health Canada. Security clearances help minimize the risk to
public health and safety, including the risk of cannabis being diverted
to an illicit market or use.
 The security clearance process includes a criminal record check in respect
to the applicant as well as a check of the relevant files of law enforcement
agencies, including intelligence gathered for law enforcement purposes, to
determine whether the applicant poses a risk to public health and safety.
 The RCMP provide services related to these security checks on a cost-
recovery basis.
 While most of the funding for these services is provided through
appropriations directly to the RCMP, Health Canada is providing $460,058
to the RCMP to cover an estimated shortfall this fiscal year as a result of a
need for a higher than anticipated demand for security clearances.
KEY FACTS
 The RCMP provides services related to the issuance of Health Canada security clearances
on a cost-recovery basis.
 While most of the funding for these services is provided through appropriations directly to
the RCMP, the transfer of $460,058 in supplementary estimates B is intended to cover an
estimated shortfall this year due to higher than expected demand for security clearances.
 Going forward, Health Canada anticipates that the funding provided through appropriations
will be sufficient in order to meet expected program demand.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 On October 17, 2018, the Cannabis Act came into force, which put in place a new strict
framework for controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis in
Canada.
 The purpose of the Cannabis Act is to protect public health and public safety, including by
preventing youth from accessing cannabis and displacing the illegal cannabis market.
 Under the Cannabis Act and the Cannabis Regulations, key individuals associated with the
holders of certain classes of licences must obtain a security clearance from Health Canada.
 Security clearances, and the associated checks, help minimize the risk to public health or
public safety, including the risk of cannabis being diverted to an illicit market.
 Conducted and coordinated by the RCMP, the checks go beyond the verification of an
individual’s criminal record and can include a search of the relevant files of law enforcement
agencies, including intelligence gathered for law enforcement purposes.
 Following the review of all relevant information provided by the RCMP, Health Canada may
issue a security clearance, where it determines that the applicant does not pose an
unacceptable risk to public health or public safety.
 The RCMP provides these services on a cost-recovery basis.
 While most of the funding for these services is provided through appropriations directly to
the RCMP, the amounts below are intended to cover an estimated shortfall this year due to
higher than expected demand for security clearances.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Capital Contributions Total
SUPPS B: 2019–20 0 (337.5) (122.6) (460.1) 0 0 0 (460.1)
Total Funding 0 (337.5) (122.6) (460.1) 0 0 0 (460.1)
Allocation of Funds
 These funds will be allocated towards salary and O&M, with details to be provided by the
RCMP.
Anticipated Results
To support the increase demand for security clearances, officials from the RCMP and Health
Canada revised projected Law Enforcement Record Check (LERC) requirements. The revised
requirement for fiscal year 2019-20 was determined to be 7,600, an increase of 2,119 from 5,481.

FUNDING – FOR A COMMUNITY-BASED APPROACH TO DEMENTIA -
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada requesting $4 million to support community-based
approaches to Dementia in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
REPONSE
 In June 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada released Together We
Aspire, Canada’s first national dementia strategy as required under the
National Strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias Act.
 The Dementia Community Investment, $20 million over 5 years and $4 million
ongoing, funded through Budget 2018, will contribute to the implementation of
key elements of the national dementia strategy.
 The Dementia Community Investment supports:
o community-based projects that seek to optimize the wellbeing of people
living with dementia and family/friend caregivers and increase knowledge of
dementia and its risk factors by developing, testing and scaling up
initiatives, knowledge and tools to support these communities; and
o a Knowledge Hub that will facilitate a community of practice for the
community-based projects funded by this investment, as well as translate
and disseminate program findings and best practices to the dementia policy
and program community across Canada.
KEY FACTS
 Dementia is the loss of mental function affecting daily activities, caused by brain diseases
and brain injuries. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form of dementia.
 According to the most recent data available, more than 432,000 seniors (65 years and older)
are living with diagnosed dementia in Canada. About two-thirds of Canadian seniors living
with diagnosed dementia are women. Annually, there are approximately 78,600 new cases
of dementia diagnosed in Canada.
BACKGROUND
• In June 2017, the National Strategy for Alzheimer’s disease and Other Dementias Act
came into force and called on the federal government to develop and implement a
comprehensive national dementia strategy, hold a national conference to inform the
development of the strategy, and establish a Ministerial Advisory Board on Dementia.
• Budget 2019 provided $50 million over five years for the Public Health Agency of
Canada to further support key elements of the strategy’s implementation. This funding is
expected to: increase awareness about dementia to support prevention, and reduce risk
and stigma; develop treatment guidelines and best practices for early diagnosis; and
improve our understanding of dementia and its impact through enhanced surveillance.
• People living with dementia and family/friend caregivers report negative impacts on their
physical, emotional, mental and social wellbeing, including depression, anxiety, social
isolation and physical inactivity.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 3 314 180.3 494.3 62.8 557.1 3,400 3,957.1
Total Funding 3 314 180,3 494.3 62.8 557.1 3,400 3,957.1
Allocation of Funds
 The Dementia Community Investment will invest in projects that propose:
o innovative community-based solutions that address the inter-related objectives of:
optimizing the wellbeing of people living with dementia and family/friend caregivers;
increasing knowledge of dementia and its risk factors; and undertaking intervention
research to assess the effectiveness of the program or initiative; and
o projects targeting at risk populations (e.g., women, Indigenous populations) more
susceptible to the potentially modifiable risk factors for dementia (e.g., physical
inactivity, social isolation, depression) and/or experiencing barriers to accessing
support (e.g., LGBTQ2+, Official Language Minority Communities).
Anticipated results
 The ultimate outcome of project investments through the dementia investment in
communities will be that Canadians living with dementia and their caregivers will see their
well-being improved as a result of increased access to and use of evidence-based
resources, knowledge and skills. Well-being refers to the diverse and interconnected
dimensions of physical, emotional, mental and social states that go beyond the traditional
definition of health (i.e. absence of disease).
Monitoring and measurement
 PHAC requires all funded projects to submit annual work plans, annual budgets and year-
end performance reports to enable it to track progress. In addition, the Knowledge
Exchange will play an important role in the application and dissemination of best practices to
the dementia policy and program community across Canada.
Evaluation
 Performance measurement and evaluation of the dementia investment in communities will
be aligned with current processes.
FUNDING FOR ADDRESSING THE CHALLENGES FACED BY BLACK
CANADIANS - TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada requesting $2.1 million to address the challenges
faced by Black Canadians in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 This new funding for the Public Health Agency of Canada will support the
development, implementation and evaluation of more culturally focused mental health
programs in Black Canadian communities.
 Racism and discrimination persist as barriers preventing the full social and economic
participation of affected communities and also negatively affect the mental health of
racialized populations, and contribute to inequities in social and economic conditions
that are linked to health.
 Budget 2018 allocated the Public Health Agency of Canada $10 million over 5 years to
support the development, implementation, and evaluation of more culturally focused
mental health programs in Black Canadian communities.
KEY FACTS
 Funded projects will be led by or delivered in partnership with Black Canadian community-
based organizations and leaders.
 Funded projects will acknowledge the unique social, economic, environmental and cultural
factors that promote or hinder mental health among Black Canadians.
 Funded projects will produce new knowledge on effective, cultural focused mental health
promotion interventions for Black Canadians.
BACKGROUND
 Budget 2018 allocated $19 million over five years in new funding to enhance local
community supports for youth at risk and to develop research in support of more culturally
focused mental health programs in the Black Canadian community.
o New funding of $10 million over five years was provided to the Public Health Agency
(2018-19 $0.4 million; 2019-20 $2.1 million; 2020-21 $2.3 million; 2021-22 $2.6
million; and, 2022-23 $2.6 million ).
o New funding of $9 million over five years was provided to Canadian Heritage.
 Racism and discrimination persist as barriers preventing the full social and economic
participation of affected communities. They also negatively impact the mental health of
racialized populations, and contribute to inequities in social and economic conditions that
are linked to health.
 Through the Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Initiative, the
Public Health Agency of Canada proposes a set of activities to support the development,
implementation and evaluation of more culturally focused mental health programs in Black
Canadian communities and strengthen the body of knowledge on effective approaches for
improving the mental health of Black Canadians.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 2 194 144 338 39 377 1,765 2,142
Total Funding 2 194 144 338 39 377 1,765 2,142
Allocation of Funds
 Approximately 10-12 multi-year projects in Black Canadian communities across Canada will
be funded over the course of the 5-year funding window.
Anticipated Results
 Public Health Agency of Canada investments are intended to foster positive mental health,
by improving the social environments in which Black Canadians live, work and play – which
in turn strengthens social well-being. Social well-being is a key, evidence-based measure of
positive mental health.
THE DRUG OVERDOSE CRISIS IN CANADA: FUNDING FOR ACTIONS
TO PROTECT CANADIANS AND PREVENT OVERDOSE DEATHS -
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) requesting $1.9 million to support actions
to protect Canadians and prevent overdose deaths in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates
(B)?
RESPONSE
 Canadians are facing one of the most severe public health crises in recent
history. Opioid-related overdoses and deaths are becoming increasingly
devastating and impacting families and communities across the nation.
 From January 2016 to June 2019, there were more than 13,900 apparent
opioid-related overdose deaths in Canada.
 This funding, announced in July 2019, will be used to support projects that
mobilize evidence to reduce barriers and enhance pathways to care for people
who use drugs; provide needed data and infrastructure to support the
development of early warning systems, and to expand understanding of
problematic substance use and the impacts on the health and well-being of
Canadians.
KEY FACTS
 Through this investment, the Public Health Agency of Canada was allocated $9.2M over
3 years ($1.9 million in 2019-20; $5.1 million in 2020-21; and, and $2.2 million in 2021-
22), to establish a grant and contribution program that will mobilize evidence to reduce
barriers and enhance pathways to care for people who use drugs, and expand and
enhance surveillance on substance-related harms and their risk factors.
 This funding is in addition to existing Public Health Agency of Canada investments of
$4.2 million per year to combat the opioid crisis.
BACKGROUND
 In July 2019, the Government announced a new commitment of $76.2 million over 5 years,
beginning in 2019-20, to further advance initiatives aimed at addressing the opioid crisis and
rising harms from methamphetamine use. This brought the total recent investment to more
than $100 million, including $30.5 million from Budget 2019. The total investments now
include:
o $41.8 million to scale up key life-saving measures in underserved communities,
o $33.6 million to mitigate the impacts of the illegal drug supply, and
o $31.3 million to identify and address emerging drug threats, and the growing use
of methamphetamines.
 Canadians are facing one of the most severe public health crises in recent history. Opioid-
related overdoses and deaths are becoming increasingly devastating and impacting families
and communities across the nation. Between January 2016 and June 2019, there were
more than 13,900 apparent opioid-related overdose deaths in Canada. The majority of these
deaths involved highly potent synthetic opioids like fentanyl, which has increasingly
contaminated the illegal drug supply in Canada, putting people who use drugs at high risk of
a fatal overdose.
 While the administration of health services typically falls under provincial jurisdiction, the
federal government, through the Public Health Agency of Canada works to promote and
protect the health of Canadians through leadership, partnership, innovation and action in
public health. Therefore, given the acute and severe nature of the crisis, the federal
government has opted to intervene to help support Provinces and Territories by removing
obstacles and accelerating the expansion of critical services.
 The impact of the crisis has been significant. For example, life expectancy at birth for males
has remained the same for 2016, 2017 and 2018. This was largely attributable to the opioid
crisis.
 The complexity of the crisis extends beyond opioid use. A variety of substances is often
involved in opioid-related deaths; approximately 70% of unintentional apparent opioid-
related deaths between January 2016 and June 2019 involved one or more non-opioid
substance, such as benzodiazepines, cocaine, or methamphetamines. In light of the dire
nature of the situation, the federal government has made significant investments to help
address the crisis.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 16 1,546 1,337 2,883 309 3,192 1,000 4,192
SUPPS B – 2019–20 6 568 848 1,416 153 1,569 300 1,869
Total Funding 22 2,114 2,185 4,299 462 4,761 1,300 6,061
Allocation of Funds
 Funding will target immediate measures to address persistent gaps in harm reduction and
reduce overdose deaths. Specifically, funding will support efforts in underserved
communities to expand access to a safe supply of prescription opioids to people suffering
with problematic opioid use, as well as support better access to opioid overdose response
training and to naloxone—a life-saving medication that can stop or reverse an opioid
overdose.
Anticipated Results
 This proposal is expected to advance the federal government’s comprehensive,
collaborative, and evidence-based response to the opioid crisis in order to reduce opioid-
related harms and deaths.
Monitoring and Measurement
• Pathways to Care:# of projects funded under the Supporting Pathways to Care for
People who Use Drugs (quantitative).
• % of participants (individuals working within the targeted systems/settings) reporting
improved knowledge/skills that can help reduce barriers to care for people who use
drugs (quantitative).
• Nature of changes to policy and practice within the system (qualitative).
FUNDING TO SUPPORT THE MÉTIS NATION IN GATHERING HEALTH
DATA AND DEVELOPING A STRATEGY - TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) requesting $1.2 million to support the Métis
Nation in gathering health data and developing a health strategy in the 2019-20 Supplementary
Estimates (B)
RESPONSE
 There is currently limited Métis Nation-specific health data and significant
challenges with existing data sources.
 Budget 2018 announced $6 million over 5 years to support the Métis Nation in
gathering health data and developing a health strategy.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada, through a funding envelope of $1.2
million annually for the next 5 years, will help the Métis Nation, the
Government of Canada, as well as Provinces and Territories, understand the
Métis Nation’s health needs in order to better inform evidence-based policies,
programs and services.
KEY FACTS
 A Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) on Developing a Canada-Métis Nation Health and
Wellness Accord was signed on August 21, 2018, aimed at improving health outcomes for
the Métis Nation. The MOU identified 13 themes to be addressed and includes Métis Health
Research, Surveillance, Knowledge and Evaluation.
 While Métis Nation health research, surveillance, knowledge and evaluation is identified as
a specific theme in the MOU, up-to-date and comprehensive Métis Nation health data
should also be viewed as foundational to support the evidence-based policy and program
decision-making in the remaining 12 themes identified in the MOU.
BACKGROUND
 This funding will help the Métis Nation, the Government of Canada, as well as Provinces
and Territories, understand the Métis Nation’s health needs in order to better inform
evidence-based policies, programs and services.
 This is not a new named grant. It is an increase to an existing grant authority under
Population Health.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants &
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,200 1,200
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,200 1,200
Allocation of Funds
 In the absence of a horizontal funding mechanism that fulfills the Canada-Métis Nation
Accord’s commitment to a renewed fiscal relationship with the Métis Nation, the funding
announced in Budget 2018 will allow PHAC to enter into six separate five-year grant
agreements with the MNC and its five Governing Members: Métis Nation of Ontario (MNO),
Manitoba Metis Federation (MMF), Métis Nation – Saskatchewan (MN-S), Métis Nation of
Alberta (MNA, and Métis Nation British Columbia (MNBC).
 The use of grants allows for reduced administrative requirements and refrains from
extensive financial oversight which is counter to a government-to-government relationship.
Anticipated Results
 The funding will enable the MNC and each of the Governing Members to increase their
capacity to gather and analyse health data. Specifically, the proposed initiative will enable
the Métis Nation to extrapolate Métis Nation-specific health data from existing databases
and analyse them in order to identify the health needs of Métis Nation citizens, including
those of its vulnerable populations. Where feasible, this data will include socio-economic
identifiers such as sex, age, etc. However, the extent to which this analysis will include
these factors is dependent upon the availability of this information in existing datasets.
1. # of human resources working on health data as a result of this funding
2. # of Governing Members with collaborative partnerships in place
3. # of new collaborative partnerships established to support health data
4. # of formalized agreements (e.g. Information Sharing Agreements) put in place to gather
and analyse health data
5. # of new technologies or technological upgrades (e.g. software, databases) implemented
to support gathering and analysis of health data
6. # of knowledge translation products developed
7. # of times knowledge translation products and analysis of health data are shared by the
MNC and Governing Members through various activities such as conferences, forums,
and meetings
8. # of times MNC and Governing Members’ health data analysis is used as evidence to
inform their policies, programs, and proposals
Monitoring and Measurement
 Although each of the recipients will be undertaking different activities to reflect their distinct
needs, priorities and circumstances, recipients will be reporting on a common set of
performance indicators.
Evaluation
• A decision on the need to evaluate this initiative will be done as part of the annual
departmental evaluation planning exercise and based on the assessed needs, risks and
priorities at that time.
REINVESTMENT OF ROYALTIES FROM INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY -
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) reinvesting $218,200 of royalties in the
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Royalties earned in the prior year for intellectual property generated by the Public
Health Agency of Canada are permitted to be re-invested annually.
 These Royalties are earned through licensing of intellectual property such as the
Ebola vaccine.
 The majority of this funding is reinvested in research and innovation and 35% is
shared among the inventors of the intellectual property.
KEY FACTS
 Pursuant to the 1993 decision of the Treasury Board respecting the retention of royalties
and fees from the licensing of Crown-owned intellectual property, Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC) is authorized to receive, through Supplementary Estimates, an
annual appropriation equal to all such revenues that the PHAC had remitted to the
Consolidated Revenue Fund in the previous year.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada Intellectual Property Policy guides the
development, ownership and stewardship of intellectual property at PHAC.
 PHAC employees involved in the conception, discovery or development of scientific or
technological innovations are eligible to share in financial awards arising from these
inventions or innovations up to a lifetime maximum of $250,000.
 Proceeds collected in fiscal year 2018-2019 totalled $218,182. The majority of this
funding returns to the PHAC to reinvest in research and innovation; the remaining 35%
is shared among seven inventors (current and former public servants).
BACKGROUND
 The Office of Intellectual Property Management & Business Development is responsible
for ensuring that all intellectual property created by the PHAC is prudently managed.
 PHAC collects licensing revenues and processes awards to inventors in a manner that is
consistent with federal policies and with Section 10 of the Public Servants Invention Act.
The 2018-19 royalty income totalled $218,200 of which:
 $201,300 was received as milestone and/or minimum royalty payments from licenses to
the rVSV Vaccine technology against viral hemorrhagic fever viruses ($163,200 for the
vaccine against Ebola; $25,000 for a vaccine against Lassa; and $13,000 for license
against Marburg & Sudan)
 $15,800 was for sales of diagnostic reagents using PHAC monoclonal antibodies
 $600 for publishing licenses to “Nobody’s Perfect” parenting guides
 $500 for minimum royalty payments from a license to Haemophilus Influenza B vaccine
technology
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total G&Cs Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 2.3 215.2 217.5 0.6 218.1 0 218.1
Total Funding 0 2.3 215.2 217.5 0.6 218.1 0 218.1
Allocation of Funds
The majority of this funding returns to the PHAC to reinvest in research and innovation; the
remaining 35% is shared among inventors.
Background information to understand our royalties profile over the past 5 years
TB Policy Guidance:
A 1993 TB decision approved the practice of authorizing the Agency to receive, through
Supplementary Estimates, an annual appropriation equal to all such revenues, which the
Agency had remitted to the Consolidated Revenue Fund.
Also specified by TBS is that the funds are intended to be used toward the costs associated with
incentive awards for technology transfer and other technology transfer activities undertaken by
the Agency (intended to offset costs of protecting and marketing intellectual property, as well as
paying royalty-based awards to public sector inventors).
http://www.tbs-sct.gc.ca/pubs_pol/dcgpubs/ContPolNotices/ip_retention_royalties-eng.asp (link
does not work)
Considerations:
PHAC consulted (April 2015) with TBS and took a look at the authorities and can confirm that
we can receive, via Supplementary Estimates, the revenues remitted to the Fiscal Framework
arising from royalties for intellectual property - provided TBS receives a CFO attestation.
The Department of Finance would need to approve a reprofile request for PHAC to access the
funding over multiple fiscal years instead of all in the year following the remittance. PHAC would
need to complete a reprofile request as per the regular ARLU process.
From a legal perspective there appears to be no limitations on how PHAC can use the licensing
revenues. The only requirement is that PHAC obtains the approval of the TB to bring the
funding into reference (via the estimates process).
Recommendation:
It is recommend that we work with both TBS and Finance to have the licensing revenues
returned over multiple years in order to invest progressively.
Summary table:
PHAC ROYALTIES FROM 2014-15 TO 2018-19
Year Royalties
2014-2015 3,790,735
2015-2016 2,497,410
2016-2017 23,391
2017-2018 121,240
2018-2019 218,182
Total $6,650,958
TRANSFER FROM THE NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL OF CANADA
TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA FOR GENOMICS
RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT - TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is National Research Council of Canada (NRC) transferring $844,735 to Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) for Genomics Research and Development in the 2019-20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The National Research Council (NRC) of Canada coordinates an annual
allocation of $3.98 million of Genomics Research and Development Initiative
funding for inter-departmental collaborative projects along shared priorities
and common goals.
 Funding of $844,735 this year from the NRC supports the Public Health
Agency’s role in the two current projects:
o $773,735 to produce new genomic-based tools that provide a fuller
understanding of contributions from the food chain to Antimicrobial
Resistance in pathogens that pose a high risk to human and animal health;
and
o $71,000 to develop innovative approaches to identify organisms associated
with environmentally transmitted diseases.
KEY FACTS
 The Genomics Research and Development Initiative (GRDI) provides the authority for NRC
to redistribute the funds to participating departments/agencies to support integrated federal
research projects that address horizontal priorities beyond the mandate of a single
department.
Antimicrobial Resistance
 NRC, Health Canada, PHAC, Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) collaborate in the Antimicrobial Resistance (AMR) project.
o The project supports integrated research that is improving our understanding of the
contribution of food and food production methods to AMR that is of human clinical
importance, and will inform policies and actions to control AMR.
 At the Agency, research funded by the AMR project is developing new tools to analyse and
share complex data to help to identify the most significant real-world transmission pathways
for AMR, and thereby also identify effective intervention points.
EcoBiomics Project
 NRC, Natural Resource Canada, Department of Fisheries and Oceans, Environment and
Climate Change Canada, AAFC, CFIA and PHAC collaborate in the EcoBiomics project that
is developing innovative tools to better understand the living systems in water and soil.
 In the environmental project, Agency researchers leverage samples supplied by natural
resource-based departments to develop new methods to detect insect vectors that spread
disease and to detect waterborne diseases. This work will inform approaches to adapt to
the impact of changing infectious disease risks driven by climate change.
BACKGROUND
 AMR is recognised internationally as a growing threat to human and animal health that if left
unchecked has the potential for enormous detrimental impact on health and on Canada’s
economy. The World Health Organisation recognises AMR as a “One Health” issue
because AMR bacteria can move between animals, humans and the environment.
Consequently, an understanding of AMR in each of those sectors is needed to develop the
most effective responses to prevent and control AMR.
 Climate change is recognised as a threat to Canada’s ecosystems, managed resources,
and agriculture, as well as the health of humans and animals. Consequently, increasing our
understanding of changes to biodiversity is important to monitoring the impact of climate
change and informs our actions to control risks, adapt and develop resiliency.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total G&Cs Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 844.7 844.7 0 844.7 0 844.7
Total Funding 0 0 844.7 844.7 0 844.7 0 844.7
Allocation of Funds
 $773,735 has been allocated to Antimicrobial Resistance project.
 $71,000 has been allocated to the EcoBiomics project.
Monitoring and Measurement
 NRC is responsible for reporting on this project. Each interdepartmental project team
provides a collaboratively drafted annual progress report directly to the NRC for that
purpose.
TRANSER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF NATIONAL DEFENCE TO
PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY FOR THE CANADIAN SAFETY AND
SECURITY PROGRAM - TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Department of National Defence (DND) transferring $240,000 to Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) funding for the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP) in
the Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP) is a federally-funded
program led by Defence Research and Development Canada’s Centre for
Security Science, in partnership with Public Safety Canada.
 This funding, provided through the CSSP, to enhance Canada’s capability to
prepare for, prevent and respond to chemical, biological, radiological-nuclear
and explosive terrorist threats.
 In addition, the CSSP is mandated to create and support federal laboratory
groups by acquiring the technologies necessary to fill the gaps in their ability
to mitigate the above threats.
 This funding transfer of $240,000 will be used by the Public Health Agency of
Canada to make an acquisition of biosecurity equipment that can be deployed
and is capable of detecting disease-causing agents.
KEY FACTS
 Funding will acquire a biological surveillance system which is a deployable instrument
capable of detecting disease causing agents which are important to biological security. This
machine will be used by the Microbiological Emergency Response Team in Canada’s
National Microbiology Laboratory for detecting disease causing agents.
BACKGROUND
• In the event of an emergency that poses a risk to public health, the Public Health Agency of
Canada, under the co-ordination of Public Safety Canada and with other Government
departments such as Health Canada, plays a key role in protecting the health and safety of
Canadians in the event of a chemical, biological or radio-nuclear emergency.
• The Agency's Microbiological Emergency Response Team (MERT) can be deployed to a
planned event and provide specialized detection and identification services for emerging
bacterial diseases.
• The MERT is also responsible for developing and maintaining national emergency response
plans, responding to bioterrorism or infectious disease outbreaks in Canada and
internationally.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total G&Cs Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 240 240 0 240 0 240
Total Funding 0 0 240 240 0 240 0 240
Allocation of Funds
 Acquisition of equipment.
TRANSFER FROM HEALTH CANADA TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH
AGENCY OF CANADA TO SUPPORT ACTIVITIES RELATED TO
ECONOMIC COSTING OF CLIMATE CHANGE AND HEALTH -
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) receiving $179,562 from Health Canada to
support activities related to economic costing of climate change and health in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 To date, the strong connections between health, economic and climate action
have not been well explored in policy and practice and there is limited
information on climate change’s economic costs and stresses to health
systems.
 To address this gap, Health Canada is transferring funding of $179,652 to the
Agency’s International Health Grants Program to be used as a grant to the
World Health Organization in order to support work to develop tools to aid in
the assessment of the economic impact that climate change has on health and
health systems.
 Health Canada is using the Public Health Agency’s platform through its
international health grant program to transfer $ 179,562 to the World Health
Organization to support two projects.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada (HC) does not have an authority to transfer funds to international
organizations directly. PHAC manages the International Health Grants Program (IHGP), a
mechanism by which international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio
can be funded.
 Health Canada’s funds are from Climate Change and Health Adaptation Capacity Building
Contribution Program, which is part of a Treasury Board Submission approved in 2017
(“Climate Change and Health Adaptation: Information and Action for Resilience”).
BACKGROUND
 Climate change is expected to magnify existing health risks and introduce novel ones.
Health decision makers need information on the costs of climate change impacts on health
and on health systems in order to make decisions that are more informed on adaptation
strategies to protect health.
 Taking action on climate change carries significant health, social and economic benefits.
These include reduced risk to human health that results from adaptation to global warming,
reduced greenhouse gas emissions and improved air quality, and better economic
outcomes from reduced financial costs to health systems.
 In the past, similar grants were provided to the World Health Organization to:
o Develop and consult on tools for assessing climate change vulnerability of healthcare
facilities;
o Develop targeted guidance for prioritization of available health adaptation options, and
indicators for measuring overall health system resilience; and
o Develop a framework for monitoring and surveillance of climate-sensitive diseases.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 179.6 179.6
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 179.6 179.6
Allocation of Funds
 The grants received by the World Health Organization will be used to fund the following
activities:
o Development of an overall health, climate change and economic framework to help
policymakers understand the health costs, savings and gains of climate actions;
o Collection and review of existing tools for health, climate and economic assessment; and
o Pilot testing the framework and tools via policy simulation exercises with 2-4 countries.
Anticipated Results
 Through this project, the World Health Organization seeks to promote a more coherent
approach to health, climate change and economics, and champion assigning a higher
priority for health in climate change mitigation and adaptation policies by providing a clear
and common understanding of how these considerations should be jointly assessed.
• The organization also aims to improve global practices in selecting health adaptation
options, and in promoting actions that improve health outcomes and climate change
mitigation.
TRANSFER FROM PUBLIC SERVICES AND PROCUREMENT CANADA
TO PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA RELATED TO THE
IMPLEMENTATION AND SUPPORT OF A CLUSTER MANAGEMENT
OFFICE AS PART OF THE LABORATORIES CANADA INITIATIVE -
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada receiving $177,678 from the Public Services and
Procurement Canada to support the implementation and support of a cluster management office
as part of the Federal Sciences and Technology Infrastructure Initiative in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Public Health Agency of Canada is participating in the Laboratories
Canada Initiative formerly announced as the Federal Science and
Technology Infrastructure Initiative in Budget 2018.
 Departments have been clustered around a series of common science
objectives and are in the planning phase for this initiative led by Public
Services and Procurement Canada.
 An annual amount of $177,678 for the next three years is being
transferred to the Agency to perform science planning and
collaboration work under the regulatory and security science cluster.
KEY FACTS
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has received funding to lead some of the
science planning / collaboration work relating to the RSS cluster in Guelph, Ontario.
 PHAC is participating in one Phase 1 project called “The Regulatory and Security Science
Cluster” (RSS). This project is led by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) with five
partnering departments: Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC), Canadian Border
Services Agency (CBSA), National Research Council Canada (NRC), Health Canada (HC)
and PHAC.
BACKGROUND
 Formerly know as the Federal Sciences and Technology Infrastructure Initiative, now
called the Laboratories Canada initiative will create a world-class, national network of
federal laboratories to support evidence-based decision-making, collaboration with
partners, and innovation in core program delivery, including regulatory responsibilities.
 Laboratories Canada is an ambitious 25-year plan to revitalize federal science.
o Whole-of-government, transformative initiative
o Driven by science outcomes.
 This initiative represents a significant opportunity to create positive and lasting change,
to better support and enable federal science now and into the future.
 Laboratories Canada will:
o create a framework for collaboration that will drive the federal science community
and the next generation of scientists;
o develop infrastructure and greater access to common tools to enable leading-
edge science; and,
o leverage partnerships with academia, industry, other governments, and key
players in research and innovation.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 177.7 177.7 0 177.7 177.7
Total Funding 0 0 177.7 177.7 0 177.7 177.7
Allocation of Funds
 The funding will be used to coordinate PHAC’s participation in the Laboratories Canada
initiative. It will support timely responses to information requests from Laboratories
Canada and the Regulatory and Security Science Cluster.
Anticipated Results
 To support effective coordination to meet Laboratories Canada execution schedule and
PHAC’s requirements.
Monitoring and Measurement
 Diligent financial management will be used to monitor the expenditures against the funding
budget.
TRANSFER FROM HEALTH CANADA TO THE PUBLIC HEALTH
AGENCY OF CANADA – TO SUPPORT ACTIVITIES RELATED TO
CHEMICALS MANAGEMENT AND PESTICIDES - TABLING OF THE
2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) receiving $150,000 from Health Canada to
support activities related to chemical management and the assessment of pesticides in the
2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Environmental factors such as air, water, soil pollution, chemical exposures
and climate change pose significant risks to human health.
 To address this gap, Health Canada is transferring funding of $150,000 to the
Agency’s International Health Grants Program to be used as a grant to the
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development in order to support
health-related policy, technical and scientific activities that help Canada
maintain the highest standards for the sound management of chemicals,
including pesticides, to protect the health and safety of Canadians and their
environment.
 Health Canada is using PHAC’s platform through the International grants
program to transfer the money to the OECD project.
KEY FACTS
 Specific Areas of work in which Health Canada is engaged include:
o The development of standard test guidelines;
o Furthering the development of novel approaches and methods for risk
assessment; and
o Collaborative work to overcome joint challenges related to emerging issues in
chemical management.
 Health Canada does not have an authority to transfer funds to international organizations
directly. PHAC manages the International Health Grants Program, a mechanism by which
international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio can be funded.
BACKGROUND
 Through the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), Health
Canada is collaborating with international partners including the European Union, the United
States and Australia on the science of chemicals management.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150
Allocation of Funds
o $50,000 will be directed to the OECD’s Environmental and Safety Division to aid in the
delivery of Canada’s Chemicals Management Plan and improve the health and safety of
Canadians.
o $100,000 will be directed to the OECD’s working group on pesticides to support ongoing
development and enhancement of approaches for the assessment of pesticides.
Anticipated Results
 The work supported by this grant will provide a venue to leverage Health Canada’s expertise
by collaborating with other countries to:
o Respond to and advance new and emerging science;
o Overcome shared challenges and find robust solutions; and,
o Increase the efficiency of chemicals management programmes for both industry and
government.
TRANSFER FROM HEALTH CANADA TO PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY
OF CANADA TO DEVELOP INTERNATIONAL SCIENTIFIC ADVICE ON
ALLERGENS - TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada (HC) transferring $110,000 to Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
to develop international scientific advice on food allergens in the 2019-2020 Supplementary
Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 As knowledge on food allergens and their management continues to evolve,
there is a need to review and revise the General Standard for the Labelling of
Packaged Foods to include the evidence-based consumer understanding of
allergens from scientific experts.
 To address this gap, Health Canada is transferring funding of $110,000 to the
Agency’s International Health Grants Program to be used as a grant to the
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations to support efforts to
update the list of food allergens included in the General Standard for the
Labelling of Packaged Foods.
 Health Canada is using PHAC’s platform through the International grants
program to transfer the money to the FAO project.
KEY FACTS
 The list of foods and ingredients known to cause hypersensitivity was included in the General
Standard for the Labelling of Packaged Foods (GSLPF) in 1999. Since then, there have been
many scientific developments in food allergens, including further research being conducted
on adverse health reactions of milk proteins.
 Health Canada (HC) does not have an authority to transfer funds to international organizations
directly. PHAC manages the International Health Grants Program (IHGP), a mechanism by
which international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio can be funded.
BACKGROUND
 The Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) is a specialized agency of the United Nations
that leads international efforts to defeat hunger. The organization seeks to achieve food
security for all and ensure that populations worldwide have regular access to enough high-
quality food to lead active and healthy lives. With over 194 member states, FAO works in
over 130 countries worldwide. The FAO facilitates partnerships for food and nutrition
security, agriculture and rural development between governments, development partners,
civil society and the private sector.
 The FAO facilitates partnerships for food and nutrition security, agriculture and rural
development between governments, development partners, civil society and the private
sector. Canada is a member state of the FAO.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 110 110
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 110 110
Allocation of Funds
 The grant will be used to support the following activities:
o To establish an ad-hoc joint FAO/WHO Secretariat to prepare technical documents,
oversee and facilitate meetings and draft reports;
o Consultant support for the Secretariat;
o Developing a risk assessment for food allergens, including data analysis and modelling,
to validate and update the list of foods and ingredients in the General Standard for
Labelling of Packaged Foods (GSLPF);
o Facilitating group discussions between multi-disciplinary experts to review and validate
risk assessment, scientific information and opinions; and
o Developing, publishing and distributing meeting and technical reports summarizing expert
findings and conclusions.
Anticipated Results
• Canada (as a member state of the FAO) will be able to leverage advice from the work
performed to support risk management decisions and conduct their own risk assessments.
More importantly, the technical guidance will help inform policy and program development
on food sensitivities and/or cross-contamination in Canada.
TRANSFER FROM HEALTH CANADA TO PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY
OF CANADA FOR THE UNITED NATIONS OFFICE OF DRUGS AND
CRIME - TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES
(B)
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $75,000 to Public Health Agency of Canada for the United
Nations Office of Drugs and Crime in the 2019-20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 A key priority for Canada is addressing the stigma associated with
problematic substance use and substance use disorders to help ensure
people who use drugs are treated with respect.
 In 2018, Canada sponsored a resolution entitled, “Promoting non-stigmatizing
attitudes to ensure the availability of, access to and delivery of health, care
and social services for drug users” that was adopted by consensus and co-
sponsored by 19 countries at the United Nations Commission on Narcotic
Drugs.
 To support this priority, Health Canada is transferring funding of $75,000 to
the Agency’s International Health Grants Program to be used as a grant to the
United Nations Office of Drugs and Crime to cover the costs of the reporting
requirements outlined in the stigma resolution, which commits member states
to report on their activities and initiatives to reduce stigma faced by people
who use drugs.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada (HC) does not have an authority to transfer funds to international
organizations directly. PHAC manages the International Health Grants Program (IHGP), a
mechanism by which international projects aligning with the priorities of the Health Portfolio
can be funded.
 The stigma resolution indicates that by 2020, Member States will report on their activities
and initiatives within their respective jurisdictions on what they have done to reduce stigma
faced by people who use drugs.
 To carry out this work, the resolution indicates that the United Nations Office of Drugs and
Crime (UNODC) will need funding to cover salary costs associated with gathering this
information from Member States and for developing a report that will be shared at United
Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs in 2020.
BACKGROUND
• In 2018, Canada sponsored a resolution entitled, “Promoting non-stigmatizing attitudes to
ensure the availability of, access to and delivery of health, care and social services for drug
users” that was adopted by consensus and co-sponsored by 19 countries at the United
Nations Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND).
• Canada has held Commission on Narcotic Drugs (CND) membership since 2006, and was
recently re-elected for another term (until 2022). As the competent authority for the UN drug
control conventions, HC attends CND annually and leads the Canadian delegation.
• Through the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, Canada is pursuing a more
balanced, evidence-based approach to drug policy, which includes prevention, treatment,
enforcement and harm reduction.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 75
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 75
Allocation of Funds
 Grant funding to the United Nations Office on Drugs and Crime will support the following key
activities:
o Distribution of an online questionnaire to the Member States to obtain information on
what they have done to reduce stigmatising attitudes faced by people who use drugs
prior to and after the adoption of the stigma resolution in 2018; and
o Compilation and analysis of survey findings to develop a report that will be shared with
Member States at the 63rd session of CND in March 2020.
Anticipated Results
• It is expected that this project will contribute to sharing information on best practices among
CND Member States with respect to reducing the stigma surrounding people who use drugs.
• It will contribute to improving awareness of stigmatising attitudes and promoting initiatives
countries can undertake to address the issue domestically.
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH TO PUBLIC
HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA TO EXPAND HEALTH INFORMATION
IN THE CLIMATE ATLAS OF CANADA - TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is Health Canada transferring $75,000 to Public Health Agency of Canada to
contribute to a climate change and health project with the Prairie Climate Center to
develop health content in the Climate Atlas of Canada in the 2019-20 Supplementary
Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Prairie Climate Centre (PCC) at the University of Winnipeg produces the
Climate Atlas of Canada (“The Climate Atlas”), a national, bilingual, public
education online tool to share information on climate change in Canada.
 Through its contribution to the Climate Atlas, Health Canada is supporting the
addition to the Climate Atlas of new air quality and health information for
Canadians. Using the transfer from Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of
Canada will fund this work through their established, multi-year grant mechanism
with the PCC.
KEY FACTS
 Health Canada and PHAC both have a role to help Canadians maintain their
health and to prepare for and adapt to new health risks resulting from climate
change.
 Both Health Canada and PHAC identified an opportunity to add public health content to the
Climate Atlas. PHAC funded the addition of content related to foodborne, infectious and
zoonotic disease risks from climate change, and Health Canada funded content related to
air quality and climate change.
 PHAC has an existing multi-year agreement with PCC to incorporate health messaging into
their climate change public education tool. The transfer of funds to PHAC allows for
increased efficiency and lessened administrative burden for the funding recipient (PCC).
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives/ /Objectifs du programme
• HC provides Canadians with information on health effects related to air quality. The PCC
Climate Atlas is a highly effective tool to engage Canadians, and share health information
related to air quality and effects of climate change on health risks.
• Presenting air quality and health information in the Climate Atlas will equip Canadians with
the information they need to understand their health risks, make informed decisions, and
take appropriate action to preserve and improve their health.
• The end result will be that new air quality and health information is available to Canadians
through the Climate Atlas of Canada.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 75
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 75 75
Allocation of Fund
 This transfer will ensure that the PCC agreement also includes Health Canada’s
objectives for the Climate Atlas for 2019-20.
Anticipated Results
 Canadians will be provided with information on health effects related to air quality.
TRANSFER TO THE ROYAL CANADIAN MOUNTED POLICE FROM
THE PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA FOR THE
PERFORMANCE OF LAW ENFORCEMENT RECORDS - TABLING OF
THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada requesting to transfer $6,517 to the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police for the performance of law enforcement records in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Human pathogens and toxins pose a small but significant risk to human health
and safety, either through accidental or deliberate release.
 The Public Health Agency of Canada issues Human Pathogens and Toxins Act
Security Clearances to individuals who work on Security Sensitive Biological
Agents, a subset of biological agents that if misused can pose a risk to
Canada’s national security.
 The purpose of the Human Pathogens and Toxins Act Security Clearance is to
validate that those individuals are reliable and trustworthy, and do not pose a
security or diversion risk by virtue of their access.
 Part of the validation process includes a Law Enforcement Record Check,
which is conducted by the RCMP.
 The additional funding of $6,517 to the RCMP will be used to fund an
anticipated increase in security checks this fiscal year due to the number of
pending expiries.
KEY FACTS
 Requirements for security screening have been in place since December 1, 2015.
 As of February 25, 2020, there are 493 individuals with a valid HPTA security clearance.
 PHAC processes approximately 35 new requests each fiscal year and security clearances
are granted for up to 5 years.
 Due to pending expiries, PHAC is expecting to process approximately 133 security
clearances for fiscal 2020-21. A further increase is anticipated for 2021-22.
BACKGROUND
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is authorized, under the Human Pathogens
and Toxins Act (HPTA) and Human Pathogens and Toxins Regulations (HPTR), to carry out
verifications, checks and assessments of applicants for HPTA Security Clearances.
 One of these assessments, the Law Enforcement Record Check, is conducted by the Royal
Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP) through a Service Level Agreement with PHAC. These
assessments are a fee-for-service.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 (4.9) (1.6) (6.5) 0 (6.5) (6.5)
Total Funding 0 (4.9) (1.6) (6.5) 0 (6.5) (6.5)
Allocation of Funds
 The transfer of funds to the RCMP is part of a fee-for-service agreement the Agency has
with the RCMP.
TRANSFER FROM PUBLIC HEALTH AGENCY OF CANADA TO THE
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH TO PARTICIPATE IN
THE EUROPEAN UNION JOINT PROGRAMME –
NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE RESEARCH - TABLING OF THE
2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) requesting to transfer $58,333 to the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to participate in the EU joint programme on
neurodegenerative disease research in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Approximately 50 million people are living with Alzheimer’s disease and
related neurodegenerative disorders worldwide. This figure is expected to
double every twenty years as the population ages.
 The European Union Joint Programme on Neurodegenerative Disease
Research (JPDN) was established to better coordinate research efforts
across countries and disciplines to more rapidly find causes, develop
cures and identify better ways to care for people with neurodegenerative
disease.
 This funding of $58,333 provides Canadian researchers the opportunity to
participating in the JDPN.
KEY FACTS
 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is the Canadian lead for the European
Union Joint Programme – Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND).
BACKGROUND
 The JPND was established in order to better coordinate research efforts across countries to
more rapidly find causes, develop cures and identify better ways to care for people with
neurodegenerative disease.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Grants and
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Contributions Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (58) (58)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 (58) (58)
Allocation of Funds
 These funds will be transferred to CIHR to support the participation of Canadian researchers
in the JPND.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires that all Nominated Principal Applicants for this funding opportunity submit an
end of grant report that allows CIHR to: obtain information on the impact of CIHR programs;
evaluate the impact of CIHR funding; and share the results of funded research with partners,
the research community and the general public.
FUNDING TO BUILD THE NEW CENTRE FOR PLANT HEALTH IN
SIDNEY, BRITISH COLUMBIA – TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) requesting $2.0 million to build the
new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Budget 2017 committed $80M over five years to replace the Sidney Centre for
Plant Health with a new, world class plant health research facility. This was part of
the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining modern
federal science infrastructure. This funding will help support the safety of
Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector, while facilitating trade and economic
growth to the benefit of all Canadians.
KEY FACTS
$2.0 million represents the funds required for fiscal year 2019-20 for the planning phase of the
construction of the new world-class facility. This facility will provide federal scientists and
partners with a state-of-the-art space and capabilities to collaborate on research opportunities
while protecting Canada's plant resources, and further supporting the agriculture and agri-food
sector.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
a. Establish a new model for scientific partnerships and accelerate the development of the Clean
Plant Network for Canada. The Centre for Plant Health will focus on monitoring, detecting, and
characterising viruses and other pathogens infecting tree fruit, small fruit, and grapevine, as part of
this Network and will include partners at all levels of government, academia, Indigenous groups,
and industry. This effort will strongly support the Vision for Science and Research in Canada and
will be a pathfinder foundational element of a modern national network of renewed federal
laboratories; and
b. Provide collaborative spaces and new capabilities for the development and sharing of innovative
science to support plant health, in collaboration with industry, federal and provincial governments,
and academia.
Funding
Funding and FTE
O&M Salary O&M Total
FTE Operating Capital Capital Capital EBP Total
Existing
Funding 0 67,877 0 0 0 0 67,877
SUPPS B –
2.6 269,907 1,661,719 1,931,626 53,981 1,985,607
2019–20
Total Funding 2.6 67,877 269,907 1,661,719 1,931,626 53,981 2,053,484
FUNDING TO RENEW THE GENOMICS RESEARCH AND
DEVELOPMENT INITIATIVE (GRDI) – TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) requesting $0.7 million for the Genomics
Research and Development Initiative (GRDI) in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Funding renewal will allow science-based federal departments and agencies to
maintain core genomics research and development capacity to continue
delivering genomics-based solutions to issues that are important to Canadians.
 The CFIA GRDI funding renewal is small portion of the larger Government of
Canada multi-department initiative that includes funding for eight science-based
federal departments and agencies: National Research Council of Canada,
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada, Health Canada, Public Health Agency of
Canada, Natural Resources Canada, Environment and Climate Change Canada,
Fisheries and Oceans Canada, and CFIA.
 The highest level goal of GRDI research is to deliver solutions to issues of key
importance to Canadians, including:
o Protecting and improving human health;
o Protecting the environment; and
o Managing agricultural and natural resources in ways that are sustainable
and benefit Canada’s economy.
 The GRDI program focuses on the specific role of federal government research.
The GRDI supports evidence-based decision-making, policy development,
formulation of standards and regulations, the delivery of federal laboratory
services, and by facilitating the development of Canadian commercial enterprises,
through strong collaborations with university and private sector partners.
KEY FACTS
 The GRDI exclusively funds federal government scientists to deliver on government
mandates and priorities in areas where federal laboratories have the responsibility to deliver
on relevant, strategic outcomes and program areas.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The GRDI program was initiated in 1999, during which time the GRDI member departments
and agencies had established formalized procedures and practices to effectively define
priorities, support departmental coordination and enable selection of the best genomics
research and development projects to address identified national priorities.
 GRDI funding benefits CFIA by supporting and building on core strengths of the
development of genomics tools and through the production of genomics knowledge to
strengthen programs to reduce base risks to food safety, and plant and animal resources.
Further developing genomics-based technologies to prevent, detect, and respond to high-
consequence pathogens (e.g. food-borne pathogens, emerging animal diseases),
reportable diseases (e.g. Foreign animal diseases), and pests (e.g. invasive species and
forest pests) will inform risk assessment and management approaches.
 Users that benefit from GRDI research within the federal government include the scientific
community; regulators; policy makers; decision makers; land managers; inspectors on the
ground who implement surveillance and monitoring programs; border agents; trade
negotiators; and international regulatory agencies adopting novel approaches.
 Users that benefit from this research outside the federal government include provincial and
territorial government partners, international bodies (e.g. World Health Organization,
Institute of Education), and industry stakeholders looking for a competitive edge; needing to
adapt to policy changes; engaging in international trade; and supplying food, agricultural
and forestry products.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Vote 90
Debt
Total Sub- Write-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total off Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 720 720 0 720 0 720
Total Funding 0 0 720 720 0 720 0 720
TRANSFER FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS AND
GOVERNEMENT SERVICES TO CANADIAN FOOD INSPECTION
AGENCY RELATED TO THE IMPLEMENTATION AND SUPPORT OF A
CLUSTER MANAGEMENT OFFICE TO HELP BUILD A STRONGER,
MORE COLLABORATIVE FEDERAL SCIENCE AND TECHNOLOGY
ECOSYSTEM – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) receiving $1.4 million for the
implementation and support of a cluster management office as part of the Government
of Canada’s commitment to building a stronger, more collaborative federal science and
technology ecosystem in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Budget 2018 announced the plan to rebuild federal laboratories and
advance interdisciplinary science.
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency is partnering with Agriculture and
Agri-Food Canada (AAFC), Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA),
Health Canada (HC), Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and the
National Research Council of Canada (NRC) to provide a seamless
integration of complementary government science capabilities. This will
serve to protect Canada’s people, animals and plants and advance
innovation and economic growth.
 The focus is on strengthening scientific collaboration between regulatory
and security science providers and users to anticipate and address
emerging threats.
KEY FACTS
 Budget 2018 announced the plan to rebuild federal laboratories and advance
interdisciplinary science. The Canadian Food inspection Agency along with Agriculture
and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC), Canadian Border Services Agency (CBSA), Health
Canada (HC), Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) and the National Research
Council of Canada (NRC) as partners will provide seamless integration of
complementary government science capabilities to protect Canada’s people, animals
and plants and advance innovation and economic growth. The focus will be on
strengthening scientific collaboration.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
o Resources from CFIA and the partnering organizations will staff an Integrated Project
Management Office (IPMO). This IPMO will work directly with its partners including
Public Services and Procurement Canada and serve as the single window into the
partnership throughout the project lifecycle.
Funding
Funding and FTE
Total
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 1,398,265 1,398,265 0 1,398,265
Total Funding 0 0 1,398,265 1,398,265 0 1,398,265
TRANSFER FROM NATIONAL RESEARCH COUNCIL OF CANADA TO
ENABLE THE GENOMICS RESEARCH AND DEVELOPMENT
INITIATIVE (GRDI) – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) requesting $0.3 million from the National
Research Council of Canada (NRC) for the Genomics Research and Development Initiative
(GRDI) in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Within the Genomics Research and Development Initiative (GRDI) funding
envelope, the NRC has the authority to redistribute funds to participating
departments/agencies for the purpose of funding collaborative projects along
shared priorities and common goals for the program which will add value to
existing agency resources.
 Funding will specifically support the delivery of the GRDI shared priority project
for antimicrobial resistance.
 The GRDI program allows science-based federal departments and agencies to
maintain core genomics research and development capacity to continue
delivering genomics-based solutions to issues that are important to Canadians.
 The highest level goal of GRDI research is to deliver solutions to issues of key
importance to Canadians, including:
o Protecting and improving human health;
o Protecting the environment; and
o Managing agricultural and natural resources in ways that are sustainable
and benefit Canada’s economy.
 The GRDI program focuses on the specific role of federal government research.
The GRDI supports evidence-based decision-making, policy development,
formulation of standards and regulations, the delivery of federal laboratory
services, and by facilitating the development of Canadian commercial enterprises,
through strong collaborations with university and private sector partners.
KEY FACTS
 The GRDI exclusively funds federal government scientists to deliver on government
mandates and priorities, in areas where federal laboratories have the responsibility to
deliver on relevant strategic outcomes and program areas.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Vote 90
Debt
Total Sub- Write-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total off Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 268 268 0 268 0 268
Total Funding 0 0 268 268 0 268 0 268
TRANSFER FROM CANDIAN FOOD INSPECTION AGENCY (CFIA) TO
HEALTH CANADA (HC) IN SUPPORT OF CFIA’S FOOD FRAUD
PROGRAMMING AND TO FACILTATE THE SHARING OF
INFORMATION – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B).
ISSUE
Why is Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) transferring $0.6 million to Health
Canada (HC) in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Through Budget 2019, CFIA received $24.4M plus $5.2M ongoing as part of the
Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC) led Food Policy for Canada.
 As part of the Food Policy funding, CFIA is enhancing its efforts to address food
fraud and misrepresentation.
 Food fraud includes the intentional misrepresentation of food, and it is an
international issue of growing importance.
 Some food fraud may have health and nutritional implications.
 Health Canada (HC) is the authority that is responsible for setting the standards,
policies and guidelines for the safety and nutritional quality of all food sold in
Canada (including regulatory and non-regulatory measures).
KEY FACTS
To support the food fraud initiative, a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) has been
developed with Health Canada to undertake a number of actions related to activities on food
fraud including analytical method development, food analysis and health risk assessments.
These activities will allow Health Canada (HC) to fulfil its mandate in the oversight of assessing
the health risks of all food sold in Canada and support the development of appropriate risk
management measures by CFIA to minimize the number and type of food fraud incidents
moving forward. Additionally, the MOU specified that the funding for this initiative will transfer
from CFIA to Health Canada through the estimates process.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
Activities under the MOU with Health Canada (HC) includes:
 Conducting health risk assessments as requested by CFIA should an anomaly appear
during the course of an inspection or in support of an investigation. Health Canada will
communicate the results of these assessments to CFIA to support CFIA compliance and
enforcement activities.
 Developing and validating analytical methodologies that will contribute to the assessment
of health risks, specifically in the proactive identification of new and emerging issues
involving food fraud; and
 Conducting analysis of the food supply (retrospective and ongoing) through targeted
surveys (i.e., the Total Diet Study) to identify trends associated with determining the initial
instances of food fraud and the extent of the occurrences and impact across the food
supply.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 (618) (618) 0 (618) (618)
Total Funding 0 0 (618) (618) 0 (618) (618)
Anticipated Results
Health Canada’s contributions are expected to aid in achieving the overall Tackling Food Fraud
anticipated results, which includes: identification of food misrepresentations or fraud; and
enhancement of consumer confidence.
FUNDING TO SUPPORT RESEARCH ON HUMAN PAPILLOMAVIRUS
(HPV) VACCINATION AND SCREENING METHODS TO CONTRIBUTE
TO THE REDUCTION OF CERVICAL CANCER IN CANADA – TABLING
OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why are the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) requesting $2,014,845 to support
research aimed at reducing the incidence of cervical cancer in Canada in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Access to Human Papillomavirus (HPV) vaccination and screening methods is key
to reducing the incidence of cervical cancer in Canada. While gains have been
made in reducing the overall rates of cervical cancer in Canada, some
underserved populations and communities, including rural, Indigenous and
immigrant women, continue to be disproportionately impacted by this disease
often because of barriers to accessing these effective treatment tools.
 The funding of $2,014,845 in 2019-2020 is part of a larger $10 million investment
that our Government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR),
will be providing to the BC Women’s Hospital and Health Centre to support
cervical cancer research.
 It is important to note that our Government, through CIHR, has invested more than
$19.5 million over the past five years in research related to cervical cancer. This
new investment will build on previous efforts and will support the eradication of
cervical cancer in Canada.
KEY FACTS
 The Government, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, invested more than
$19.5 million over the last five years in research related to cervical cancer.
 This $10 million investment over five years, starting in 2019-20, to the B.C. Women’s
Hospital & Health Centre builds on these previous investments in cervical cancer research
and will support the goal of eradicating cervical cancer in Canada.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
• The investment of $10 million over five years, starting in 2019-20, to the B.C. Women’s
Hospital & Health Centre will support research to:
o better understand socio-economic barriers to HPV vaccination and cervical
cancer screening methods;
o develop strategies to address these barriers; and
o explore possible new approaches to cervical cancer screening and prevention
through the development of new technologies and better screening practices.
• This investment will focus on one province, British Columbia (BC), as this province has
considerable strengths for monitoring the population level effectiveness of cervical
cancer prevention programs. Other provinces and territories will be part of the
investment and uptake through knowledge translation activities.
• The BC Women’s Hospital Global HPV Control team (the research team) is expected to lead
the establishment of a network of collaborative centres to facilitate the translation of
research knowledge and best practices on a national scale to maximize the impact and
outcomes of the research program across jurisdictions for the benefit of Canadians. The
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) will collaborate with CIHR to provide oversight of
the initiative and disseminate results.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 71 15 86 19 105 1,929 2,034
Total Funding 0 71 15 86 19 105 1,929 2,034
Allocation of Funds
 CIHR is receiving a total of $10,000,000 over five years (from 2019-20 to 2023-24) from the
fiscal framework for this initiative. The break down of funding is as follows:
 A total of $9,884,540 in grants (including $1,928,588 in 2019-20); and
 A total of $105,496 in operating costs, including employee benefits plans (all in 2019-20).
 The remaining $9,964 (all in 2019-20) is held centrally in an earmarked reserve to offset
accommodation requirements and incremental costs of providing core information
technology services.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR will monitor the achievement of results through the ongoing monitoring and
assessment of its Research in Priority Areas Performance Information Profile (PIP). CIHR
has identified a subset of outcomes and measures from CIHR’s Research in Priority Areas
PIP that demonstrate progress towards achieving the objectives of the incremental funding
and will be monitored on an annual basis.
BUDGETARY TRANSFER FROM THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND
ENGINEERING RESEARCH COUNCIL TO THE CANADIAN INSTITUTES
OF HEALTH RESEARCH FOR THE CANADA RESEARCH CHAIRS
PROGRAM – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $12.4 million being transferred from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for the Canada Research Chairs Program
in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 As you may know, the Canada Research Chairs is a tri-agency (i.e., the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC), and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council (SSHRC)) program to attract and retain a diverse community of world-
class researchers, to reinforce academic research and training excellence in
Canadian postsecondary institutions. The program is administered by SSHRC, on
behalf of the three granting agencies.
 The purpose of this transfer is to allocate more funding for chairs in the area of
health research to reflect capacity in this area.
 SSHRC – which falls under the mandate of the Standing Committee on Industry,
Science and Technology - is also receiving a transfer from NSERC for this
program.
KEY FACTS
 The Canada Research Chairs is a competitive funding program managed by the Social
Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) in collaboration with CIHR and the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC). Chairs are funded by the
agency responsible for the respective research area.
 The purpose of this transfer from NSERC to CIHR is to allocate more funding for chairs in
the area of health research to reflect capacity in this area.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
• The Canada Research Chairs (CRC) is a tri-agency (CIHR, NSERC, SSHRC) program to
attract and retain a diverse community of world-class researchers, to reinforce academic
research and training excellence in Canadian postsecondary institutions.
• Chairholders aim to achieve research excellence in engineering and the natural sciences,
health sciences, humanities, and social sciences. They improve our depth of knowledge and
quality of life, strengthen Canada's international competitiveness, and help train the next
generation of highly skilled people through student supervision, teaching, and the
coordination of other researchers' work.
• Budget 2018 announced new investments of $210M over 5 years and $50M ongoing for the
Canada Research Chair program.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M EBP Grants Total
Operating total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 104,582 104,582
SUPPS B – 2019–
0 0 0 0 0 0 12,378 12,378
20
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 116,960 116,960
Allocation of Funds
 The transferred funding will be allocated to support Canada Research Chairs for health
research positions.
Monitoring and Measurement
 The CRC program is administered by SSHRC, on behalf of the three granting agencies. In
addition, the financial monitoring frameworks ensure that the three granting agencies
periodically monitor recipient institutions to determine if the institutions have the necessary
financial and administrative tools to properly and effectively manage research funds.
FUNDING TO ENSURE THE VIABILITY OF A COLLABORATIVE
AGREEMENT FOR THE RENEWAL OF EXACTIS INNOVATION, A
BUSINESS-LED NATIONAL CENTRE OF EXCELLENCE (NCE) –
TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $1,994,788 being transferred from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC) to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) for the Business-led
Networks National Centre of Excellence (NCE) in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Government has taken steps to further drive innovation in health research
and to commercialize discoveries by establishing programs such as the Business-
led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCEs).
 The goal of the BL-NCE program is to address private sector research and
development (R&D) challenges in Canadian Research priority areas by
encouraging private sector investment in R&D, innovation and competitiveness.
 Unique among granting agency programs, the BL-NCE program allows networks
to fund private sector partners directly so they can conduct research at their own
facilities.
 The transfer of funds from NSERC to CIHR is to support a BL-NCE related to
health research, Exactis Innovation.
 Exactis Innovation is conducting promising research on new therapeutics in
cancer, including pediatric cancer, and has delivered significant results since its
inception.
 The BL-NCE program is a Tri-Agency program administered by NSERC on behalf
of CIHR, the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) and
NSERC.
KEY FACTS
 The purpose of this transfer is to redistribute funding between the three agencies to align
with actual funding requirements under the Business-Led Networks of Centres of
Excellence program.
 Exactis Innovation was part of the 2018 BL-NCE Renewal Competition and in response to
their application for renewal, the NCE Management Committee had recommended a series
of conditions to be met in exchange for receiving additional funds.
 In July 2019, the NCE Steering Committee approved a second funding cycle of $18M over
five years (until March 2024).
 This is the final competition and renewal for the Business-Led Networks under the NCE
Program.
 The Funding agreement is based on the one signed during the first five-year cycle and no
new funds are being requested for this fiscal year.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
• The pharmaceutical industry has been increasingly shifting towards more partnerships with
academia to drive innovation in health research and to commercialize these discoveries.
• The Government has taken steps to capitalize on this trend as of 2007 and, under its
Science and Technology Strategy it put in place programs to ensure Canada can lead in this
shift, including the Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCEs).
• The program was set up in 2007 and made permanent in the 2012 federal budget, with
annual funding of $12 million.
• The goal of the BL-NCE program is to address private sector research and development
(R&D) challenges in Canadian Research priority areas through the creation of business-led
research networks that increase private sector investment in R&D, innovation and
competitiveness.
o The BL-NCE program is jointly administered by Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC), the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC) and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) in partnership with Industry Canada and Health Canada.
o The program’s partnership model places academic and private-sector partners
on an equal level and its matching requirements mean that at least half of each
network’s research costs are paid by partners.
o The program was made permanent in the 2012 federal budget, with annual
funding of $12 million.
 Exactis Innovation is one of the Business-led Networks and has been established to achieve
the following goals among others:
o To optimize clinical and translational research in cancer by developing tools,
approaches and methods to ensure the rapid and effective transition from
research to clinical practice.
o To act as an interface organization between other research organizations,
contributors and participants and to ensure optimal results through KT in
particular in the field of oncology and of therapeutic resistance mechanisms of
metastatic cancers.
o To finance and realize R&D projects in the field of cancer based on biomarkers
and increase value of results.
 Exactis has built a pan-Canadian research network of 11 sites and launched the Personalize
My Treatment (PMT) platform, which collects clinical and molecular information about
thousands of cancer patients that monitors the evolution of the cancer.
o Three multi-centre, serial biopsy trials in colorectal and lung cancer were
managed by Exactis and are in the closing/reporting stages, with promising
biomarker discoveries to be published in the coming months.
o Currently, Exactis is supporting and managing the TRAM Study, a Biomarker
Phase 2 study for pediatric patients open at five academic centers in Canada
that leverages the specific expertise in targeted trials (CHU Ste Justine, Montreal
Children’s, CHUL, SickKids and BC Children’s Hospital).
 In order to modernize these programs and make them more accessible for businesses,
through Budget 2018 the Government consolidated the Centres of Excellence for
Commercialization and Research and the Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence
programs and transferred responsibility for these programs and associated funding to the
Strategic Innovation Fund.
o This is the final competition and renewal for the Business-Led Networks under the
NCE Program.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,737 1,737
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,995 1,995
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 3,732 3,732
Allocation of Funds
 Funds will be strictly used a grant transfer to Exactis Innovation under the agreement as part
of the BL-NCE program. No funds will be used to fill operational needs.
Anticipated Results
 Having a large clinical and molecular database of patients and their banked tumours will
allow rapid identification of patient-treatment matches, resulting in faster access for patients
to new treatments, an accelerated clinical development process and reduced clinical trial
costs.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires all grant recipients to complete an end of grant report that allows CIHR to:
obtain information on the impact of CIHR programs; evaluate the impact of CIHR funding;
and share the results of funded research with partners, the research community and the
general public.
FUNDING TO THE CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH
FOR RESEARCH ON THE POTENTIAL THERAPEUTIC BENEFITS AND
HARMS ASSOCIATED WITH CANNABIS USE – TABLING OF THE
2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why are the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) requesting $150,000 for research
on the potential therapeutic benefits and harms associated with cannabis use in the 2019–20
Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 CIHR is supporting research related to the legalization and regulation of cannabis
and is working closely with Health Portfolio partners to develop timely research
evidence through the Integrated Cannabis Research Strategy.
 The $150,000 from Veterans Affairs Canada will support research on the impact of
chronic cannabis use for medical purposes on Veteran health and determinants of
health.
 This funding is expected to enhance capacity development and training related to
research on cannabis consumption among Veterans as well as improving
knowledge dissemination to the public and health professionals.
KEY FACTS
 Veterans Affairs Canada is transferring $150,000 to CIHR in 2019-20 to support team
grants on the health impact of chronic cannabis use among Veterans.
 This funding is one component of a $19.5M research initiative on the potential therapeutic
benefits and harms associated with cannabis use.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The Integrated Cannabis Research Strategy (ICRS) is a CIHR-led trans-disciplinary
initiative that seeks to support the advancement and translation of scientific knowledge on
cannabis in Canada.
 Through the ICRS, CIHR is making coordinated investments in cannabis research in order
to build the evidence base on the benefits and harms of cannabis use under different
contexts; establish rigorous clinical evidence for the therapeutic use of cannabis; and
develop common data standards.
 The $150,000 in funding to support research on impact of chronic cannabis use on Veteran
health is part of a larger $19.5M interdisciplinary initiative that is fostering collaboration and
resource sharing among researchers across different domains including health and social
sciences.
 The priority research areas being addressed through this initiative were identified through
stakeholder consultations, including:
o Neurodevelopment outcomes associated with fetal/infant exposure through
maternal cannabis use;
o Potential therapeutic use of cannabis in pain; and
o Impact of cannabis smoke/vape on cardiovascular and respiratory health.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150
Allocation of Funds
 In addition to the $150,000 received by CIHR from Veterans Affairs Canada in 2019-2020,
Veterans Affairs Canada will transfer $2.85M to CIHR over the next five fiscal years for a
total of $3M. This funding will support two teams of researchers for up to five years for a
total of $1.5M per team.
Anticipated Results
 This funding will support two teams of researchers that will generate evidence on the impact
of chronic cannabis use for medical purposes on Veteran health and determinants of health.
 Teams that employ diverse approaches such as clinical, health services and/or policy
research will be supported.
 This funding is expected to enhance capacity development and training in cannabis
research while connecting researchers to existing knowledge translation efforts undertaken
by the non-profit sector across Canada.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires all Nominated Principal Applicants for this funding opportunity submit an end
of grant report that allows CIHR to: obtain information on the impact of CIHR programs;
evaluate the impact of CIHR funding; and share the results of funded research with partners,
the research community and the general public.
BUDGETARY TRANSFER FROM NSERC AND SSHRC TO CIHR FOR
THE HEALTHY CITIES RESEARCH TRAINING PLATFORM – TABLING
OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $100,000 being transferred from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) to the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) for the Healthy Cities Research Training
Platform in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) is leading the Healthy Cities
Research Initiative, which aims to make our cities healthier, sustainable and
equitable.
 As part of this initiative, CIHR is partnering with the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and the Social Sciences and Humanities
Research Council (SSHRC) to create a national Healthy Cities Research Training
Platform (HCRTP) that will help develop capacity among the country to design,
implement and sustain real-world solutions for healthy cities.
 As a first step towards implementing this new platform, CIHR, NSERC and SSHRC
are funding development grants that will support initial research and planning
activities within the research community. This requires an investment of $150,000;
$50,000 from each of the three research granting agencies.
KEY FACTS
 NSERC and SSHRC are each transferring $50,000 (for a total of $100,000) to CIHR in
2019-20 to support development grants associated with the implementation of the Healthy
Cities Research Training Platform (HCRTP).
 CIHR is also contributing $50,000 towards this funding opportunity, for a total investment of
$150,000.
 These development grants make up the first of two stages to develop and implement the
HCRTP. Total funding for this collaboration, divided equally among the three agencies
(CIHR, NSERC, SSHRC), amounts to $5.1M over eight years starting in 2019-20.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 CIHR, NSERC and SSHRC are jointly funding a national HCRTP to develop an
interdisciplinary, inter-sectoral training initiative that will generate cutting-edge knowledge
and build capacity for implementation science and solutions-based research.
 This training platform will enable researchers with the expertise to design, implement and
sustain real-world solutions for healthy cities (i.e. inclusive, safe, equitable, resilient, age-
friendly, smart and sustainable urban environments).
 The HCRTP is a major component of a broader initiative led by CIHR called the Healthy
Cities Research Initiative (HCRI).
 In 2019-20, NSERC, SSHRC and CIHR are each committed to contributing $50,000 for a
total amount of $150,000 that will be used to fund up to of six $25,000 developmental
grants. Developmental grants will fund activities that contribute to the further development
of a grant application (e.g. partnership building, conducting environmental scans, and
consultations) for the full application stage of the HCRTP.
 Over the next seven fiscal years, it is expected that NSERC and SSHRC will each transfer
an additional $1,650,000 to CIHR to support the implementation of the full application of the
HCRTP. The HCRTP represents a total investment of $5.1 million over 8 years (including
$1.7 million from CIHR).
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 50
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 100 100
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 150 150
Allocation of Funds
 The $100,000 transfer includes $50,000 from NSERC and $50,000 from SSHRC. This
amount will be combined with a $50,000 investment from CIHR for a total of $150,000 that
will be used to support six $25,000 development grants administered by CIHR.
Anticipated Results
 This funding will support the creation of the HCRTP. It is anticipated that this initiative will
help to build capacity within the research and practitioner communities around designing
and implementing evidence-based interventions in urban contexts to improve population
health and health equity.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires that all Nominated Principal Applicants for this funding opportunity submit
an end of grant report that allows CIHR to: obtain information on the impact of CIHR
programs; evaluate the impact of CIHR funding; and share the results of funded research
with partners, the research community and the general public.
BUDGETARY TRANSFER FROM PHAC TO CIHR FOR THE EUROPEAN
UNION JOINT PROGRAMME ON NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASE
RESEARCH – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $58,334 being transferred from the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research to participate in the European Union Joint Programme –
Neurodegenerative Disease Research in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Our Government is committed to advancing research that will help to prevent
dementia, advancing therapies, and improve the quality of life of people living with
dementia and their caregivers.
 To advance these efforts, Canada – through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) – has been a longstanding partner in the European Union Joint
Programme – Neurodegenerative Disease Research (or JPND).
 This global research initiative aims to coordinate research efforts among multiple
countries to better understand, develop cures, and identify appropriate ways to
care for those with neurodegenerative diseases, including dementia.
 The transfer of $58,334 from the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to CIHR
in 2019-20 is part of a larger investment of $875,000 over four years from CIHR and
PHAC. This investment will support the participation of Canadian researchers in
multi-national and multi-disciplinary collaborative research projects that address
health and social care delivery for people with neurodegenerative diseases
including Alzheimer’s and Parkinson’s disease.
 For example, through this investment, Canadian researchers are working closely
with counterparts in Australia, the Netherlands, the UK and Poland to develop a
new internationally adaptable set of recommendations and toolkits for persons
with dementia, care partners, and health care practitioners on how to optimize the
diagnostic process and post-diagnostic care.
KEY FACTS
 PHAC is transferring $58,334 to CIHR in 2019-20 to support research funded through
the JPND call on “multinational research projects on Health and Social Care for
Neurodegenerative Diseases.”
 This transfer is part of a four-year agreement between PHAC and CIHR to support the
JPND call. PHAC’s total commitment for the period beginning in 2018-19 and ending in
2021-22 is $175,000.
 Through this investment, PHAC is directly supporting one multi-national research
project.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The EU Joint Programme – Neurodegenerative Disease Research (JPND) is the largest
global research initiative aimed at tackling the challenge of neurodegenerative diseases.
JPND aims to increase coordinated investment between participating countries in research
aimed at finding causes, developing cures, and identifying appropriate ways to care for
those with neurodegenerative diseases, including Alzheimer’s disease.
 Through CIHR, Canada has been a member of JPND since 2011.
 PHAC and CIHR are currently supporting the JPND call “multinational research projects on
Health and Social Care for Neurodegenerative Diseases.” The aim of the call is to establish
a limited number of ambitious, innovative, multi-national and multi-disciplinary collaborative
research projects that address health and social care delivery at the macro level (system
and infrastructures) as well as (at) the individual level of patients, their careers and families.
 The total amount available for the Canadian component of this funding opportunity is
$875,000 (including $700,000 from CIHR and $175,000 from PHAC).
 Through this investment, CIHR is supporting the participation of Canadian researchers in
three multinational projects.
 The investment from PHAC is directly supporting participation of three Canadian
researchers led by Dr. Isabelle Vedel (McGill University) in a three-year to develop a new
internationally adaptable set of recommendations and toolkits for persons with dementia,
care partners, and health care practitioners on how to optimize the diagnostic process and
post-diagnostic care. The project involves researchers from Australia, the Netherlands, the
UK and Poland.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 233 233
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 58 58
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 291 291
Allocation of Funds
 PHAC is transferring a total of $58,334 to CIHR in 2019-20 for this JPND call. This is part
of a larger agreement totalling $175,000 from PHAC over three fiscal years; whereas
CIHR is committed to investing $700,000 towards this JPND call.
Anticipated Results
 The funding from PHAC is supporting research that will lead to the development of
recommendations and toolkits for persons with dementia, care partners, and health care
practitioners on how to optimize the diagnostic process and post-diagnostic care.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires that all Nominated Principal Applicants for this funding opportunity submit
an end of grant report that allows CIHR to: obtain information on the impact of CIHR
programs; evaluate the impact of CIHR funding; and share the results of funded research
with partners, the research community and the general public.
BUDGETARY TRANSFER FROM HEALTH CANADA TO THE
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH TO ADVANCE
POLICIES THAT PROMOTE SCIENCE AND EVIDENCE-BASED
DECISION MAKING – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $58,000 being transferred from Health Canada to the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR) to advance policies that promote science and evidence-based decision
making in the 2019–20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The Government is committed to evidence-based decision making and to
leveraging one of Canada’s greatest strengths, our scientists.
 Based on the recommendations of Canada’s Chief Science Advisor, the
establishment of a network of departmental science advisors (DSA) will provide
our senior officials with an important, neutral resource to access scientific
evidence and facilitate its incorporation in decision-making processes.
 This transfer from Health Canada to CIHR supports the appointment of Dr. Cara
Tannenbaum, Scientific Director of CIHR’s Institute of Gender and Health, as DSA
for Health Canada, utilizing existing funding mechanisms at CIHR to convey salary
and non-salary support to the incumbent.
KEY FACTS
 Dr. Cara Tannenbaum, Scientific Director of CIHR’s Institute of Gender and Health, has
accepted a two-year appointment to the position of DSA for Health Canada, commencing
October 1, 2019.
 As CIHR has existing mechanisms to support the services of Dr. Tannenbaum through it’s
Institute Support Grant program, this transfer of funds from Health Canada to CIHR will be
applied to compensate Dr. Tannenbaum for both salary and non-salary expenditures arising
from her appointment as Health Canada DSA.
 Health Canada as agreed to transfer $236,200 over 3 fiscal years, beginning with $58,000
in 2019-20.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 Dr. Mona Nemer, Canada’s Chief Science Advisor (CSA), announced as a priority the
establishment of a Network of DSAs that will support the CSA and work closely with senior
departmental officials. DSAs stand apart from day-to-day operations and provide a neutral
sounding board for senior officials and decision-makers to evaluate various streams of
information, facilitate the incorporation of evidence in decision-making processes and act as
a link between the department and external stakeholders.
 Five departmental science advisor positions are now in place at the Canadian Space
Agency, Environment and Climate Change Canada, Health Canada, the National Research
Council of Canada and Natural Resources Canada.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,000 1,000
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 58 58
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 1,058 1,058
Allocation of Funds
 This transfer of funds includes $58,000 from Health Canada to CIHR in 2019-20. CIHR will
provide the in-kind contribution of serving as conveyer of Health Canada’s funding to Dr.
Tannenbaum’s institution (Centre intégré universitaire de santé et de services sociaux,
Montréal) through CIHR’s Institute Support Grant program. CIHR is not receiving any
financial benefit from this collaboration.
Anticipated Results
 As Health Canada’s DSA, Dr. Tannenbaum will help to revitalize Health Canada’s Science
Advisory Board and assist with other appropriate functions, such as oversight of scientific
integrity, science communication and liaison with CIHR.
Monitoring and Measurement
 The Parties will communicate regularly during the period covered by the memorandum of
understanding to ensure that the collaboration achieves its objectives.
 The MOU recognizes the accountability of the Parties for the management of their own
assets and resources, and the internal delegation of authorities and responsibilities within
the Parities.
BUDGETARY TRANSFER FROM THE NATURAL SCIENCES AND
ENGINEERING RESEARCH COUNCIL TO THE CANADIAN INSTITUTES
OF HEALTH RESEARCH TO INCREASE INNOVATION THROUGH
PARTNERSHIPS BETWEEN CANADIAN COLLEGES, UNIVERSITIES
AND LOCAL COMPANIES – TABLING OF THE 2019–20
SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $49,994 being transferred from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council
(NSERC) to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase innovation through
partnerships between Canadian colleges, universities and local companies, in the 2019-20
Supplementary B Estimates?
RESPONSE
 The Government recognizes that colleges are a valuable source of
knowledge and innovative thinking, and important economic players in
their communities and regions.
 The College and Community Innovation Program is an initiative of
Canada’s three federal granting agencies, namely the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research (CIHR), Natural Sciences and Engineering Research
Council (NSERC) and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
(SSHRC) that enables Canadian colleges to work with local companies to
transform research into economic activity.
 It supports applied, collaborative research partnerships that facilitate
commercialization, increase economic prosperity, and create quality jobs.
 This particular transfer to CIHR is for the administration of two health-
specific grants, one to the Cégep de Drummondville in Québec to support
its proposal to develop intergenerational interventions for children with
special needs, and the other to Conestoga College in Kitchener, Ontario,
for its proposal to enhance learning for home care providers.
KEY FACTS
 Budget 2018 provided $140 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, to increase support
for collaborative innovation projects involving businesses, colleges and polytechnics
through the College and Community Innovation (CCI) Program.
 CCI is a competitive grant program managed by NSERC in collaboration with CIHR and
SSHRC. CCI grants are funded by NSERC, with the exception of proposals exclusively in
the field of health or social sciences.
 The purpose of this transfer from NSERC to CIHR is for the payment of two health-related
CCI grants, one to CEGEP de Drummondville, and one to Conestoga College, in 2019-20.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The objective of the CCI Program is to increase innovation at the community and/or
regional level by enabling Canadian colleges to increase their capacity to work with local
companies, particularly small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs). It supports applied
research and collaborations that facilitate commercialization, as well as technology
transfer, adaptation and adoption of new technologies.
 CCI grants are institutional grants awarded directly to successful applicant colleges.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 444 444
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 50 50
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 494 494
Allocation of Funds
 NSERC will provide two transfers to CIHR as follows:
o $24,994 in FY 2019-20 for a grant awarded to the Cégep de Drummondville for a project
titled Développer un programme d’interventions dyadiques intergénérationnelles aîné-
enfant TDA/H en approche multisensorielle (Develop a Intergenerational AD/HD Senior-
Child Dyadic Interventions Program with a Multisensory Approach.
o $25,000 in FY 2019-20 for a grant awarded to Conestoga College for a project titled
Microlearning for Care Providers in Canadian Home Care Agencies.
 CIHR will administer the funds for these grants. Upon request, CIHR will provide a
consolidated financial report to NSERC as of March 31, 2020 (Conestoga) and August 31,
2020 (Cégep de Drummondville).
Anticipated Results
 This funding will support the implementation of two health-related CCI projects at the
recipient colleges, in alignment with the objectives of the program to increase the capacity of
the colleges to transform the results of research and development (R&D) into economic
activities easier and faster.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR will follow the terms and procedures of the CCI Program Tri-Agency Financial
Administration Guide (https://www.nserc-crsng.gc.ca/Institutions-Etablissements/CCIGuide-
ICCGuide/Index_eng.asp) in carrying out its obligations under this agreement.
 In accordance with federal laws and policies regarding grants, the Agency (i.e. CIHR)
verifies eligibility for, and entitlement to, grants. The Agency also defines the conditions
under which its funds may be used, monitors the use of grants and interprets its rules and
requirements for the institutions and the authorized representative.
 Each institution (i.e. College) establishes appropriate procedures, systems and controls to
ensure that Agency policies and requirements are followed.
 Progress reports (or final reports) are required for CCI grants.

NEW FUNDING TO SUPPORT A KNOWLEDGE SYNTHESIS GRANT:
LIVING WITHIN THE EARTH’S CARRYING CAPACITY – TABLING OF
THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $250,000 being transferred from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to
the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada (SSHRC) for knowledge
synthesis grants on Living within the Earth’s Carrying Capacity in the 2019–20 Supplementary
Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 Adapting to live within the Earth’s carrying capacity is viewed as one of
humanity’s most important challenges and is expected to be a key challenge that
Canada is likely to face over the coming decades.
 The Government has taken steps to fund research that could help us better
understand and eventually address these challenges by setting up a Living within
Earth’s Carrying Capacity Initiative.
 This Initiative aligns with Canada’s Federal Sustainable Development Strategy
2019-2022 and commitment to the UN Sustainable Development Goals (SDG), as
well as the Horizon Europe Framework 2021-2027.
 This is a first of a number of future fund transfers from Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR) to Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council
(SSHRC) to support a joint collaboration on the topic of Living within the Earth's
Carrying Capacity
 The purpose of this transfer is to support the collaboration between and work by
SSHRC, CIHR and NSERC on a Knowledge Synthesis Grant (KSG) competition on
the topic of Living Within Earth’s Carrying Capacity. This funding opportunity for
Canadian researchers will support the synthesis of existing research knowledge
emerging over the past 10 years and the identification of knowledge gaps, which
will contribute to the use of synthesized evidence in decision-making and
practice. A particular focus is put on knowledge mobilization.
KEY FACTS
 With regards to program delivery, the three granting agency agreed that:
o SSHRC will initiate and manage, in collaboration with CIHR and NSERC, the
competitive process for a Knowledge Synthesis Grants funding opportunity and
related knowledge mobilization activities dedicated to Living within Earth’s Carrying
Capacity, for up to 20 awards, which will be funded jointly and according to the
number of grants as follows: NSERC up to 3 awards; CIHR: up to 5 awards; SSHRC
up to 12 awards.
 Total funding is $1,000,000 in 2019-20.
 SSHRC will administer the funds available for this Program. When the competition is
completed and the Agencies have determined which grants they will fund, SSHRC will
administer the grants to be awarded.
o The funds to support this Program will be transferred from the Parties to SSHRC
through Supplementary Estimates for the 2019-20 fiscal year.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 Adapting to live within the Earth’s carrying capacity is viewed as one of humanity’s most
important challenges.
 Living Within the Earth’s Carrying Capacity is one of 16 new global future challenges
identified through SSHRC’s Imagining Canada’s Future initiative. These complex issues
were identified following an extensive foresight exercise and reflect key challenges that
Canada is likely to face in an evolving global context over the coming decades. All of the
challenges cross multiple sectors and research disciplines, and require broad collaboration
to address.
 The Government has taken steps to fund research that could help better understand and
eventually address these challenges.
o To that end, SSHRC, with support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering
Research Council (NSERC) and the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR), has launched a Knowledge Synthesis Grants initiative for a total of
$1,000,000 in fiscal year 2019-20.
o With the commitment, CIHR will be able to fund up to five grants up to $50,000
each for a maximum total investment of $250,000. SSHRC and NSERC anticipate
funding approximately 15 grants with a maximum investment of $750,000.
 Knowledge Synthesis Grants are not intended to support original research. Rather, they
are intended to support the synthesis of existing research knowledge and the identification
of knowledge gaps.
o This call is particularly focused on the state of research knowledge emerging over
the past 10 years and may yield impacts for as many as 20 years to come.
 The goal of this funding opportunity is to foster a deeper understanding of the state of
knowledge regarding the absorptive and productive capacity of global ecosystems, as well
as the connections between natural and human systems.
o The resulting syntheses will identify roles that the academic, public, private and not-
for-profit sectors, as well as Indigenous rights-holders, may play in advancing and
supporting mitigation and adaptation responses, and may inform the development
of effective tools, robust policies and sustainable practices required to support the
transition to an equitable, prosperous, healthy and sustainable future.
 More specifically this research will, among other things, help us identify the impacts of
current environmental challenges on human health and wellness, identify better adaptation
responses such as health promotion strategies and conservation strategies, and better
inform policy on food security and healthy nutrition in the context of sustainability and
accessibility.
 As such, through the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) and
with support from the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council (NSERC) and
the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government has launched a
Knowledge Synthesis Grants initiative in fall 2019.
 This initiative is expected to fund over 25 grants starting in year 2020 and foster lasting
partnerships at the national and global level that will identify more accurate knowledge
gaps and generate evidence to inform future policy.
 These grants are expected to help identify roles for key partners in advancing and
supporting mitigation and adaptation responses including the academic, public, private and
not-for-profit sectors, as well as Indigenous rights-holders.
 Partners will be solicited to inform the development of effective tools, robust policies and
sustainable practices required to support the transition to an equitable, prosperous, healthy
and sustainable future.
 The Living within Earth’s Carrying Capacity initiative aligns with Canada’s Federal
Sustainable Development Strategy 2019-2022 and commitment to the UN Sustainable
Development Goals (SDG), as well as the Horizon Europe Framework 2021-2027,
providing opportunities for national and international collaboration.
Funding
The Parties intend to commit a joint total of up to $1,000,000 in FY 2019-2020, as illustrated
below. These funds are sufficient to fund up to of 20 Knowledge Synthesis Grants at up to
$50,000 each, .This amount is subject to the availability of appropriated funds from Parliament
and may increase should additional partners be secured or decrease due to unforeseen
circumstances.
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub-
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total Grants Total
Existing Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 250 250
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 0 0 0 0 (250) (250)
Total Funding 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Allocation of Funds
 Funds will be strictly used for the allocation of grants. No funds will be used for the purpose
of filling operational needs.
Anticipated Results
 A better understanding of the linkages across biodiversity and ecosystem services to
help identify their potential interactions and the extent to which natural systems can
continue to sustain life.
 The resulting knowledge will inform possible transitions in coming decades to a more
sustainable, equitable and healthy future for generations to come, and will be key to
addressing pressing questions regarding humanity’s ability to live within the Earth’s
carrying capacity.
Monitoring and Measurement
 CIHR requires all grant recipients to complete an end of grant report that allows CIHR to:
obtain information on the impact of CIHR programs; evaluate the impact of CIHR
funding; and share the results of funded research with partners, the research community
and the general public.
 More specifically for this competition, recipients ought to keep the following
measurement guidelines in mind:
o How are the impacts of current environmental challenges (such as climate
change, deforestation, ocean acidification, biodiversity loss and extinction risks)
on natural and human systems (including health issues) being captured,
measured and evaluated?
o What targets, metrics and indicators (human, economic, environmental and
technological) have been established or proposed to monitor human activities
and humanity’s relationship with the Earth’s carrying capacity?
o How has technical capacity for scenario development and modelling evolved
over time, and how might new technologies and analytical approaches provide
more accurate forecasts?
o What are the implications of differing sectoral or discipline-based constructs and
measures of sustainability for policy development and the formation of adaptation
and mitigation strategies?
o Are data integration and linkages possible within and between various
disciplines, given the use of different measures and indicators to monitor the
Earth’s carrying capacity? What indicators might be added to catalyze the
disciplinary and multidisciplinary integration of data?
Evaluation
 Applications are adjudicated, and available funds awarded, through a merit review
process. SSHRC bases funding decisions on the recommendations of the adjudication
committee and on the funds available. Committee discussions are guided by the
principle of minimum essential funding.
FUNDING FROM THE CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH
RESEARCH AND SOCIAL SCIENCES AND HUMANITIES RESEARCH
COUNCIL TO NATURAL SCIENCES AND ENGINEERING RESEARCH
COUNCIL TO WORK ON A COMMON GRANTS MANAGEMENT
SOLUTION – TABLING OF THE 2019–20 SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (B)
ISSUE
Why is $1,481,805 being transferred from the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
and Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council (SSHRC) to Natural Sciences and
Engineering Council (NSERC) to work on a common grants management solution in the 2019–
20 Supplementary Estimates (B)?
RESPONSE
 The three federal research granting agencies, CIHR, SSHRC, and NSERC are
pursuing the Tri-Agency Grants Management Solution (TGMS) Initiative to
modernize, harmonize and improve their grants management system.
 This important Initiative, administered by NSERC on behalf of the three Agencies,
will provide the research community with a more efficient and user-friendly
system to apply for federal research funding.
 Costs related to developing and implementing the TGMS are shared between the
three Agencies.
 CIHR is transferring $1,481,805 to NSERC in order to support operating expenses
associated with the TGMS Initiative.
 Upon completion, the TGMS Initiative will modernize grants management and
meet the standards of excellence that the Canadian research community expect in
terms of efficiency, interoperability, accessibility, and usability.
KEY FACTS
 CIHR and SSHRC are transferring $1,481,805 and $645,915 respectively to NSERC in
2019-20 for a total of $2,127,720. These funds will cover operating expenses, incurred by
NSERC, associated with the TGMS Initiative. In addition to these funds, NSERC is
contributing $2,229,040 to the TGMS Initiative in 2019-20.
 The total cost of the TGMS Initiative for 2019-20 is $5,066,000.
BACKGROUND
Program Objectives
 The Presidents of the three granting Agencies formally approved the decision to move
forward with the TGMS Initiative in September 2018.
 A dedicated team with representatives from the three Agencies is completing key activities
required to inform the procurement of the final solution and associated product(s).
 Currently, the TGMS is in the discovery phase of stakeholder consultations at institutions
across Canada that will inform the procurement process and implementation phase.
 The proposed timelines indicate that the final solution will be migrated, systems tested and
operational in 2021-22.
 The TGMS will support harmonization of processes and systems to provide an integrated
solution to the Canadian research community.
Funding
Funding ($000’s) and FTE
Total Sub- Vote
FTE Salary O&M Operating EBP total XX Total
Existing Funding 0 0 1,976 0 0 1,976 0 1,976
SUPPS B – 2019–20 0 0 (1,482) 0 0 (1,482) 0 (1,482)
Total Funding 0 0 494 0 0 494 0 494
Allocation of Funds
 CIHR and SSHRC are transferring $1,481,805 and $645,915 respectively to NSERC in
2019-20 for a total of $2,127,720 targeted towards operating expenses associated with the
TGMS Initiative. In addition to these funds, NSERC is contributing $2,229,040 to the TGMS
Initiative in 2019-20.
 The total cost of TGMS Initiative for 2019-20 is $5,066,000.
Anticipated Results
 Through the TGMS Initiative, the Tri-Agencies will procure a user-centric solution to support
the grants management lifecycle (i.e., from program design to end-of-grant reporting) to
achieve the following outcomes:
o Improved user experience for the research community and Tri-Agency staff;
o Improved effectiveness and collaboration;
o Increased ability to acquire high-quality data and report on the research results; and
o Reduced risk of aging technologies, providing a strong foundation for the future.
Monitoring and Measurement
 Upon completion of the TGMS Initiative, the three Agencies will monitor implementation of
the final solution to ensure that it continues to address the needs of all stakeholders.
