Created: 2024-02-23T14:52:31.351271
Name: Hazardous_substance_assessment_-_n-Butyl_acetate
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/environmental-workplace-health/occupational-health-safety/workplace-hazardous-materials-information-system/hazardous-substance-assessments/n-butyl-acetate.html
Package ID: abaae93c-cfe1-4420-b0c2-c3dea57b23cb
Keywords: ['Hazardous substance assessments', 'Hazardous Products Regulations', 'HPR', 'HPR amendments', 'n-Butyl acetate']
Notes: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Hazardous substance assessment - n-Butyl acetate - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Environmental and Workplace Health Occupational Health and Safety Workplace Hazardous Materials Information System (WHMIS) Hazardous substance assessments Hazardous substance assessment - n-Butyl acetate Important note: Hazardous substance assessments are technical documents produced by Health Canada as educational and information resources for suppliers of hazardous products under the Hazardous Products Act (HPA) and its regulations. For more information on supplier roles and responsibilities, visit supplier responsibilities. This hazardous substance assessment was conducted according to the former Hazardous Products Regulations (HPR). Learn more about the HPR amendments and transition period. Identification Chemical name: n-Butyl acetate CAS #: 123-86-4 Chemical composition: C6H12O2 Synonyms: Butyl acetate, Acetic acid, butyl ester, n-Butyl acetate, n-Butyl ethanoate, 1-Butyl acetate, Acetic acid n-butyl ester. UN #: 1123 Pictogram(s): Figure 1. Figure 1 - Text description The symbol within the pictogram is a flame with a line underneath it. This symbol indicates that hazardous products with this pictogram can ignite easily and burn rapidly if they are not stored and handled properly. WHMIS classification Health hazards: n-Butyl acetate does not meet the criteria for classification. Physical hazards: Flammable Liquids: Category 2 Health hazards Acute Toxicity (Oral): Does not meet criteria LD­50: 10,760 mg/kg (rat) (based on study summary Footnote 1). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Oral). Acute Toxicity (Dermal): Does not meet criteria LD­50: 14,112 mg/kg (rabbit) (based on study summary Footnote 1). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Dermal). Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Gas): No data available Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Vapour): Does not meet criteria LC­50: >33 mg/L (rat) Footnote 2. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Inhalation Vapour). Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Dust and Mist): Does not meet criteria LC­50: 5.2 mg/L (rat) Footnote 3. Several acute inhalation studies are available for n-butyl acetate. The studies were performed to replicate an early result of 160 ppm (0.74 mg/L) Footnote 2. The results, including the initial study, range from 160 ppm to 9,312 ppm (0.74-44 mg/L); however, LC50 values within the concentration value range for classification were obtained in only two cases, and these studies were either inconclusive or were determined to have methodological issues Footnote 4,Footnote 5. The majority of studies have determined that the LC50 for n-butyl acetate is above the concentration value range for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Acute Toxicity (Inhalation – Dust and Mist). Skin Corrosion / Irritation: Does not meet criteria In an Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Test Guideline (OECD TG) 404 study with rabbits, irritation was found to be mild/insignificant, with mean erythema and edema scores of 0 at 24, 48, and 72 hour time points (based on study summary Footnote 1). A 4-hour application of 0.5 mL of test substance on 6 rabbits using the Draize scoring method resulted in no erythema, edema, or other irritation, with mean erythema and edema scores of 0 at 24, 48, and 72 hours and 7 and 10 days Footnote 6. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Skin Corrosion / Irritation. Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation: Does not meet criteria In an OECD TG 405 study, 0.1 mL of undiluted test substance was applied to the eyes of 4 rabbits, with mean scores for corneal opacity, iritis, conjunctive redness, and chemosis of 0, 0, 1, and 0, respectively at time points 24, 48 and 72 hours Footnote 6 Footnote 7. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Serious Eye Damage / Eye Irritation. Respiratory Sensitization: No data available Skin Sensitization: Does not meet criteria Results were negative in a Magnusson-Kligman guinea pig maximization test (GPMT) and a Buehler test (OECD Guideline 406 study) Footnote 1. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Respiratory Sensitization. Germ Cell Mutagenicity: Does not meet criteria In Vivo: A bone marrow micronucleus test produced negative results Footnote 8. In Vitro: Results were negative in an Ames test Footnote 1 and a chromosomal aberration test Footnote 9. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Germ Cell Mutagenicity. Carcinogenicity: No data available n-Butyl acetate has not been reviewed by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC), the National Toxicology Program (NTP), or the American Conference of Governmental Industrial Hygienists (ACGIH). Reproductive Toxicity: Does not meet criteria An inhalation study in rats exposed to the n-Butyl acetate showed no reproductive effects, but an increase in the incidence of fetal rib deformities was observed Footnote 10. A second generation reproductive toxicity inhalation study in rats showed statistically significant decreases in F2 pup body weights and absolute testis weights Footnote 11. Both studies show that, while there were exposure-related growth effects such as lower pup weights, there were no functional effects on reproduction or other histopathological effects in parents. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Reproductive Toxicity. Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: No data available Dermal Route of Exposure: No data available Inhalation Route of Exposure: An inhalation study in humans showed severe throat irritation with exposure to 300 ppm of n-Butyl acetate, with all test subjects complaining of discomfort Footnote 12. As this is a subjective human observation, it would require objective measurement of STOT-SE respiratory tract irritation for classification. An acute inhalation study in rats showed dose-dependent narcotic effects and respiratory tract irritation; at 6,867 ppm, signs of toxicity included respiratory irritation, breathing abnormalities, ataxia, and narcosis Footnote 6. Another study indicated that concentrations of 1,500, 3,000, and 6,000 ppm reduce motor activity and response to stimulus during exposure. At 6,000 ppm, the severity of hypo activity was minor to moderate. At 3,000 ppm, the severity of hypo activity in female rats was minor, while male 3,000 ppm rats were characterized as having minimal hypo activity. Only minimal hypo activity was observed at 1,500 ppm. The no-observed effect level (NOEL) post exposure was determined to be 1,500 ppm Footnote 9. Although there are some signs of narcotic effects, these effects occur at concentrations above the cut-off of 20 mg/L (4,170 ppm) for a vapour. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Single Exposure (Inhalation). Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure: Does not meet criteria Oral Route of Exposure: No data available Dermal Route of Exposure: No data available Inhalation Route of Exposure: A 13 week study in rats revealed necrosis of the olfactory epithelium on necropsy but at a dose above the concentration value range for classification Footnote 13. A secondary 13 week inhalation study in rats showed no systemic organ-specific toxicity [14]. A 14 week inhalation study in rats for neurotoxicity showed no adverse effects Footnote 14. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Specific Target Organ Toxicity – Repeated Exposure. Aspiration Toxicity: No data available No human data are available. This substance is not a liquid hydrocarbon. Biohazardous Infectious Materials: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a microorganism, protein or nucleic acid. Physical hazards Explosives: Not Evaluated* * Explosives are excluded from the Hazardous Products Act and Regulations. Explosives are regulated under the Explosives Act. For more information, visit Natural Resources Canada. Flammable Gases: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a gas. The classification criteria for Flammable Gases do not apply to this substance. Flammable Aerosols: No data available No data are available to determine whether n-Butyl acetate meets the classification criteria for Flammable Aerosols. Oxidizing Gases: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a gas. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Gases do not apply to this substance. Gases Under Pressure: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a gas. The classification criteria for Gases Under Pressure do not apply to this substance. Flammable Liquids: Category 2 n-Butyl acetate is a liquid with a flash point of 22oC (closed cup) & a boiling point of 127oC Footnote 15,Footnote 16. The available data meet the classification criteria for Flammable Liquids – Category 2 [HPR 7.6.1 (2)]. Flammable Solids: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a solid. The classification criteria for Flammable Solids do not apply to this substance. Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria The chemical composition of n-Butyl acetate precludes the possibility of any self-reactive properties and its auto-ignition temperature was measured to be 415 °C at 1010 hPa, determined by the EU method A.15 (based on study summary Footnote 1). The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-Reactive Substances and Mixtures. Pyrophoric Liquids: Does not meet criteria n-Butyl acetate is a liquid, but is not known to be pyrophoric despite its long and widespread use. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Pyrophoric Liquids. Pyrophoric Solids: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a solid. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Solids do not apply to this substance. Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures: Does not meet criteria n-Butyl acetate has an auto-ignition temperature of 415 °C at 1010 hPa, determined by the EU method A.15 (based on study summary Footnote 1), which is well above the spontaneous ignition temperature for classification. The available data do not meet the classification criteria for Self-Heating Substances and Mixtures. Substances and Mixtures which, in Contact with Water, Emit Flammable Gasses: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is an ester that does not contain metals or metalloids and is, therefore, excluded from classification [HPR 7.12.1(1)]. Oxidizing Liquids: Not applicable Section 7.13.1(1)(c) of the HPR excludes from classification any organic liquid that contains oxygen, fluorine or chlorine if those elements are chemically bonded only to carbon and hydrogen. n-Butyl acetate is an ester, composed only of chemically bonded carbon, oxygen and hydrogen. Oxidizing Solids: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a solid. The classification criteria for Oxidizing Solids do not apply to this substance. Organic Peroxides: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not an organic peroxide. The classification criteria for Organic Peroxides do not apply to this substance. Corrosive to Metals: No data available n-Butyl acetate is not known to be corrosive to metals. In view of this, no data have been developed to determine whether the substance meets the classification criteria for Corrosive to Metals. Combustible Dusts: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a solid. The classification criteria for Combustible Dusts do not apply to this substance. Simple Asphyxiants: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a gas. The classification criteria for Simple Asphyxiants do not apply to this substance. Pyrophoric Gases: Not applicable n-Butyl acetate is not a gas. The classification criteria for Pyrophoric Gases do not apply to this substance. Regulatory and other information Regulatory information: Hazardous substance assessments are prepared by Health Canada as educational and information resources. Under the HPA, suppliers of hazardous products must, upon the sale or importation of a hazardous product, provide a safety data sheet and label that meet the requirements set out in the HPR. Other information: The information and classifications contained in these hazardous substance assessments are based on publicly available sources, such as peer-reviewed literature or reports by international bodies. New information, including proprietary information, could have an impact on the classification of substances or hazardous products containing them. It is the responsibility of the supplier to ensure the accuracy, sufficiency, and reliability of their hazardous product classifications. Last updated: 2020 Prepared by: Workplace Hazardous Materials Bureau, Health Canada References Footnote 1 European Chemicals Agency (2016) N-butyl acetate - REACH dossier. Available at: http://www.echa.europa.eu/ Return to footnote 1 referrer Footnote 2 Union Carbide Corp. (1987) Acute vapor inhalation toxicity test in rats with n-butyl acetate with cover letter dated 120287. Bushy Run Res Ctr. EPA/OTS Doc #: 89-880000051. NTIS/OTS0513465. Return to footnote 2 referrer Footnote 3 Union Carbide Corp (1993) Support: Acute Inhalation Toxicity of N-butyl Acetate (old Production Process Material) in Rats with Cover Letter dated 060393. EPA/OTS Doc #: 89-931000024. NTIS/OTS0513465-1. Return to footnote 3 referrer Footnote 4 Norris, J. C. et al (1997) Acute inhalation toxicity studies of n-butyl acetate. Inhalation Toxicology 9:623-646. Return to footnote 4 referrer Footnote 5 OECD SIDS (2001) n-Butyl acetate, CAS No. 123-86-4. SIDS initial Assessment Report. SIAM 13. UNEP publications. Return to footnote 5 referrer Footnote 6 Union Carbide Corp. (1987) Acute toxicity and primary irritancy studies on n-butyl acetate with cover letter dated 100887. Bushy Run Res Ctr. EPA/OTS Doc #: 89-880000006. NTIS/OTS0513465. Return to footnote 6 referrer Footnote 7 ECETOC (1998) Eye Irritation: Reference Chemicals Data Bank. Second Edition. European Centre for Ecotoxicology and Toxicology of Chemicals, Brussels, Belgium. Volume 48(2). Return to footnote 7 referrer Footnote 8 Rim, K. T., Kim, S. J., and Lim, C. H. (2015) In vivo micronucleus test of n-butyl acetate to classify a chemical's mutagenicity according to GHS. Toxicology and Environmental Health Sciences 7:2:117-123. Return to footnote 8 referrer Footnote 9 Chem Mfgs Assn (1994) N-butyl acetate - An acute inhalation neurotoxicity study in the rat, with cover letter dated 8/30/94. Eastman Kodak Co. EPA/OTS Doc #: 44613. NTIS/OTS0558833. Return to footnote 9 referrer Footnote 10 Hackett, P. L. et al (1982) Teratogenic study of ethylene and propylene oxide and n-butyl acetate. NIOSH Contract No. 210-80-0013; Battelle, Pacific Northwest Laboratories Contract 2311104277, National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health, USDHHS, Cincinnati, Ohio, USA NTIS/OTSPB83-258038. p.i-140. Return to footnote 10 referrer Footnote 11 American Chemistry Council (2006) Interim data - Two-generation reproductive toxicity study on butyl acetate. EPA/OTS Doc #: 89-070000079. NTIS/OTS8EHQ-06-16622. Return to footnote 11 referrer Footnote 12 Nelson, K. W. et al (1943) Sensory response to certain industrial solvent vapors. Journal of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology 25:7:282-285. Return to footnote 12 referrer Footnote 13 Shell Oil Co. (1996) Support: N-butyl acetate - a thirteen week subchronic inhalation toxicity study in the rat with attachments and cover letter dated 02/19/97. EPA/OTS Doc #: 89-970000110. NTIS/OTS0558481-1. Return to footnote 13 referrer Footnote 14 Chem Mfgs Assn (1996) N-butyl acetate - A thirteen-week subchronic inhalation neurotoxicity study in the rat, final report, with cover letter dated 2/15/96. Eastman Kodak Co. EPA/OTS Doc #: 44622. NTIS/OTS0558849. Return to footnote 14 referrer Footnote 15 National Fire Protection Association (2002) Fire Protection Guide to Hazardous Materials. 13th Edition. National Fire Protection Association, Quincy, MA 02269. Return to footnote 15 referrer Footnote 16 Criteria group for occupational standards (1998) Scientific Basis for Swedish Occupational Standards XIX. Lundberg,P. National Institute for Working Life (Arbetslivsinstitutet), Sweden. Work and Life (Arbete och Halsa). Volume 25: 21-27. Return to footnote 16 referrer Page details Date modified: 2023-02-27 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy