Created: 2023-04-20T21:04:27.913508
Name: The_2008-2022_Total_Diet_Study_Food_Consumption_Tables_(2015_CCHS-Nutrition)
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/food-nutrition/food-nutrition-surveillance/canadian-total-diet-study.html
Package ID: ac573724-2f77-4f75-a2f4-c416d79cf130
Keywords: ['consumption', 'daily intake', 'exposure', 'cchs', 'contaminants', 'chemicals', 'surveillance', 'food safety', 'food', 'market basket survey', 'TDS', 'Total Diet Study']
Notes: The 2008-2022 Total Diet Study Food Consumption Tables show the daily consumption of each Total Diet Study (TDS) food composite for various age-sex groups. The source for these consumption data is the 2015 Canadian Community Health Survey-Nutrition Component (2015 CCHS-Nutrition). When paired with concentrations of chemical contaminants in each TDS food composite, these consumption data allow the calculation of exposure of the Canadian population to contaminants through food. These consumption values are applicable to the Total Diet Study years 2008 to 2022. For sample years further out from 2015, increasing caution should be used as the 2015 consumption survey data may be less representative of consumption in those years.

Food consumption values are available for the total population (consumers and non consumers together) and for consumers only. Data are presented as food consumption in grams per person per day and in grams per 1 kg of body weight per day. Data are disaggregated by 29 age-sex groupings. 

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Canadian Total Diet Study - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Skip to section menu Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Food and nutrition Food and Nutrition Surveillance Canadian Total Diet Study The Canadian Total Diet Study (TDS) is a food surveillance program that monitors the concentrations of chemical contaminants in foods that are typically consumed by Canadians. The TDS measures priority chemicals in food samples either annually, on a pre-determined cycle or in response to a specific food safety issue. Examples of chemicals included in the TDS are trace elements, pesticides, radionuclides, and a variety of other industrial chemicals. Since its inception in 1969, the TDS has enabled Health Canada to monitor the concentrations of contaminants in foods sold in Canada in order to determine the key dietary sources, assess trends, support the development of food safety policies and regulations, and help ensure the safety of the Canadian food supply. Health Canada follows guidance provided by the World Health Organization (WHO) for conducting a TDS. TDS surveys are also implemented in other countries worldwide, which facilitates international comparisons and global food safety oversight. How the TDS is Conducted Nine Canadian cities that are geographically representative of the entire country are included in the TDS. One of these cities is selected each year for food sampling. Over a 5-week period each year, approximately 2100 food samples from different food retail outlets or restaurants are collected by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA). Health Canada prepares the foods for consumption as they would be at home, which provides realistic information about contaminant exposure from the diet. Preparation steps include washing, peeling, and cooking. Similar types of foods are combined into approximately 160 composite samples that are frozen at -35°C until analysis. Health Canada regularly reviews information on the consumption patterns of Canadians and adds new food composite samples to the TDS, as necessary, in order to ensure that the foods most commonly consumed in Canada are included. How the TDS Results are Used TDS measured concentrations are then combined with food intake information to provide estimates of the dietary intakes of these chemicals for Canadians. The TDS results on the concentrations of the chemicals in the different food composites are publically available on the Health Canada and Open Data websites. Some TDS results may also be published in peer-reviewed scientific literature. Contact Health Canada's Bureau of Chemical Safety, Food Directorate leads the Canadian TDS with support from other federal food safety partners, including the Radiation Protection Bureau of Health Canada and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. For more information, please contact: Bureau of Chemical Safety Health Products and Food Branch Health Canada 251 Sir Frederick Banting Driveway Postal Locator 2202C Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0K9 Telephone: (613) 957-0973 Fax: (613) 954-4674 E-mail: hc.bcs-bipc.sc@canada.ca Page details Date modified: 2020-06-16 Section Menu Food and Nutrition Surveillance ARCHIVED - Canada's Nutrition and Health Atlas Canadian Total Diet Study Concentration of Contaminants and Other Chemicals in Food Composites Dietary Intakes of Contaminants and Other Chemicals for Different Age-Sex Groups of Canadians - Canadian Total Diet Study - Health Canada Publications Health and Nutrition Surveys National nutritious food basket Other Surveillance Conceptual Model of Canadian Food And Nutrition System Table - Food and Nutrition Surveillance in Canada: An Environmental Scan Food and Nutrition Surveillance in Canada: An Environmental Scan About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy