Created: 2022-07-15T20:15:13.070835
Name: Health_Canada_–_Standing_Committee_on_Health_-_Minister_of_health_Briefing_Binder_-_Supplementary_Estimates_(C)
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/ad360b3f-b690-478a-95d8-430a6710fad0/resource/e64471ed-7419-4568-8ce8-86a4ecd2fba9/download/minister-of-health-briefing-binder-hesa-march-2022.pdf
Package ID: ad360b3f-b690-478a-95d8-430a6710fad0
Keywords: ['Parliamentary Committee appearance', 'budget', 'health']
Notes: Appearance of the Minister of Health Before HESA on the Supps C
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada
HESA Appearance
Supplementary Estimates (C) and Main Estimates
Minister Duclos
March 21, 2022
TABLE OF CONTENTS
APPERANCE AT HESA SUPPLEMENTARY ESTIMATES (C) 2021-22AND MAIN ESTIMATES-MARCH 2022
PART A:
Opening Remarks
Part B:
HOT ISSUES
1. Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research–MSM
2. Border Measures
3. Global Efforts/Assistance (COVAX)
4. Health System Capacity
5. Health Transfers (includes Ifpressed on Bill C-237)
6. Mental Health and Substance Use Tools
7. Mobility Data
8. NESS and PPE
9. NML Docs
10. Opioid Overdose Crisis
11. Paxlovid and Other Therapeutics
12. Pharmacare
13. s.56 Requests to Allow for Personal Possession
14. TestingCapacity (Rapid Test, includes Bill C-8 & C-10 funding)
FINANCIAL MATERIAL
15. Mains Overview Card
(a) Health Canada
(b) Public Health Agency of Canada
(c) Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(d) Canadian Institutes of Health Research
16. Crosswalk of MainsIncreases and Decreases
(a) Health Canada
(b) Public Health Agency of Canada
(c) Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(d) Canadian Institutes of Health Research
17. Crosswalk of Mains Transfers
(a) Health Canada
(b) Public Health Agency of Canada
(c) Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(d) Canadian Institutes of Health Research
18. Crosswalk of Supps C
(a) Health Canada
(b) Public Health Agency of Canada
(c) Canadian Food Inspection Agency
(d) Canadian Institutes of Health Research
COVID
19. Covid Alert App
20. Adverse Reactions/Vaccine Hesitancy
21. Enforcement of Quarantine and Testing Orders
22. Vaccination–General
23. Vaccine Injury Support
24. Vaccine Supply for Booster
25. Proof of Vaccination Certification Fund
26. PT Surge Capacity (TF)
27. Length of Quarantine
18. Longer Term Effects of COVID-19
29. NACI Recommendations
30. Review of the Pandemic Response
31. Access to COVID Vaccines for Children
32. Status of Vaccine Approvals
33. Test Kits
34. GPHIN (Global Public Health Intelligence Network)
ANIMAL TESTING
35. Animal Testing
BIOMANUFACTURING
36. Biomanufacturing
BLOOD
37. Plasma Collection
CANADA HEALTH ACT
38. Abortion Access
39. Canada Health Act–Compliance Issues
CANCER
40. General Cancer Note
41. Pediatric Cancer
CANNABIS /ILLICIT DRUGS / TOBACCO
42. Legislative Review of the Cannabis Act
43. Medical Access Framework
44. Psychedelics
45. Smoking and Tobacco Use in Canada
46. Youth Vaping
CLINICAL TRIALS
47. Clinical Trials–Expedited Pathways
DRUGS
48. Bulk Imports
49. Critical Drug Reserve
50. Drug Shortages
ENVIRONMENT / HEALTH
51. CEPA Reform (Bill S-5)
FOOD INSPECTION
52. Food Safety
HEALTH CARE
53. Harassment of Healthcare Workers
54. Home Care
55. LTC Homes (if pressed section on M-47)
56. MAID
57. Dental Care
58. Digital Supports and Virtual Care
59. Primary Care
60. Sexual and Reproductive Health
HEALTHY EATING
61. Healthy Eating
INDIGENOUS
62. Advancing Reconciliation in Canada’s Health Care System
MENTAL HEALTH
63. Perinatal Mental Health
64. B2021 Investments in Mental Health (PHAC)
PESTICIDES
65. Glyphosates
66. GoC Funding Pesticide Regulations
67. Humane Use of Pesticides
68. Maximum Residue Levels of Pesticides
69. Neonics
PHARMACARE
70. Drugs for Rare Diseases
71. Establishing a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO)
72. PMPRB Amendments
PROGRAM SPECIFIC
73. Anti-Microbial Resistance
74. Autism
75. Dementia
76. Diabetes
77. Family Gender-Based Violence (FGBV)
78. HIV/AIDS Funding
79. Long-Term Fundingfor PHAC
80. NB Cluster (Atypical Neurological Syndrome)
81. Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
82. Seasonal Flu
83. Seniors and Healthy Aging
84. Suicide Prevention
85. Thalidomide
RESEARCH
86. CIHR-Funded COVID-19 Research
87. CIHR-Funded Mental Health and Addictions Research
88. Health Research (non-COVID)
Remarks for
the Honourable Jean-Yves Duclos
Minister of Health
HESA appearance:
Health Portfolio Main Estimates
March 21, 2022
Ottawa, ON
Allotted speaking time: 5 minutes(maximum)
Speech length: 785 words (6+ minutes)
Check against delivery
Introduction
Mr. Chair, thank you for the opportunity to appear before you today to speak about the Main Estimates
for the Health Portfolio.
Joining me today we have:
• TheHonourable Carolyn Bennett, Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate
Minister ofHealth
• Dr. Stephen Lucas,Deputy Minister, Health Canada
• Dr. Theresa Tam, ChiefPublic Health Officer of Canada
• Dr. Harpreet Kochhar, President, PublicHealth Agency of Canada
• Sylvie Lapointe, Vice-President Policy and Programs Branch,Canadian Food Inspection Agency
• Dr. Michael Strong, President, Canadian Institutes of Health Research
Let me begin with a few words about the current
COVID-19 situation.
Across Canada, the pandemic outlook is improving. Infection rates have peaked in many areas of the
country, followed by a slow decline in hospitalization rates.
After two years of following individual public health measures, people in Canada know what to do to
keep themselves and each other safe.
Now, as jurisdictions across the country are adapting their public health measures and restrictions in
alignment with their respective situations, we are collectively moving towards more sustainable
management of the virus.
Main Estimates overview
Today, I am here to talk about resourcing plans for the Health portfolio.
As you know, we tabled our Supplementary Estimates (C) on February 19. These Estimates sought
parliamentary approval of $ 7.1 billion in newspending, which amended our budget to better support
evolving priorities at the end of fiscal year 2021-2022. I am happy to answer any questions you may
have about these Estimates later this [morning / afternoon].
At this time, I would like to focus on theMain Estimates for 2022-2023.
Keeping people in Canada healthy and safe will be the top priority for the Health portfolio in the months
to come.
The Main Estimates I am presenting today reflect this ─ and they identify the actions we are taking
towardsthat goal.
In total, I am seeking $14.47 billion on behalf of the Health Portfolio, which includes Health Canada, the
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), the Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA), the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) andthe Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB).
Health Canada investments
I’ll start with an overview of Health Canada’s plans.
The 2022-23 Main Estimates reaffirms Health Canada’s focus on providing services that are important to
people in Canada,including support for long-term care, improved access to palliative care and safe
access to medical assistance in dying.
To achieve these and other objectives, I am seeking a total of $3.88 billion. This represents an increase
of just over $15.2 million over last year.
As you know, the COVID-19 pandemic has exacerbated existing mental health and substance use
challenges for people in Canada. My colleague Dr. Carolyn Bennett will provide details on the
investments that address these challenges.
Public Health Agency of Canada investments
The Main Estimates of the Public Health Agency of Canada for 2022-23 propose a decreaseof $256.1
million, for a total budget of $8.49 billion.
This proposed spending will help ensure that PHAC has resources in place to continue to deliver on its
mandate to protect the health of people in Canada during the pandemic, including:
• $5.3 billionfor the procurement of boosters;
• $1.0 billion for the procurement of therapeutics;
• $382 million for the continuity of PHAC’s pandemic response and recovery; and
• $346 million for border measures and safe voluntary isolation sites.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency investments
CFIA protects people in Canada against food safety risks, supports the food supply chain and safeguards
the health and safety of people working in food manufacturing and distribution.
CFIA has a proposed net increase of $52.1 million in its 2022-23 Main Estimates.
This includes funding for:
• maintaining a daily inspection presence in federally registered meat processing establishments
($15.6 million);
• maintaining and further strengthening food safety measures ($14.3 million);and
• addressing antimicrobial resistance ($1.4 million).
Canadian Institutes of Health Research investments
As we learn to live with COVID-19, the importance of investing in health and medical research becomes
more important than ever.
CIHR’s proposedspending on health research for 2022-23 is $1,242.5 million.
These investments will help provide the evidence needed to make better health care decisions, during
the pandemic and beyond.
Conclusion
Mr. Chair, the investments I have outlined today will help the Health Portfolio deliver on its mandate of
maintaining and improving the health of people in Canada.
Our commitments, as set out in our Main Estimates, are a reflection of our most pressing health
priorities.
They demonstrate how we are taking action.
They are an assurance to people in Canada that we will continue to protect and improve our health
system.
Thank you for the opportunity to provide my comments. I would be pleased to take questions from the
Committee after Dr. Bennett presents her remarks.
Blood Donor Deferral Policy and Related Research–Men Who Have Sex with Men (MSM)
ISSUE
• Health Canada funds research that could inform future changes to blood donation policies. This
funding supports blood operators to generate the scientific data required to support a submission to
Health Canada for regulatory authorization.
KEY FACTS
• Our government has been working on reducing barriers preventing MSM from donating blood
by:
o authorizing Canadian Blood Services’ and Héma-Québec’s proposals to reduce the deferral
period for donation from five years to 3 months;
o committing $3 million toCanadian Blood Services, starting in 2016, and in collaboration with
Héma-Québec, to further advance research on this issue, and
o providing a further $2.4 million over three years, starting in 2019–20, for additional research
specific to reducing barriersto the donation of plasma.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the safest blood systems in the world.
• On September 15, 2021, Health Canada authorized Canadian Blood Services to implement
behaviour-based criteria for MSM in the collection of source plasma. The change to behaviour-based
criteria will initially be implemented at two sites (Calgary, Alberta and London, Ontario) with the
intention of further roll-out to other locations.
• On December 15, 2021, Health Canada received a submission from CanadianBlood Services
seeking authorization to remove the current three-month waiting period for men who have sex with
men who want to donate blood. The submission proposes using sexual behaviour-based screening for all
donors, regardless of gender or sexuality.
• The submission is being reviewed, and an expert advisory panel is being convened for this
purpose. As such, the review period will take longer than the normal target of 90 days.
• On December 20, 2021, a regulatory submission was received from Héma-Quebec, which
proposes a transition to a gender-neutral screening questionnaire that focusses on risk behaviours for
donors of source plasma for use in the manufacture of therapeutic products. The submission is currently
under active review, and Health Canada’s decision is expected to occur within the 90-day target.
IF PRESSED …
• Health Canada and the provinces and territories cannot mandate a policy change to donor
screening requirements except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
• Canadian Blood Services and Héma-Québec must make submissions to Health Canada
demonstrating the change’s potential benefit and safety based on up-to-date scientific data. Without
this evidence, the current screening policies cannot be changed.
• Héma-Québec has indicated that the implementation of more flexible donor screening criteria
for plasma could lead to a submission in the future to change the screening criteria for all types of blood
donations.
IF PRESSED ON THE KARAS’ HUMAN RIGHTS COMPLAINT …
• The Attorney General of Canada filed an application for judicial review of the September 25,
2019 decision of the Canadian Human Rights Commission, which was dismissed by the Federal Court on
June 10th, 2021.The purpose of the judicial review that Health Canadahad requested was not to stop or
pre-empt the inquiry in the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal from proceeding, but rather to correctly
establish the proper parties in the case. As the matter is presently before the Tribunal, any further
details of Health Canada’s position will be provided to the Tribunal.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA ORDERED A 2-YEAR WAIT BETWEEN BLOOD BAN POLICY
CHANGES …
• The blood establishments were required to monitor and report on the safety of the blood
system following the implementation of each change to their MSM donor deferral policies; however, a
2-year minimum monitoring period prior to filing subsequent changeswas not a condition of Health
Canada’s authorizations
BACKGROUND
In Canada:
CBS and H-Q were created as arm’s length organizations responsible for operating Canada and Quebec’s
blood systems. Under Canada's Blood Regulations, they are required to make submissions to HC for any
changes to their policies, such as changes to donor deferrals. These submissions must include scientific
data that support the safety of the proposed changes. HC assesses and authorizes any changes before
they can be implemented, but has no authority to mandate that a donor screening criterion be changed,
except in extraordinary situations when safety issues arise.
The first MSM deferral in 1984 prohibited a man who had engaged in sex with another man even once
since 1977 from donating blood. On May 22, 2013, HC authorized a request from CBS and H-Q to change
its MSM deferral criteria to a five-year deferral period and on June 16, 2016 HC authorized subsequent
proposals from CBS and H-Q, to change the blood donor deferral period forMSM from a five-year to a
one-year deferral period. On April 30, 2019, HC authorized a submission from CBS and H-Q to further
reduce the MSM deferral period to three-months.
Funding research is the federal lever available to support further changes to blood donation policies. In
2016, the Government allocated $3.0 million for research to strengthen the evidence base supporting a
non-discriminatory approach to blood donations. Budget 2019 further provided $2.4 million over three
years, starting in 2019–20,for additional research specific to reducing barriers to the donation of blood
plasma. Under Health Canada’s MSM Blood and Plasma Research Program, ongoing since 2016,
Canadian Blood Services is overseeing eighteen (18) funded research projects selected through peer
review processes. Among the funded studies, alternative donor eligibility questions and criteria are
under evaluation for MSM. To date, twelve (12) projects have been completed, while six (6) projects are
on track to achieve expected results.
On September 16, 2021 HC authorized CBS to implement behaviour-based criteria for MSM for
collection of source plasma. CBS intends to implement behaviour-based criteria at two sites (Calgary,
Alberta and London, Ontario) prior to further roll-out. Part ofthe evidence used by CBS to support the
plasma submission comes from results of the studies funded by HC.
On December 15, 2021, HC received a submission from CBS seeking authorization to change its
approach to blood and plasma donor screening. The submission proposes to move away from the
current three month donor deferral period for all sexually active men who have sex with men, and to
instead screen all donors, regardless of gender or sexuality, for high-risk sexual behaviour. The
submission is being reviewed and an expert advisory panel has been convened for this purpose. As such,
the review period will take longer than the normal target of 90 days. The tentative target for completing
the review of the CBS submission is now May 31, 2022. Pending approval, CBS expects the
implementation of the new screening processes would take up to six months, which is based on the UK
experience.
On December 17, 2021, H-Q submitted an authorization amendment to change their rules for source
plasma donations in Quebec with the goal of making them more inclusive. They also reported that the
implementation of more flexible methods of screening plasma donors, based on sexual behaviour, could
lead to a subsequent submission to extend those rules to blood donation in order topromote greater
inclusion of donors.
International trends:
There is no international scientific consensus regarding donor deferral periods for MSM. Some
countries, such as China and Lebanon, maintain permanent deferral periods, while other countries,
including Austria and Denmark adopted 4-months deferral periods. In Spain and Italy there is no MSM
deferral period, rather donors are screened for higher risk activities such as having sex with more than
one concurrent partner, or sex with an occasional partner. Others have adopted a 3-month deferral
including the United States (April 2020), New Zealand (December 2020) and Australia (January 2021). In
June 2021, the UK implemented changes that lift the MSM blood donation deferral and move to
behavioural screening based on evidence-based recommendations. The Netherlands also moved
towards behavioural-based screening, by starting to allow MSM in monogamous relationships to donate
blood in September 2021.
BORDER MEASURES
Issue
The Public Health Agency ofCanada (PHAC) has put successive border measures in place, in response to
COVID-19, under the Quarantine Act.
Key Facts
• Travellers now have the option of using the results from a COVID-19 rapid antigen test taken no
more than 1 day prior to their scheduled flight or arrival at the land border or marine port of entry to
meet pre-entry requirements.
o Taking a rapid antigen test at home is not sufficient to meet the pre-entry requirement–the
test must be authorized by the country in which it was purchased and must be administered or observed
by a laboratory, healthcare entity or telehealth service.
o Travellers can still provide results from a molecular test taken no more than 72 hours before
scheduled flight departure or before arrival at the land or marine port of entry, or proof of a previous
positive molecular test result taken between 10 and 180 days before arrival to meet the pre-entry test
requirements.
• Travellers who qualify as fully vaccinated, arriving to Canada from any country, do not needto
take a COVID-19 molecular test on arrival unless they are selected at random. Randomly selected
travellers will not be required to quarantine while they await their test results.
• Unvaccinated travellers are still required to test on arrival and on day8, and are required to
quarantine for 14 days.
Key Messages
• Border measures are based on the available data, scientific evidence and monitoring of the
epidemiological situation both in Canada and internationally.
• Now that recent data indicates thatthe Omicron wave has passed its peak in Canada, we can
safely ease border measures.
• The Government of Canada has adjusted its Travel Health Notice from a Level 3 to a Level 2. This
means that the Government no longer recommends that Canadians avoid alltravel for non-essential
purposes.
• Travellers should understand the risks that are still associated with international travel and take
necessary precautions.
• Canada’s border measures will remain flexible and adaptable, for potential future scenarios.
• Our first and foremost priority remains the health and safety of all people in Canada.
If pressed–Special Measures for Ukrainian Refugees
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with partners across government,
including Global Affairs, Transport Canada and Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada to
prioritize any measures needed to facilitate entry of Ukrainian refugees.
• Given the ongoing situation in Ukraine, some Ukrainian nationals are permitted to enter Canada
even if theydo not meet Canada’s definition of being fully vaccinated.
• All other testing and quarantine measures remain in place for travellers from Ukraine, including
the pre-departure test requirement.
If pressed–testing to meet pre-entry requirements
• As of February 28, the Government expanded the options for the pre-entry test requirement.
Travellers can now use the results from a COVID-19 rapid antigen test taken no more than 1 day prior to
their scheduled flight or arrival at the land border or marine portof entry.
• The Government recognizes that antigen tests have a lower sensitivity than molecular tests over
the duration of infection. However, evidence indicates that antigen tests can detect most cases with
high viral load, who are the most likely to beinfectious. To take into account their lower sensitivity, the
requirement is that antigen tests must be professionally performed or observed within no more than 1
day of travel.
If pressed–children less than 12 years of age
• Children less than 12 yearsof age who are not fully vaccinated, but travelling with fully
vaccinated adults, will no longer need to wait 14 days before they can attend school, daycare or camp.
• These children may be selected for mandatory random testing upon arrival; however, theyare
not required to quarantine while awaiting their Day 1 test result.
Background
Fully vaccinated travellers
Canada allows entry of travellers from any country for discretionary reasons if they have been fully
vaccinated with Government of Canada accepted vaccines at least 14 days prior to entering Canada, and
if they also meet specific entry requirements.
Fully vaccinated travellers must:
• submit all required COVID-19 information electronically into the free ArriveCAN app prior to
travelling to Canada;
• provide a negative molecular test result 72 hours before arrival OR provide a negative COVID-19
antigen test which is authorized by the country in which it was purchased, taken no more than 1 day
before the flight’s initial departure time or beforeentering Canada by land or water, and administered
or observed by a laboratory, healthcare entity or telehealth service OR proof of a previous positive
molecular test result taken between 10 and 180 days before arrival;
• be asymptomatic upon arrival;
• have a paper or digital copy of their proof of vaccination in English or French (or certified
translation);
• mask when in public spaces; and
• keep a list of contacts for the 14 days after their entry.
Foreign nationals who are travelling for non-essential/discretionary purposes must meet Canada’s
definition of fully vaccinated in the context of border and travel requirements in order to be eligible for
entry. Travellers who are not considered fully vaccinated may be denied boarding or entry.
Unvaccinated or partially vaccinated travellers
All partially or unvaccinated travellers must have a quarantine plan, and unless otherwise exempted, will
be required to quarantine for 14 days. They must also have a pre-departure, on-arrival and post-arrival
test completed.
All travellers will be allowed onward travel to their place of quarantine unless they are symptomatic, a
close contact of a positive case and/or they do not have a suitable place of quarantine upon arrival.
Travellers who do not have a suitableplace to quarantine may be directed to a federal designated
quarantine facility.
Travel advisories
Effective February 28, 2022, the Government of Canada eased its Travel Health Notice from level 3 to 2.
This change means that the Government no longer recommends that Canadians avoid non-essential
travel to all destinations. Travellers are advised to understand the risks that are still associated with
international travel, and take necessary precautions.
All eligible travellers should complete a COVID-19 vaccine series along with any additional
recommended doses in Canada, at least 14 days before travelling.
Anyone who has not completed a COVID-19 vaccine series should continue to avoid non-essential travel
to all destinations. Anyone who has not completed a vaccine series is at increased risk of becoming
infected with and spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 when travelling internationally and is at
greater risk for severe disease.
In considering whether to travel, travellers should consider the availability of medical services abroad,
and plan for the potential high costs associated with medical treatment and extending their trip if they
test positive for COVID-19 while abroad.
Travellers should also understand that there is also the risk that border andtravel measures in other
countries, and in Canada, may change while travellers are abroad. Travellers should regularly review the
entry requirements and exemptions for their travel situation.
Enforcement
Compliance with border measures is subject to monitoring, verification and enforcement. If travellers do
not comply, they may be transferred to a quarantine facility, face fines and/or imprisonment. Maximum
penalties for failing to comply with an order under the Quarantine Act (e.g. the Quarantine, Isolation
and Other Obligations Order) include a fine of up to $750,000 or imprisonment for six months, or both.
Additionally, the Contraventions Act gives law enforcement partners (including RCMP, provincial and
local police) the power to issue tickets, with fines of up to $5,000 for different offences, to people who
do not comply with the Quarantine Act (this does not apply in Alberta, Saskatchewan and the territories
as these jurisdictions have not signed on to the contraventions regime).
In addition to the Quarantine Act, individuals can also be subject to fines, under Transport Canada’s
Aeronautics Act, for non-compliance in relation to mandatory requirements prior to boarding a flight to
Canada.
GLOBAL EFFORTS
Issue
Since the beginning of the COVID-19pandemic, Canada has engaged with international partners
bilaterally and multilaterally, through the G7, the G20, the World Health Organization (WHO), and the
Pan American Health Organization to help inform our domestic response and to contribute to global
efforts on fighting COVID-19.
Key Facts
• Since February 2020, Canada has participated in regular G7 Health Ministerial calls to discuss
COVID-19, which has contributed to enhancing bilateral relationships with key countries such as the U.S.
• Canadalooks forward to continuing our engagement under the 2022 G7 German Presidency and
the G20 Indonesian Presidency to end the acute phase of the pandemic and improve global
preparedness against future health threats.
• G7 Ministers met virtually on January 31 and February 28, 2022, to discuss the ongoing response
to the Omicron variant and Germany’s priorities for the year.
• On March 3, 2022, Canada participated in a COVID-19 Health Ministers’ “Virtual Dialogue”
convened by the U.S., and discussed expandingequitable access to diagnostics, therapeutics, and
vaccines; addressing mis-and disinformation in the response to COVID-19; and strengthening the global
public health architecture.
• On December 1, 2021, Canada and other WHO Member States agreed to launcha process to
develop a new convention, agreement, or other international instrument to enhance global pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response.
Key Messages
• Canada has contributed $2.6 billion to the global fight against the virus. This includesa total of
$1.3 billion to support the Access to COVID-19 Tools Accelerator.
• The Prime Minister announced that Canada will donate the equivalent of at least 200 million
doses to the COVAX Facility by the end of 2022.
• This includes both financial commitments to COVAX and surplus dose donations. As of March 4,
2022, 13.9 million surplus vaccine doses have been delivered through the COVAX Facility and the
equivalent of 87 million doses have been provided through financial support.
• Canada has provided $50 million to the Pan American Health Organization to support efforts to
introduce COVID-19 vaccines and ancillary supplies to reach those living in situations of vulnerability
across the Caribbean and Latin America. Portions of this grant are being used to procure vaccine doses
for countries through the Organization, which are in addition to Canada’s commitment to COVAX.
• Canada is also working with international partners to address barriers to equitable access of
vaccines by improving global capacity to manufacture them.
• The Prime Minister announced an investment of up to $15 million to COVAX Manufacturing Task
Force partners in support of establishing the South Africa Technology Transfer Hub. This initiative will
help build capacity to enable the development and production of mRNA vaccines and technologies in
the region.
• Canada supports the development of a new international instrument to improve multilateral
cooperation on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. We also need to improve the tools
we already have by strengthening the World Health Organization and its existing core international legal
instrument for health emergencies, the International Health Regulations.
Si l’on insiste–Don de vaccins excédentaires
• L’engagement pris par le Canada de donner l’équivalent d’au moins 200 millions de doses au
programme COVAX d’ici la fin de 2022 comprend plus de 50 millions de doses de vaccins achetées par le
Canada dont Santé Canada a déterminé qu’elles dépassaient nos besoins nationaux, un soutien financier
à COVAX pour l’achat et la livraison de doses, ainsi que des contributions et des dons potentiels futurs.
• Le Canada a également envoyé 762 080 doses d’AstraZeneca dans le cadre d’accords bilatéraux
directs avec des pays d’Amérique latine et des Caraïbes.
If Pressed–Donation of Surplus Vaccines
• Canada’s commitment to donating the equivalent of at least 200 million doses to the COVAX
Facility by the end of 2022 includes over 50 million vaccine doses procured by Canada that were
determined by Health Canada to be in excess of our domestic needs, financial support to COVAX for the
procurement and delivery of doses, as well as potential future contributions and donations.
• Canada has also shared 762,080 AstraZeneca doses through direct, bilateral arrangements with
countries in Latin America and the Caribbean.
If Pressed–Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and
Response
• Canada is pleased to see the important consensusreached at the recent Special Session of the
World Health Assembly to negotiate a new international instrument to improve multilateral cooperation
on pandemic prevention, preparedness and response. This sends a critical message to the global
community onour collective will to take bold action to ensure we are better prepared for the next
pandemic.
• Our work should provide a foundation for action across all levels and sectors and integrate a
One Health approach so that we can effectively and collectivelyprevent, detect, prepare and respond to
future infectious disease threats.
• We also need to improve the tools we already have by strengthening the WHO and its existing
core international legal instrument for health emergencies, the International Health Regulations.
• Canada is ready to collaborate with other countries to design this new instrument, should it be
legally binding or otherwise, so that it will have a real impact on the health and safety of people around
the world.We look forward to thesediscussions.
If Pressed–Findings from the International Pandemic Preparedness and Response Panel
• The Government of Canada welcomes the frank assessment and bold recommendations from
the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response.
• Wethank the Panel members for their efforts to understand how a localized outbreak became a
global pandemic, and to assess how the international system responded.
• One of the Panel’s important conclusions is that the world was not prepared for the pandemic
on a number of fronts. We know there are many lessons from this pandemic, which we are learning
from to adjust our approach.
• Canada is working with our international partners to improve global cooperation so that we
remain well-positioned and preparedto respond to future global health events.
Background
Canada has participated in various G7 and G20 discussions on ways to strengthen our collective
capacities to prevent, prepare and respond to future health emergencies. This has also contributed to
enhancing bilateral relationships with key partners such as the U.S. and the EU. Germany has assumed
the Presidency of the G7 for 2022. The G7 Health Ministers met virtually most recently on February 28,
2022, to discuss the response to the Omicron variant.
At the Canada-European Union (EU) Leaders’ Summit in June 2021, the Prime Minister met with his EU
counterparts and announced a Canada-EU dialogue on health to enhance collaboration in the post-
pandemic environment.
Indonesia has assumed the G20 Presidency for 2022. This year’s theme is Recover Together, Stronger
Together. The agenda for the health track will focus on Reshaping the Global Health Architecture.
Canada looks forward to working with our G20 partners to support the objectives of the Presidency,
building resilience for the global health system, harmonizing global health protocol standards, and
expanding global manufacturing and knowledge hubs for pandemic prevention, preparedness and
response.
On September22, 2021, Prime Minister Trudeau provided remarks at the Global COVID-19 Summit
convened by U.S. President Biden on the margins of the United Nations General Assembly. Following the
Summit, Canada has participated in a series of U.S.-convened COVID-19 international Ministerial
meetings, including most recently a Foreign Ministers’ meeting on February 14, 2022, and a COVID-19
Health Ministers’ “Virtual Dialogue” on March 3, 2022. President Biden is expected to convene a second
Leader-level Global Summit inspring 2022 (date to be confirmed).
On November 18, 2021, the Prime Minister attended the North American Leaders Summit in
Washington D.C. along with U.S. President Joseph Biden and Mexican President Andrés Manuel López
Obrador. The three leaders agreed to several commitments, including re-envisioning and updating the
North American Plan for Animal and Pandemic Influenza; shoring-up critical medical supply chains;
supporting the Global Health Security Agenda; and continuing trilateral engagement under theNorth
American Drug Dialogue to address the ongoing opioid overdose crisis. The Prime Minister also held his
first in-person bilateral meeting with President Biden, and reaffirmed the commitments in the February
2021 Roadmap for a Renewed U.S.-Canada Partnership. The Prime Minister and President agreed to
launch a Canada-U.S. Working Group on Supply Chains, tasked with producing a progress report in the
next 120 days; and to develop a renewed vision for joint management of the border, applying lessons
learned from the pandemic.
In addition, senior and technical staff of the Health Portfolio have engaged with their counterparts in a
variety of fora, both bilaterally and multilaterally, World Health Organization (WHO), the Pan American
Health Organization (PAHO), U.S. Centers for Disease, Global Health Security Initiative, the Global
Outbreak Alert and Response Network), to exchange information and best practices that have informed
and enhanced Canada’s response to COVID-19.
Review and Lessons Learned from COVID-19
On May 12, 2021, the Independent Panel for Pandemic Preparedness and Response (IPPPR) published
their final report and recommendations. The report concludes that the pandemic was a result of
“failures and gaps in international and national responses” at every juncture of preparedness for, and
response to, COVID-19. As a result, “February 2020 was a lost month when steps could have been taken
to curtail the epidemic and forestall the pandemic.”
The IPPPR suggests that the failure of countries to respond was a combination of two things: “they did
not sufficiently appreciate the threat and know how to respond”; and, “in the absence of certainty
about how serious the consequences of this new pathogen would be, “wait and see” seemed less costly
and consequential than concerted public health action.”
The IPPPR also notes that stronger leadership and better coordination at national, regional and
international levels were needed to more effectively respond and recommend a more focused and
independent WHO,a pandemic treaty and a Senior Global Health Threats Council that would be led at
the Head of State and Government level. Among its recommendations, the Panel also recommends
greater investment in preparedness and stronger accountability mechanisms to spuraction. They call for
improved surveillance and for the WHO to have authority to rapidly publish information and to dispatch
expert missions.
Canada has consistently supported a comprehensive evaluation and review process of the global
response to COVID-19. Efforts to strengthen WHO and Member States preparedness and response
capacities are also being discussed in several international fora including the WHO, G7, G20, Global
Health Security Initiative, Global Health Security Agenda and North American Plan for Animal and
Pandemic Influenza. Canada recognizes the importance of continued bilateral and multilateral
discussions on how to enhance health security and to effectively address risks.
Development of a new International Instrument on Pandemic Prevention, Preparedness and Response
On November 29 to December 1, 2021, the World Health Assembly convened for a Special Session for
only the second time in the organization’s history. The Assembly adopted a milestone decision, “The
World Together: Establishment of an intergovernmental negotiating body to strengthen pandemic
prevention, preparedness and response”, which was co-sponsored by upwards of 120 Member States,
including Canada. The decision establishes an intergovernmental negotiating body (INB), open to all
Member States, to draft and negotiate a new WHO convention, agreement or other instrument, with
the expectation that this work will proceed with the intention of creating a binding instrument, while at
the same time keeping the door open to other forms of non-binding agreements should the INB decide.
In discussing a new instrument, Member States reiterated several themes, including:
• equity, particularly the importance of timely and equitable access to medical countermeasures;
• universal health coverage and primary health care in strengthening health systems to support
both prevention and response;
• the importance of a whole of government/whole of society approach; and the need for a One
Health approach
Member States will convene the first meetingof the INB by March 1, 2022, to elect Member State co-
chairs and vice-chairs for the process, agree on working methods, and begin the development of the
substantive elements and a working draft of the new instrument. A second meeting will be held by
August 1, 2022, to start discussions on a zero draft and confirm whether the international instrument
will be legally binding.
HOSPITAL/HEALTH CARE SYSTEM IMPACTS
ISSUE
• The ongoing management of the COVID-19 pandemic has led to impactson the health care
system, such as the cancellation of elective surgeries. There are also concerns about the health care
system’s capacity to cope with the current wave of the virus.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 confirmed an additional $5 billion in direct support to provinces and territories for
health care, including $4 billion to address backlogs, and $1 billion to support vaccination roll-out.
• This investment supplements Safe Restart Agreement funding in 2020 of $700 million to help
ensure health care systems are ready for future waves of the virus, $740 million for vulnerable
Canadians–including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative care–who are at risk of more
severe cases of COVID-19, and $500 million in support and protection for people experiencing
challenges related to mental health, substance use, or homelessness.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada has made investments that are helping provincial and territorial
health systems respond to the virus.
• The federal government is ready to respond with surge supports to provincial and territorial
requests for assistance, e.g., with health human resource support and the facilitation of mobile health
services capacity.
IF PRESSED ON HOW MODELLING IS HELPINGTO INFORM DECISIONS ABOUT HEALTH SYSTEM CAPACITY
• Data plays a key role in planning hospital capacity. We have worked with provinces and
territories to track and model potential pressure points related to the availability of hospital beds and
medical equipment, which in turn is informing decisions on how to allocate resources.
• Governments continue to work collaboratively to model demands on health systems under
different modelling scenarios, both at the provincial level and at the national level with support from the
Canadian Institute for Health Information.
BACKGROUND
• Provinces and territories continue to take a range of actions to increase system capacity and
meet projected needs as the pandemic unfolds. This includes cancelling elective surgeries, physically
reconfiguring spaces to fit more beds and create more isolation areas, and transferring patients to other
settings.
• Provinces and territories have also increased use of publicly funded virtual care services and
online screening assessments.This can help reduce pressure on emergency departments and is also
complementing physical distancing measures. Provinces and territories are also running training
exercises and simulations, and are hiring or rehiring staff to meet health system needs.
Safe Restart Agreement
On July 16, 2020 the Prime Minister announced a federal investment of more than $19 billion to help
provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make the country more resilient to possible
future waves of the virus. New federal funding is addressing seven priority areas:
• enhanced capacity for testing, contact tracing, and data management and information sharing
to mitigate future outbreaks;
• investments in health care to respond to the pandemic, including support forCanadians
experiencing challenges with substance use, mental health, or homelessness;
• support for vulnerable Canadians–including those in long-term care, home care, and palliative
care–who are at risk of more severe cases of COVID-19;
• funding to secure a reliable source of personal protective equipment (PPE), and to recover some
of the costs from previous investments made by provincial and territorial governments;
• support to ensure that safe and sufficient child care spaces are available to support parents’
gradual return to work;
• joint funding with the provinces and territories to support municipalities on the front lines of
restarting the economy, including by putting in place precautions for public spaces and essential services
to reduce thespread of the virus, as well as a dedicated stream of funding for public transit; and
• a temporary income support program that will provide workers who do not have paid sick leave
with access to 10 days of paid sick leave related to COVID-19.
2020 Fall Economic Statement
The Fall Economic Statement of November 30, 2020 proposed new measures to support Canadians
through the pandemic and to continue Canada’s COVID-19 response:
• Ensuring that federal and provincial laboratories continue to receive sufficient testing supplies
and supporting the roll-out of new rapid COVID-19 tests and innovative approaches to testing;
• Continuing to procure PPE and provide warehousing and logistics support to deliver critical PPE
and medical supplies to provinces, territories and Indigenous communities, as well as maintaining the
readiness of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile;
• Establishing a new Safe Long-term Care Fund that will provide up to $1 billion to help provinces
and territories protect people in long-term care (LTC) and support infection prevention and control to
protect seniors and the most vulnerable;
• Investing in additional measures to support infection and prevention and control in LTC;
• Reaffirming the Government’s commitment to work withprovinces and territories to set new,
national standards for LTC to make sure seniors and those in care live in safe and dignified conditions;
• Investing to provide additional mental health and virtual care supports for Canadians;
• Continuing to respondto Canada’s opioid crisis to support community-based organizations
responding to substance use issues, including to help them provide frontline services in a COVID-19
context; and
• Supporting the continuing efforts of the Canadian Red Cross to respond toCOVID-19 and other
emergencies, and for a humanitarian workforce to provide surge capacity in response to COVID-19
outbreaks and other large-scale emergencies.
Budget 2021
• Budget 2021 confirmed the Government’s continued support for provinces and territories,
including addressing urgent health care needs, with an additional $5 billion in direct support to
provinces and territories for health care and vaccination roll-out.
• The funding includes a one-time payment of $4 billion through the Canada Health Transfer,
distributed equally per capita, to help provinces and territories address immediate health care system
pressures. This funding could be used for a variety of urgent needs, including clearing the backlog of
medical procedures, patient care, and access to primary care put on hold due to the pandemic.
• A one-time payment of $1 billion, distributed equally per capita, is also being provided to the
provinces and territories to support and accelerate COVID-19 vaccine roll-out campaigns.
2021 Economicand Fiscal Update
On December 14, 2021 the Government of Canada tabled its Economic and Fiscal Update outlining
measures to finish the fight against COVID-19 and support Canadians through a robust recovery. The
Economic and Fiscal Update sets out a range of measures to support Canadians through the pandemic
including:
• $1.7 billion to increase access to rapid testing supplies across Canada;
• $2 billion to procure lifesaving COVID-19 therapeutics and treatments;
• $409 million to continue the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic response, including strengthened
surveillance, laboratory research, and emergency management operations;
• $599 million to support and maintain ongoing COVID-19 border testing capacity and operations;
and
• Up to $4.5 billion to respond to theOmicron variant, including border measures, and income
and business supports.
The update provides proposed funding for safer travel. It also provides funding to provinces and
territories through the Safe Return to Class Fund, and to First Nations for on-reserve schools, to improve
ventilation. It also commits additional investments to support ventilation projects in public and
community buildings such as hospitals, libraries, and community centres.
HEALTH FUNDING AGREEMENTS AND TRANSFERS
ISSUE
• The government continues to work collaboratively with provinces and territories (PTs) to
strengthen Medicare and provide funding through transfers and bilateral agreements to improve health
care. In addition to the Canada Health Transfer, the Government provided over $19 billion to provinces
and territories last fiscal year to help them manage the pandemic, and directly invested another $19
billion in health to support the fight against COVID, including public health support and the purchase of
vaccines and tests. This is in addition to targeted funding provided to the PTs to support specific health
care priorities, such as home care, mental health, substance use, long term care and virtual care.
• As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing PTs with additional
pandemic support including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as support for primary care,
virtual care, long-term care, palliative care, mental health, and problematic substance use.
KEY FACTS
• In July 2021,our Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for
health care, including a $4 billion one-time top-up to the Canada Health Transfer to support PTs to clear
the backlog of procedures caused by the pandemic, and $1 billionto support vaccine roll-out.
• This is in addition to significant pandemic-related health system investments through the $19
billion Safe Restart Agreement, as well as $150 million for the rapid deployment of virtual care services.
• Furthermore, our government continues to collaborate with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health andaddiction services; and
o More recently, $1 billion for safe long-term care, and $3 billion to help provinces and territories
improve the standard of care in their long-term care facilities
• For more information on Federal spending, please see funding charts in the Background.
KEY MESSAGES
• The pandemic has highlighted the need for resilient health care systems in Canada. That is why
our government is committed to working collaboratively with provinces and territories to provide
pandemic supports andto strengthen Medicare.
• Our Government will continue to work closely with provinces and territories in order to improve
health care and health outcomes for Canadians across the country.
IF PRESSED (GENERAL)
• From the beginning, the Government of Canadahas been there to support provinces and
territories in the fight against COVID-19. More than eight of every ten dollars spent to fight COVID-19
and support Canadians comes from the federal government.
• In 2020-21, the Government of Canada provided $41.9billion in cash support to provinces and
territories through the Canada Health Transfer (CHT), growing to $43.1 billion in 2021-22 and $45.2
billion in 2022-23. This stable, predictable funding is in addition to another $19.1 billion in pandemic
support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 (e.g. $4 B to help address health
system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
• In addition to funding directly to provinces and territories, the federal government made $19
billion in direct health investments in 2020-21 to support the fight against COVID, including public health
support and the purchase of vaccines and tests.
• Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-
19spending will total $72.4 billion. This includes a total of $23.2 billon in transfer to provinces and
territories and $49.2 billion in direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
• This does not include our continued collaboration with provinces and territories on shared
priorities, supported by targeted federal investments of:
o $11 billion over 10 years for provinces and territories to improve access to home and
community care and mental health and addiction services; and
o More recently, $4 billion to help provinces and territories improve infection prevention and
control and the standard of care in their long-term care facilities.
IF PRESSED ON Bill C-237–BQ PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL INTRODUCED BY MR. PLAMONDON
(Bécancour—Nicolet—Saurel)
• The government of Canada is committed to protecting our publicly funded health care system
and supporting provinces and territories in the delivery of care to their residents. The Canada Health
Transfer (CHT) remains the key federal funding mechanism for supporting Canada’s health care system,
providing long-term, predictable fundingto provinces and territories.
• The Canada Health Act (CHA) establishes principles that provinces and territories must fulfill in
order to receive their fullCanada Health Transfer (CHT) cash contribution. The five principles of the CHA
are designed to ensure that all Canadians, regardless of which province or territory they reside in or
travel to, have universal access to comprehensive, publicly administeredcare. Beyond the link to these
basic principles, the CHT is unconditional and gives provinces and territories the autonomy to decide
how best to allocate these funds in order to address the health care needs of their residents and
communities.
• However, our system is in need of improvement. Past experience tells us that improvements will
not be easily achieved by merely adding more federal money. Canada is among the world’s top tier of
spenders on health care and yet we are not achieving the kind of results that Canadians need. Canadians
expect new funds to be invested in a way that achieves tangible improvements in health care. The
federal government understands that targeted investments are needed to accelerate change and
improve the responsiveness and sustainability of the health system.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADA MENTAL HEALTHTRANSFER–PLATFORM COMMITMENT
• The Government of Canada is committed to ensuring Canadians have access to mental health
and substance use supports when and where they need them. That is why it is so important to assist
jurisdictions to expand the delivery of high-quality and accessible mental health and substance use
services.
• The Government of Canada has already made significant investments in this area, including $5B
to supportmental health and substance use services through its bilateral agreements with provinces
and territories. The Government of Canada is committed to make significant additional investments,
with accountability and data to demonstrate results for Canadians.We want to ensure that Canadians
get the services and supports they need and that our investments have a positive impact on their mental
health.
IF PRESSED ON QUEBEC
• Our Government is committed to ensuring it is there to meet the needs of the people of
Quebec, and continues to work with all provinces and territories tostrengthen public health care.
• The Canada-Quebec home and community care and mental health and addiction services
bilateral agreement will flow approximately $2.5 billion over 10 years in funds targeted to support home
and community care and mental health and addiction services and reflects the principles of
asymmetrical federalism as recognized in 2004.
• Our government also committed to new targeted funds for Quebec and other provincesand
territories for virtual care, safe long-term care and support through the Safe Restart agreement.
• This is in addition to the Canada Health Transfer, which will flow over $10.1 billion to Quebec in
2022-23.
• Quebec will also receive $902.4 million as part of its share of the $4 billion, one-time top-up to
the CHT. It will also receive a further $225.6 million to support COVID-19 immunizations.
IF PRESSED ON NEXTSTEPS FOR BILATERAL AGREEMENTS
• The Government of Canada signed home and community care and mental health and addiction
services bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories to flow $5 billion in targeted funding for
home care and mental health from 2017-18 through 2021-22.
• We are now working with provinces and territories to amend those agreements to flow funding
for the $1 billion Safe Long-term CareFund.
• A new round of bilateral agreements will be negotiated to flow the remaining $6 billion in
funding starting in 2022-23, and these agreements will also flow Budget 2021 commitment of $3 billion
over five years to ensure that standards for long-term care are upheld across the country and that
seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.
BACKGROUND
Council of the Federation (CoF) Request forIncreased in (CHT)
In September 2020, the Council of the Federation (CoF) made a formal request for an increase in health
transfers to help address the PT projected increase in health care costs associated with COVID-19 and
pressures such as an aging population, and new drugs/technology. The increase requested by CoF would
have had the CHT rise to $70 billion, an increase of $28 billion from $42 billion in 2020-21, or from its
current 23% share of PT health spending to 35%. CoF has also called for the CHT to grow by an annual
escalator of at least 5% (March 4, 2021), and reiterated this demand in December 2021.
In July 2021, the Government provided provinces and territories with an additional $5 billion for health
care, including a $4 billion, one-time top-up to the CHT intended to support PTs to clear the backlog of
procedures caused by waves one and two of the pandemic. Bill C-25 also provides PTs with $1 billion to
support Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan. Additionally, the Bill provides $2.2 billionto address
infrastructure priorities. The $4 billion CHT top-up is in addition to the COVID-19 Response Fund that
also provided one-time funding of $500 million through the CHT in 2019-20 to support PTs’ critical
health care system needs and COVID-19 mitigation efforts.
The Canada Health Transfer (CHT), the largest major transfer to PTs, provides long-term predictable
funding for health care, and is tied to PTs’ respect for the principles of the Canada Health Act, which are:
universality; comprehensiveness;portability; accessibility; and, public administration. In 2021-2022, PTs
will receive $43.1 billion through the CHT, growing to $45.2 billion in 2022-23.
BILL C-237-An Act to amend the Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act and the Canada HealthAct
This BQ Private Member's Bill was introduced by Mr. Plamondon (Bécancour—Nicolet—Saurel) on 7
February 2022. It was also tabled in the previous parliamentary session (43-2) but did not proceed past
First Reading on 27 May 2021. The Bill seeks to amendthe Federal-Provincial Fiscal Arrangements Act in
order to allow a province with a program whose objectives are comparable to those of a federal
program in an area under provincial legislative authority (e.g., health care) to withdraw from the federal
program, with full compensation.
The Bill also seeks to amend the Canada Health Act in order to exempt Quebec (and other provinces)
from the national criteria and conditions that are required for a province to receive its full allocation of
the Canada Health Transfer. The Bill would also exempt Quebec from other federal standards including
planned long-term care standards.
Pandemic Funding:
In 2020-21, the federal government provided $19.1 billion, beyond the Canada Health Transfer, in
pandemic support for provincial and territorial health care systems in 2020-21 to support the fight
against COVID, including public health support and the purchase of vaccines and tests (e.g. $4 B to help
address health system pressures and $1 billion to support immunization campaigns).
As part of its new mandate, the government has committed to providing additional pandemic support
including for immunization and therapeutics, as well as, support for primary care, virtual care, long-term
care, palliative care, mental health,and problematic substance use.
Between 2019 and 2027, the federal government estimates that federal health related COVID-19
spending will total $72.4 billion. This includes a total of $23.2 billon in transfer to provinces and
territories and $49.2 billionin direct federal spending (e.g., spending on PPE, vaccines, and rapid tests).
Federal Targeted Funding:
On March 22, 2017, Budget 2017 committed to $11 billion over 10 years to improve access to home care
and mental health services.
Shared Health Priorities and Bilateral Agreements:
In August 2017, all PTs (except Quebec) agreed to a Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, which sets out priorities for action in home and community care, and mental health and
addiction services. OnMarch 10, 2017, the Government of Canada and the Government of Quebec
agreed to an asymmetrical arrangement distinct from this Common Statement of Principles and based
on the asymmetrical agreements of September 2004.
The Common Statement also includes acommitment for PT governments to work with the Canadian
Institute for Health Information on a set of common indicators in these areas, to continue collaborating
to advance work in health innovation and prescription drugs, and to engage with Indigenous leaders to
improve health outcomes for Indigenous peoples. At the June 2018 Health Ministers’ meeting, Health
Ministers (except Quebec) endorsed a set of common indicators, developed by CIHI and FPT
governments, to measure and report progress toCanadians on shared priorities.
Recognizing the unique circumstances in Nunavut, and to provide Nunavut the flexibility it required to
implement initiatives that will improve access to home and community care and mental health and
addiction services, it was agreed thatthe start date of the agreement would be delayed by a year, i.e.,
beginning 2019-20.
The funding is allocatedto PTs on a per capita basis.
Renewal of Agreements:
The first year of funding (2017-18) flowed to PTs based on their acceptance of the federalfunding offer,
as outlined in the Budget Implementation Act, 2017, No. 1. The Government of Canada then engaged
with PTs to negotiate detailed funding agreements for the 2018-19 to 2021-22 period. The Government
of Canada will negotiate the renewal of these agreements in 2021-22 for the remaining five years (2022-
23 to 2026-27). Bilateral agreements with all provinces and territories have been signed and are posted
online.
Safe Long-term Care:
The 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a commitment of upto $1 billion for a Safe Long-term
Care Fund, to help provinces and territories protect people in long-term care and support infection
prevention and control. Funding will be contingent on a detailed spending plan, and conditional on
provinces and territories demonstrating that investments have been made according to those spending
plans. Provinces and territories will be able to use this funding to undertake a range of activities,
including carrying out infection prevention and control readiness assessments, making improvements to
ventilation and hiring additional staff or topping up wages.
Long-term Care Standards:
Budget 2021 proposed to provide $3B over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-termcare are applied and permanent changes are made. The
federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while respecting their
jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care. This work would ensure seniors and those in care
live in safe and dignified conditions.
The pandemic has shone a light on systemic issues affecting long-term care facilities across the country.
The government welcomes the news that the Health Standards Organization and Canadian Standards
Associationare launching a process to help address those issues in Canada. The Health Standards
Organization’s and Canadian Standards Association’s work with governments, stakeholders, and
Canadians to develop national standards will help inform our ongoing discussions with provinces and
territories on improving the quality of life of seniors in long-term care.
Virtual Care:
In May 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for
Canadians. This funding will support the rapidroll out of virtual care and needed supports for health
systems, as the Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to assist health services
to undertake virtual care and provide health services at a distance. Of this funding, $150M will flow to
PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to virtual services focused on secure messaging and
file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient monitoring, patient online access to test results,
and back-end supports to integrate these tools within existing digital systems.
In addition, Canada Health Infoway will receive up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards on
secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant to
the bilateral agreements.
Federal Health Related COVID-19 Spending ($ Millions)
Transfer to Provinces and Territories
- Safe Restart Agreement (ARS)–Health components
o 2020-21: 13,814
o Total: 13,814
- SRA PPE and Medical Equipment (includes $4.5Bin-kind to PTs)
o 2020-21: 7,550
o Total: 7,500
- SRA Testing & Tracing, Data Management (includes $1.28B in-kind to PTs
o 2020-21: 4,280
o Total: 4,280
- SRA System Capacity, Vulnerable Populations & Small Jurisdictions
o 2020-21: 1,984
o Total: 1,984
- Covid Response Fund($500M CHT Top up for PTs in 2019-20)
o 2019-20: 500
o Total: 500
- Emergency health funding to territories
o 2020-21: 73
o Total: 73
- Additional support to territories
o 2020-21: 65
o Total: 65
- CHT top-up for surgical backlogs
o 2020-21: 4,000
o Total: 4,000
- Canada’sCOVID-19 immunization Plan
o 2020-21: 1,000
o Total: 1,000
- Virtual care
o 2020-21: 150
o Total: 150
- Mental Health
o 2021-22: 140
o Total: 140
- Safe long term care (LTC) fund
o 2021-22: 1000
o Total: 1000
- $3 billion for long term care over 5 years
o 2021-22: 2
o 2022-23: 609
o 2023-24: 608
o 2024-25: 609
o 2025-26: 607
o Total: 2,435
- Total transfers
o 2019-20: 500
o 2020-21: 19,101
o 2021-22: 1,142
o 2022-23: 609
o 20230-24: 608
o 2024-25: 609
o 2025-26: 607
o 2026-27: 0
o Total: 23,176
Direct Federal Spending
- Direct long-term care funding
o 2020-21: 824
o 2021-22: 516
o 2022-23: 1
o 2023-24: 1
o 2024-25: 1
o 2025-26: 1
o Total: 1,344
- Covid response fund (direct federal spending)
o 2020-21: 512
o 2021-22: 37
o 2022-23: 37
o 2023-24: 37
o 2024-25: 37
o 2025-26: 37
o Total: 697
- PPE and medical equipment
o 2019-20: 200
o 2020-21: 3,331
o 2021-22: 1,821
o 2022-23: 289
o 2023-24: 289
o 2024-25: 28i9
o 2025-26: 289
o Total: 6,508
- Vaccines and therapeutics
o 2020-21: 7,520
o 2021-22: 6,530
o 2022-23: 826
o 2023-24: 826
o 2024-25: 826
o 2025-26: 826
o Total: 17,354
- Other public health support
o 2019-20: 382
o 2020-21:6,830
o 2021-22: 2,025
o 2022-23: 308
o 2023-24: 308
o 2024-25: 308
o 2025-26: 308
- Additional funding for testing
o 2021-22: 750
o Total: 750
- Vaccine procurement and pandemic preparedness since budget 2021
o 2021-22: 63
o 2022-23: 2,966
o 2023-24: 2,754
o 2024-25: 492
o 2025-26:490
o 2026-27: 490
o Total: 7,255
- Vaccine mandates–making travel safer
o 2021-22: 5
o 2022-23: 23
o 2023-24: 9
o Total: 37
- Vaccine mandates–core public administration and the RCMP
o 2021-22:86
o 2022-23: 113
o Total: 199
- Support for proof of vaccination
o 2021-22: 300
o Total: 300
- Rapid tests
o 2021-22: 1,450
o Total: 1,450
- Additional COVID-19 theraputics procurement
o 2021-22: 1000
o 2022-23: 1000
o Total: 2000
- Funding to improve ventilation and accessibility
o 2021-22: 125
o 2022-23: 225
o 2023-24: 95
o 2024-25: 7
o Total: 452
- Supporting the Public health agency of Canada’s operations
o 2022-23: 405
o 2023-24: 1
o 2024-25: 1
o 2025-26: 1
o 2026-27: 1
o Total: 409
- Total direct spending:
o 2019-20: 582
o 2020-21: 19,017
o 2022-23: 14,708
o 2023-24: 6,193
o 2023-24: 4,320
o 2024-25: 1,961
o 2025-26: 1,952
o 2026-27: 491
o Total: 49,224
- Total federal health related COVID-19 funding
o 2019-20: 1,082
o 2020-21: 38,118
o 2021-22: 15,850
o 2022-23: 6,802
o 2023-24: 4,928
o 2024-25: 2,570
o 2025-26: 2,559
o 2026-27: 491
o Total: 72,400
Federal Health Related COVID-19 Spending ($ Millions)
Transfers to Provinces and Territories:
- Safe Restart Agreement (SRA)–Health Components
o 2020-21: 13,813.7
- SRA PPE and Medical Equipment ($3B cash)
o 2020-21: 3 000
o NL: 41.1
o PE: 12.5
o NS: 77.3
o NB: 61.7
o QC: 675.7
o ON: 1165
o MB: 109
o SK: 93.4
o AL: 349.9
o BC: 404.5
o YT: 3.3
o NT: 3.6
o NU: 3.1
- SRA PPE and medical equipment ($4.5 in-kind to PTs)
o 2020-21: 4 550
o NL: unknown
o PE: unknown
o NS: unknown
o NB: unknown
o QC: unknown
o ON: unknown
o MB: unknown
o SK: unknown
o AL: unknown
o BC: unknown
o YT: unknown
o NT: unknown
o NU: unknown
- SRAtesting & tracing, data management ($3B cash)
o 2020-21: 3 000
o NL: 41.1
o PE : 12.5
o NS : 77.3
o NB : 61.7
o QC : 675.7
o ON : 1 165
o MB : 109
o SK : 93.4
o AL : 349.9
o BC : 404.5
o YT : 3.3
o NT : 3.6
o NU : 3.1
- SRA testing & trading, data management ($1.3B in-king to PTs)
o 2020-21: 1 280
o NL: unknown
o PE : unknown
o NS : unknown
o NB : unknown
o QC : unknown
o ON : unknown
o MB : unknown
o SK : unknown
o AL : unknown
o BC : unknown
o YT : unknown
o NT : unknown
o NU : unknown
- SRA system capacity, vulnerable populations and small jurisdictions
o 2020-21: 1,983.7
o NL: 26.6
o PE : 14.5
o NS :50
o NB :39.9
o QC :437
o ON :753.3
o MB :70.5
o SK :60.4
o AL :226.2
o BC :261.6
o YT :14.5
o NT :14.6
o NU :14.5
- Emergency health funding to territories
o 2020-21: 72.6
o NL: 0
o PE : 0
o NS : 0
o NB : 0
o QC : 0
o ON : 0
o MB : 0
o SK : 0
o AL : 0
o BC : 0
o YT : 18.4
o NT : 23.4
o NU : 30.8
- Additional support to territories
o 2020-21: 64.7
o NL: 0
o PE : 0
o NS : 0
o NB : 0
o QC : 0
o ON : 0
o MB : 0
o SK : 0
o AL : 0
o BC : 0
o YT : 4
o NT : 30.7
o NU : 30
- CHT top up for surgical backlogs
o 2020-21: 4 000
o NL: 55
o PE : 16.8
o NS : 103
o NB: 82.2
o QC : 902.4
o ON : 1550.8
o MB : 145.2
o SK : 124.1
o AL : 465.3
o BC : 541.8
o YT : 4.4
o NT : 4.8
o NU : 4.1
- Canada’s COVID-19 immunization plan
o 2020-21: 1 000
o NL: 13.8
o PE : 4.2
o NS : 25.8
o NB : 20.5
o QC : 225.6
o ON : 387.7
o MB : 36.3
o SK : 31
o AL : 116.3
o BC : 135.4
o YT: 1.1
o NT : 1.2
o NU : 1
- Virtual care
o 2020-21: 150
o NL: 4.5
o PE : 3.5
o NS : 5.9
o NB : 5.3
o QC : 28.1
o ON : 46
o MB : 7
o SK : 6.5
o AL : 15.9
o BC : 18
o YT : 3.1
o NT : 3.1
o NU : 3.1
- Total transfers
o 2020-21: 19 101
o NL: 182.1
o PE : 64.1
o NS : 339.2
o NB : 271.1
o QC : 2944.5
o ON :5067.8
o MB : 476.9
o SK : 408.8
o AL : 1523.5
o BC : 1765.9
o YT : 52.1
o NT : 84.8
o NU : 89.8
Canada Health Transfer Substance Use and Emergency Treatment Virtual Care Bilateral Bilateral Agreement for
Addictions Program Fund Agreement Home and Community
Careand Addiction
Services
(in millions) (in millions) (in millions) (in millions) (in millions)
(2021-2022) (estimate is for a seven (estimate is for a ten year
year period) period)
NfL 585 2.4 1.5 4.5 151
NS 1,109 2.5 3.2 5.9 285
NB 881 5.3 2.8 5.3 227
PEI 182 .9 .52 3.5 47
QC 9,705 53.2 22 28 2,479
ON 16,758 135.4 51 46 4,262
MB 1,560 8.2 4.1 4.2 399
SK 1,330 6.4 5 6.4 341
AB 5,030 11.9 24 16 1,279
BC 5,843 62.6 34 18 1,494
YK 48 .7 .5 3.1 12.3
NWT 51 2.4 .5 3.1 13.1
NU 45 - .5 3.1 11.3
Total 43,127 291.9 150 150 11,000
Totals may not add due to rounding
MENTAL HEALTH AND SUBSTANCE USE TOOLS
ISSUE
• The Government remains committed to supporting Canadians with their mental health and
substance use challenges as well as increasing access to services so that Canadians can get the help they
need, when they need it.
KEY FACTS
• Canada’s current range ofcommunity, private and hospital-based mental health services can be
difficult to navigate and are not always well integrated to support the mental health care needs of
Canadians.
• These gaps have been exacerbated during the pandemic, and disproportionately impact rural
and remote communities, where service availability, access and quality vary.
• Certain populations and groups have been disproportionately impacted due to a lack of timely
and appropriate care. For example:
- While rural populations havehistorically reported higher self-rated mental health than
Canadians overall, and lower levels of diagnosis with mental disorders, mental health services and
supports are less frequently available.
- Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significantpublic health issues, increasing the risk of
poor mental and physical health outcomes for mothers, along with potential impacts for children and
families.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed to a suite of measures to improve access to
quality and timely mental health supports:
- $45 million over two years to develop national standards for mental health, in collaboration
with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders.
- $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and
Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians.
- $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.
- $10 million for the Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund to support community-based projects
across Canada.
- $13.5 million through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and partners for the COVID-19
and Mental Health Initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and
substance use responses in the context of COVID-19.
- The Government has allocated an additional $62 million, in 2021-22, for the Wellness Together
Canada portal so that it can continue to provide Canadians with tools and services to support mental
health and well-being.
• As of January 24, 2022, over 2 million individuals across all provinces and territories have
accessed the Wellness Together Canada portal in over 6 million web sessions since launch.
Approximately 39% of site visitors are men, which compared to other services is higher than usual male
engagement. Approximately 47% of individuals that have created an account are under the age of 30, an
age group that tends to be underserved by traditional mental health services. For phone sessions, 88%
felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 85% of texters were highly satisfied with
the service. Based on a client feedback survey, 28% indicated they have no other options for support, if
not for the portal.
KEY MESSAGES
• In response to the pandemic, our Government moved quickly to create Wellness Together
Canada, providing 24/7 access to free and confidential mental health and substance-use supports.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed in excess of $280 million for a suite of
measures to support the mental health needs of marginalized and disproportionately impacted
Canadians, while also investing in health systems improvements.
• Moving forward, our Government is committed to ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full and equal part of our universal health care system.
IFPRESSED ON POCKETWELL …
• Supporting the mental health and well-being of Canadians is a priority for our Government.
Having an app to complement the Wellness Together Canada portal will help increase awareness and
accessibility of available mental health and substance use resources.
• Through PocketWell, the WTC companion app, individuals can link to the portal to access
resources ranging from self-assessment tocustomized support based on their assessment. Via the app,
individuals can connect seamlessly to WTC for free and confidential virtual sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals.
IF PRESSED ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF NATIONALSTANDARDS FOR MENTAL HEALTH…
• Our government is committed to working with stakeholders, provinces and territories to set
national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the support
they need, when they need it.
• The Government of Canada is working with the Standards Council of Canada–a Federal Crown
Corporation with demonstrated expertise in developing national standards–to develop a suite of
national standards for delivering mental health and substance useservices, leveraging significant work
done to date in this field.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS TO CHILDREN, YOUTH AND FAMILIES…
• The pandemic is particularly challenging for families.
• Through Wellness Together Canada, children and youth (ages 5 to 29) are able to access mental
health and substance use resources, including Kids Help Phone which provides online, phone and text
based support to young people.
• The Federal Government is currently funding Kids Help Phone a total of approximately $15
million over 36 months (2020-23).
• We are also investing $5 billion over ten years to provinces and territories to help them expand
access, which includes community-based mental health and addiction services for children and youth.
IF PRESSED ON SUBSTANCE / OPIOID USE IN YOUTH …
• Substance use prevention in youth is an important priority for the Government of Canada.
• We know that the pandemic has exacerbated mental health and substance use concerns for
young people.
• That is why the Government of Canada continues to invest in helping youth understand the risks
associated with alcohol, cannabis, tobacco and vaping use. We have also invested in the Know More
Tour to engage teens and young adults on the facts surrounding the overdose crisis and health risks
associated with opioid use.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDE SUPPORTS FOR FRONTLINE WORKERS…
• Health care and front line personnel are an important population for Wellness Together Canada.
That is why the portal features a dedicated text line and targeted mental health and substance use
supports.
• Frontline workers can access free counselling, peer support groups, and a range of anonymous,
self-guided programming. This includes co-designed mindfulness sessions for health care workers to
reduce stress and support coping with work/life demands.
• The portal also features Program Navigators that can assist frontline workers in accessing portal
resources appropriate for their needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED TO PROVIDESUPPORTS TO DIVERSE POPULATIONS
• Wellness Together Canada continually enhances the portal to ensure inclusivity.
• Phone counselling sessions are supported by instantaneous interpretation in 200 languages and
dialects, including24 Indigenous languages.
• The portal features contact information for Hope for Wellness (for Indigenous peoples), and
supports populations with barriers to care, including those in isolation or remote areas, facing stigma or
financial difficulties, and official language minority communities.
• The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to
support community-based projects across Canada.
IF PRESSED ON BARRIERS TO ACCESS CARE INRURAL AND REMOTE COMMUNITIES …
• Our government recognizes that rural and remote communities in Canada face unique
challenges in providing access to quality mental health services.
• Wellness Together Canada (WTC) has been providing rural and remote communities with free
mental health and substance use resources available 24/7, in both official languages. In addition, for
Canadians who do not have reliable internet access, many of theWTC supports can be accessed by
phone and text, and via PocketWell, a companion app to the Portal.
• The Government will explore pathways to increase the accessibility of mental health services in
rural areas, including virtual options.
IF PRESSED ON SUICIDE …
• In 2019, suicide was the second leading cause of death among youth and young adults aged 15
to 34.
• The Government is also investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service with its
partners. The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides 24/7 suicide crisis support over the
phone to everyone in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON PREVIOUS INVESTMENTS…
• Our Government has made significant investments in mental health, including:
o $50 million for distress centres;
o $500 million, as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, for mental health and substance use needs;
o $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone;
o $4.9 million annually for the Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund;
o $21 million for a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service; and,
o $5 billion over ten years, through Budget 2017, to provinces and territories to increase access to
mental health and addictions services.
IF PRESSEDON 2021 MANDATE COMMITMENTS …
• As Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, I will ensure that mental health care is treated as a
full, equal part of our universal health care system, working in close collaboration with provinces and
territories, and help addressproblematic substance use in Canada.
• To realize these objectives, I will deliver in many commitments, such as:
o Establishing a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer;
o Developing and implement a comprehensive, evidence-based plan for mental health; and,
o Addressing problematic substance use in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON THE UTILIZATION OF WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA…
• Asof January 24, 2022, over 2 million individuals have accessed the portal in over 6 million web
sessions.
• Approximately 39%are men.
• Approximately 47% are under the age of 30.
• For phone sessions, 88% felt better after speaking with a counsellor. For text sessions, 85% of
texters were highly satisfied.
• 28% indicated they have no other options for support.
• Health Canadawill continue to monitor the portal by supporting data collection, reporting, and
evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON THE COLLECTION OF PERSONAL INFORMATION WITHIN WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA...
• The portal strictly adheres to all applicable privacy and health information standards to maintain
the security and confidentiality of personal information. Vendors are bound by the privacy protective
terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve personal information.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORT INDIVIDUALS WITHOUT INTERNET
ACCESS…
• For individuals without internet access, confidential chat sessions with social workers,
psychologists and other professionals can be accessed by phone and text.
IF PRESSED ON HOW WELLNESS TOGETHER CANADA CAN SUPPORTINDIVIDUALS EXPERIENCING GRIEF…
• Wellness Together Canada provides a range of mental health supports, which includes access to
24/7 counselling by phone and text. All service providers are able to support individuals with the grief
they face.
• The portal also features new dedicated grief content, including informational resources and a
telephonic 1-on-1 Grief Loss and Coaching Program, provided by Homewood Health.
IF PRESSED ON UNMET MENTAL HEALTH NEEDS INTHE DRR …
• Increased mental health literacy and reduction in stigma have improved knowledge, attitudes,
and help-seeking behavior, contributing to an increased demand for services. This demand has been
compounded during the pandemic with increased levels of anxiety and depression along with a
reduction in available supports.
• Despite progress that may have been achieved, these changes have made it challenging to
reduce unmet mental health needs of Canadians.
• As Minister of Mental Health andAddictions, I will also work to ensure that mental health care is
treated as a full, equal part of our universal health care system.
BACKGROUND
Pressure on Existing Provincial/Territorial Mental Health Services
With Canadians physical distancing and isolated, there is an unprecedented need for virtual services,
such as telehealth and other information lines (e.g., 811), and provinces/territories are not able to
absorb the increased demand.
It is critical that Canadians have access to effective tools toself-monitor, promote their mental well-
being, obtain credible and reliable information, and access services when deemed necessary. Canadians
need to be re-assured that there are supports available to help alleviatetheir stress, fear and anxiety.
Government Actions and Investments to Improve Access to Mental Health Services and Address the
Impacts Of COVID-19 On Canadians’ Mental Health
Wellness Together Canada
Health Canada has invested $130 million over two years in Wellness Together Canada, an onlinemental
health and substance use support portal. Launched in April 2020, Wellness Together Canada provides
free and confidential online mental health and substance use supports accessible 24/7 to individuals
across Canada in both official languages. Interpretation services are also available during phone sessions
in over 200 languages and dialects. Through Wellness Together Canada, individuals in all provinces and
territories have immediate access to supports ranging from self-assessment, educational contentand
self-guided programming, to peer support and confidential sessions with social workers, psychologists
and other professionals. Supports are provided online as well as by phone and text for those without
internet access. There are dedicated text linesfor youth, adults and front line workers that provide
immediate access to support. There is also a dedicated phone line for accessing Program Navigators that
can assist with finding resources on the portal. Wellness Together Canada augments existing provincial
and territorial services, and does not replace them.
Wellness Together Canada is led by a consortium of three organizations:
• Stepped Care Solutions is an interdisciplinary and cross-sector team of clinician-researchers,
leaders and pioneers in theareas of Stepped Care 2.0 and e-mental health.
• Kids Help Phone is Canada’s only 24/7 national service offering support to young people via
phone, text and live chat, and is a global leader in developing and delivering virtual mental health
solutions.
• Homewood Health is a Canadian leader in the development and delivery of national, evidence-
based mental health, trauma, and addiction treatment and services.
National Standards for Mental Health and Substance Use
To fulfill commitments made in the Minister of Health’s mandate letter, the Government of Canada will
“set national standards for access to mental health services so Canadians can get fast access to the
support they need, when they need it”. Through Budget 2021, the government has allocated $45million
over two years, starting in 2021-22, to help develop national standards for mental health, in
collaboration with provinces and territories, health organizations, and key stakeholders, so that
Canadians can access timely care, treatment, and support. This language was interpreted broadly to
include standards for substance use due to its close relationship with mental health.
Support for the Mental Health Needs of Those Most Affected by COVID-19
Budget 2021 provides support for populations most affected by COVID-19 in dealing with mental health
challenges. The government will provide:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, front-line workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and
Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians.
• $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address posttraumatic
stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-
19 pandemic.
Funding to Provincial and Territorial Governments
The Government of Canada is investing $5 billion over ten years to improve Canadians’ access to mental
health services. The investment is being provided directly to provinces and territories via negotiated
bilateral agreements to help them expand access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth, integrated services for people with complex needs, and spread proven
models of community mental health care and culturally appropriate interventions linked to primary
health services.
In addition, on July 16, the Prime Minister announced a federal investmentof more than $19 billion to
help provinces and territories safely restart their economies and make our country more resilient to
possible future waves of the virus. As part of this investment $500 million targeted immediate mental
health and substance service needs, including strengthening the service infrastructure (workforce,
targeted programs) to manage post-pandemic demands that have been exacerbated due to the
pandemic by providing wrap-around care, harm reduction and evidence-based treatment servicesand
programs.
Promoting Mental Health and Preventing Mental Illness
Through the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Mental Health Promotion Innovation Fund, the
Government of Canada is investing $39 million from 2019-2028 to address multiple risk andprotective
factors to promote mental health for children, youth, young adults and populations susceptible to
mental health inequities (e.g., low-income families, immigrants and refugees, First Nations, Inuit, Métis,
LGBTQ2+, people living with disabilities and people with other socio-economic risk factors).
On March 29, 2020, the Prime Minister announced an investment of $7.5 million to Kids Help Phone to
provide crisis supports for children and youth during the COVID-19 pandemic.
$9 million is being provided to the United Way (through New Horizons) for practical services for seniors.
The Promoting Health Equity: Mental Health of Black Canadians Fund is investing $10 million to support
community-based projects across Canada.
In addition, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement announced a $50 million investment to bolster the
capacity of distress centres, which are experiencing a surge in demand during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PHAC is administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021. A portion of
funds will support an additional round of grants in fiscal year 2021-22. In addition, $2 million of this
funding will support the development of resources to assist distress centres in meeting the needs of
diverse and vulnerable populations.
Mobilizing Data and Evidence
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested over $333
million in mental health and behavioural disorders research. This represents more than 1700 projects
led by experts across the country.
CIHR is also leading the COVID-19 and Mental Health Research Initiative (CMH) in collaboration with
PHAC and Health Canada. This initiative currently supports 101 research projects, representing a total
investment of $13.5 million from CIHR andpartners. This work is guided by an Expert Advisory Panel
composed of leading Canadian experts in mental health and substance use. New knowledge generated
through these projects will be mobilized to ensure it will inform policy making in a timely manner.
CIHR provided the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse with a $1 million directed grant to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providers in light
of COVID-19. This includes the creation of six national guidance documents and a rapid assessment of
the challenges faced by people who use drugs during the COVID-19 crisis to guide future policy
decisions.
Statistics Canada developed and administers a web panel survey, the “Canadian Perspectives Survey
Series”. Each month, approximately 4,600 people in the 10 provinces have been responding to the new
iteration of the survey. In addition, in collaboration with Statistics Canada, PHAC funded two cycles of
data for the Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health to better understand the wider impacts of the
pandemic on mental health in Canada. A special collection of research articles based on the first cycle of
data was released in the Health Promotion and Chronic Disease Prevention Journal on September 27,
2021.The Canadian Community Health Survey also resumed in September 2020. The Canadian
Community Health Survey provides data on a variety of mental health indicators, and has been collected
for many years prior to the pandemic. It will allow for ongoing measurement of changes in mental
health of the Canadian population as the pandemic continues and as Canada recovers.
Suicide Prevention
The Government of Canada is investing $21 million over five years in the Centre for Addiction and
Mental Health (CAMH) to implement and sustain a fully operational pan-Canadian suicide prevention
service in partnership with the Canadian Mental Health Association and Crisis Services Canada. By 2023,
this service will provide people across Canada with access to 24/7/365 bilingual crisis support from
trained responders, using the technology of their choice (voice, text or chat). The Federal Framework for
Suicide Prevention was released November 2016. It focused on raising public awareness, reducing
stigma, disseminating information and data, and promoting the use of research and evidence-based
practices. Progress Reports on the Framework are available onCanada.ca, with the next report planned
for release in December 2022. In response to motion M-174, which called on the Government ofCanada
to establish a national suicide prevention action plan and was unanimously supported by
parliamentarians in 2019, the Public Health Agency of Canada is developing an action plan that aligns
with the Framework.
Posttraumatic Stress Disorder
Pursuantto the Federal Framework on Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder Act, Canada’s first Federal
Framework on Posttraumatic Stress Disorder (PTSD) was tabled in Parliament on January 22, 2020 and
made public on February 13, 2020. To inform the development of the Framework, in accordance with
the Act, the Minister of Health convened a National Conference on PTSD in April 2019 with the Ministers
of National Defence, Veterans Affairs, and Public Safety and Emergency Preparedness, partners and
stakeholders, including people with lived-experience. The Government of Canada is now working with
partners on the implementation of the Framework. The Act requires the Public Health Agency of Canada
to report on the effectiveness of the Framework within five years of its release (by February 2025).
HC’s 2020-21 Departmental Results Report
Health Canada advanced the development of national standards for access to mental health services to
gain insight on practical approaches to developing and implementing these standards. As part of this
work, Health Canada has entered into an agreement withthe Standards Council of Canada to lead the
development of standards in the following priority areas, in alignment with the Common Statement of
Principles on Shared Health Priorities developed by federal, provincial and territorial governments:
• Children and youth:
o Integrated Youth Services: increase access to youth mental health and substance use supports
that are integrated with physical health, sexual health and social services
• Primary Health Services Integration:
o Primary Care Integration: increase access to quality, integrated mental health and substance use
supports in primary care settings
o Digital Mental Health and Substance Use Apps: improve access to high-quality, safe and
effective apps to help Canadians make better-informed app choices
• People with complex needs:
o Substance Use Treatment Centres: improve access to high-quality, evidence-based care and
promote an integrated and coordinated treatment system
o Substances Use Workforce: increase substance use workforce capacity to provideevidence-
based care and stepped-care approaches
o Integrated Services for Complex Health Needs: improve integrated treatment approaches for
individuals with concurrent mental health and substance use disorders and complex health needs
Use and Privacy Protection of Public Health Mobility Data
Issue
Public concerns surrounding the Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) use of mobility data have
emerged in response to a public posting of a mobility data Request for Proposal (RFP) on December 17,
2021, to access cell-tower/operator location data to assist in the response to the COVID-19 pandemic
and for other public health applications. This RFP has raised public concerns regarding individuals’ right
to privacy, and concernover the government gathering information on individuals.
Key Facts
• Anonymous and population-level mobility data analysis is needed to evaluate the effectiveness
of public health directives during the pandemic. By analyzing population movement data, we can better
understand the public’s responsiveness during lockdown measures.
• Analyses and findings from the mobility data have also been regularly shared with provinces and
territories as a supplemental source of information to support policy decisionsand evaluation in their
pandemic response.
• The data received was focused at the regional public health level and does not include any
individually identifiable or personal data.
• The Ethics Committee (ETHI) and the House of Commons voted to suspend thedata gathering
program until the committee could release its report in mid-April.
• There is no option to suspend an RFP. PHAC allowed the RFP to close on February 18, 2022. The
procurement process will take weeks. PHAC will take the ETHI report into account, once it is released, as
it determines whether it is in the public interest to award the contract.
Key Messages
● Reliable, timely and relevant health and public health data are crucial to inform policy and
decision-making during this pandemic, and more broadly during public health emergencies and to
improve long-term public health outcomes for Canadians.
● The Public Health Agency of Canada takes the privacy of individuals seriously and is ensuring
that no personal information was asked for, or received, and no individual or identifiable data is
contained in mobility data received by the agency.
● The Agency is aware that the Office of the Privacy Commissioner is investigating complaints on
the Agency’s use of mobility data. The Public Health AgencyofCanada has proactively provided
information to the Office of the Privacy Commissioner over the past year and a half on its use of mobility
data and will continue to cooperate fully with the investigation.
If pressed on user privacy
● The Public HealthAgency of Canada engaged internal privacy and ethics experts to ensure the
Government of Canada’s use of mobility data follows best practices. The Agency also met with the Office
of the Privacy Commissioner on this initiative in April 2020 and in January2022.
● The Request for Proposal requires that the contractor protect user privacy by only providing
secure, de-identified and aggregated data. This means all personal identifiers are removed before the
Agency receives it and the data represent a population of people and cannot identify or track individuals
using this data. The proposal also requires that individuals have the ability to easily opt out of their
mobility data sharing programs.
● The Agency only considered vendors in the process who met the Government of Canada’s strict
security, legal, privacy and transparency requirements.
If pressed on secrecy or transparency
● This work has been made publically available on the COVIDTrends website as a means to
provide Canadians with local information on COVID in their communities with explanations of how this
data is used, and privacy protections in place. The work is also shared with provinces and territories as
part of joint efforts on COVID-19.
If pressed on the government’s response to the order of the House of Commons to immediately
suspend this data-gathering program
• De-identified and aggregated mobility data is an important tool to understand the impact of
public health measures on the pandemic. This data is used by other governments, both nationally and
internationally, to help make better public health decisions.
• We understand the concerns of Canadians. We understand that trust in government is key and
that preserving the privacy of people in Canada must be core to our service while we work toimprove
and protect the health of the people in Canada.
• The Government has been criticized for not having the data needed to understand and inform
the pandemic response. Direction from the Auditor General and Canadians has been clear: Canada
needs a better health data system that can meet the needs of our country during the pandemic and
beyond.
• The RFP closed on February 18 and these processes take weeks to complete. We are keenly
interested in the concerns and considerations of the Committee and this will allow the Public Health
Agency of Canada to take into account the findings of their report as we determine whether it is in the
public interest to award the contract as part of our work to ensure that Canada has the data it needs to
protect our people.
• We cannot speak to the details of the procurement process and any questions on procurement
should be directed to Public Services and Procurement Canada.
Background
Mobility data is a useful tool to inform public health analysis. To date, the Public Health Agency of
Canada (PHAC) has used two types of mobility data: crowdsourced mobility data and operator based
mobility data (which is complementary to and used to verify crowdsourced data).
Early in the COVID-19 response, operator-based mobility data was provided to PHAC through
Innovation, Science, and Economic Development’s Communication Research Centre (CRC) in partnership
with Telus Mobility.
PHAC established a sole-source contract, which expired on October 8, 2021, with Telus Mobility for this
data in March 2021. PHAC also has an ongoing contract with Bluedot Inc. for de-identified and
aggregated crowdsourced data.
The data received from Telus was secure, de-identified, aggregated (i.e., not at the level of an
individual), and vetted for security, legal, privacy and transparency considerations by both Telus and
PHAC.
This data helps to contribute to generate public health insights including the ability to estimate the
impacts of public health interventions and risk factors. This includes using mobility data analysis to
contextualize the public health situation over time, examining possible links between population
movement within Canada and propagation of COVID-19, measuring the effectiveness of public health
measures, and empowering Canadians with information to improve and protect their health.
Since September 2020, COVIDTrends, PHAC’s COVID-19 public-facing dashboard, has provided
Canadianswith a population movement indicator to raise awareness of mobility patterns in relation to
possible easement or tightening of public health measures within their health region. Mobility data is
used to support that indicator.
PHAC has been producing report summaries to look at how movement trends of the Canadian
population have changed over the course of the pandemic, including identifying new patterns to help
direct public health messaging, planning and policy development. These summaries have been regularly
shared with provinces and territories throughout the pandemic via the Special Advisory Committee.
In early fall 2021, PHAC launched an internal survey to mobility data users. Survey results indicated users
find this data valuable and informative forCOVID-19 situational awareness. Users also perceived the
scalable potential of this data to inform other public health challenges.
PHAC is currently without a provider for operator-based mobility data, limiting its ability to validate
analyses derived from the crowdsourced data. Rather than use a sole source mechanism, PHAC
launched a Request for Proposal (RFP) for its next partnership for operator-based mobility data in order
to increase transparency and align with the Government of Canada’s “Open Data” initiatives.
An RFP was posted on theBuyandsell.gc.casite in December 2021. In order to ensure identity
protection, this RFP requires that a vendor supply data that has been de-identified and aggregated (i.e.,
not individualized) in a secure format that is vetted for security, legal, privacy and ethical considerations.
Ethics and consultations
In response to an internal request for a privacy analysis for the planned uses of mobility data, PHAC’
Privacy Management Division (PMD) concluded in August 2020 that while the data is considered
sensitive, it does not contain personal information and therefore is not subject to the Privacy Act.
In January 2021, internal consultation with the Public Health Ethics Consultative Group (PHECG) for
advice related to consent and ways to mitigate potential public concerns surrounding perception of
state surveillance provided an ethical analysis that outlined the need for PHAC to be clear about public
health goals, transparent, and to engage the public. PHAC accepted all recommendations. Due to the
priority of the pandemic response, DMIA was not able to conduct a public consultation.
In addition, since April 2020, PHAC has also met regularly with the Office of the Privacy Commissioner
(OPC). As part of the briefings, the Agency provided OPC a very detailed presentation including data
types and pipelines, epidemiological uses, privacy and safeguards, as well as users opt-out options. In
addition, over the past 15 months, PHAC has also met with the OPC every two weeks to providethem
verbal updates on all our COVID files including mobility data. While the OPC was not asked formally for
written comments on the mobility data initiative, at no time did they raise any concerns with PHAC on
the numerous occasions when it was discussedwith them and the information provided.
January 6, 2022 was the most recent meeting with OPC representatives to describe the mobility data
project, associated RFP currently out for tender, the types of analyses performed to date, and future
plans to support public health.
For operator data, a number of security measures—at a contractor-level, at PHAC, and through CRC—
exist to preserve the privacy and integrity of mobility data:
● Contractors must have a secure platform with clear security protocols (e.g. two-factor user
identification), data that is anonymized (e.g. scrambled SIM), and ensures that precise locations are not
included (e.g. location of nearest tower only)
● Analyses performed within the platform use standard codes and protocols to ensure data is de-
identified.
● Prior to data extraction, anonymized user IDs are removed, data are aggregated to at least 20
devices at no smaller than census subdivision level (i.e. municipality), and measurements must be
transformed into percentages. This pre-processing of mobility data prevents tracking movement
patterns of individual users, including at the cell tower level.
● Exported, aggregated data are stored securely in the AWS cloud, where automated reports are
created by CRC and sent to PHAC.
● Reports generated display population-level trends within health regions (with no fewer than 20
devices) and all measurements are in proportions.
PHAC employees attended the February 2, 2022 meeting of the ETHI committee and responded to
questions from the committeeboth directly and via remit.
On February 8, 2022, the House of Commons passed a motion calling on the government to suspend the
PHAC’s cellular data tender until the ETHI Committee reports to the House that it is satisfied that the
privacy of Canadians will not be affected.
As there is no option to suspend an RFP, PHAC allowed the RFP to close on February 18, 2022.
NATIONAL EMERGENCY STRATEGIC STOCKPILE MANAGEMENT
Issue
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) manages the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to
support provinces and territories during emergencies. To bolster the response to COVID-19 and address
the procurement and distribution needs in support of frontline health care, PHAC works with federal
partners including Health Canada, National Research Council, Global Affairs Canada, the Department of
National Defense, Public Services and Procurement Canada, Statistics Canada, and Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada.
Key Facts
• Canada's National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) contains supplies that provinces and
territories can request in emergencies, such as infectious disease outbreaks, natural disasters, and other
public health events, when their own resources are exhausted. The stockpile includes a variety of items
such as personal protective equipment; vaccine ancillary supplies; medical equipment (e.g. ventilators,
biomedical equipment) and supplies; pharmaceuticals; and social service supplies, such as beds and
blankets.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada continues to proactively distribute incoming medical supplies and
equipment, such as personal protective equipment and vaccine supplies, to provinces and territories to
support Canada’s COVID-19 response.
• Significant stockpiles of supplies are maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile
(NESS) and are deployed in response to urgent requests for assistance from provinces and territories.
If pressed on how the government of Canada is working to secure a sufficient quantity of PPE in Canada
• The Public Health Agency of Canada continues to work with provincial and territorial partners to
monitor the sufficiency of National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventories, and will take steps to
address emerging supply gaps if required.
If pressed on NESS Inventory
• As of March 8, 2022, key supplies within the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile inventory
include:
o N95 respirators and equivalents: 17 million units
o Surgical masks: 207 million units
o Face shields: 23 million units
o Nitrile gloves: 830 million pairs
o Disposable and reusable gowns: 140 million units
o Needles and syringes: 189 million units
• The Government of Canada continues to proactivelyreplenish its inventory to secure sufficient
quantities of supplies, including through multi-year contracts.
• In addition, the Government of Canada has procured enough first aid supplies, including band
aids and swabs, to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines across the country.
If pressed on domestic PPE manufacturing
• The following percentages of commodities procured by the Public Health Agency of Canada are
domestically manufactured:
o Approximately 70% of N95 respirators. This percentage accounts for the 2 multi-year contracts
with AMD Medicom and 3M Canada.
o 50% of surgical masks. This percentage accounts for the multi-year contract with AMD
Medicom.
o 100% of face shields.
o 25% of disposable gowns.
If pressed on the disposal of PPE
• The Public Health Agency of Canada adheres to the Treasury Board Policy on Materiel
Management, which sets out a lifecycle management continuum for sound management of crown
assets.
If pressed on biomedical equipment
• Since the beginning of the pandemic, significant quantities of biomedical equipment have been
procured and deployed to jurisdictions or maintained in the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile in
case they are needed.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is working closely with provincial and territorial
governments to identify needs and allocate biomedical equipment, including oxygen concentrators.
If pressed on the development of a comprehensive management plan for the future of the NESS
• The top priority for the Public Health Agency of Canadais supporting Canada’s response to the
COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Agency is committed to enhancing its preparedness for future public health emergencies,
including working on improvements for the management of the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada agreed with the recommendation of the Auditor General to
develop a comprehensive management plan for the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile to support
responses to future public health emergencies.
• This plan will focus on key areas, such as optimizing life-cycle materiel management, enhancing
infrastructure and systems, and working closely with provinces and territories and other key partners to
better define needs and roles and responsibilities.
Background
NESSMandate
The fundamental basis underpinning federal emergency management and the NESS is that provincial,
territorial and local governments are prepared to respond in a reasonable manner to the most common
emergencies in their jurisdictions. This includes being responsible for the procurement and management
of personal protective equipment (PPE) and other medical supplies.
As such, the federal government’s role in stockpiling emergency health assets is twofold:
• To provide surge capacity support to provinces and territories at their request when their own
resources are not sufficient
• As the sole provider of certain assets, for example, costly and rarely used vaccines or antidotes,
required for rare public health emergencies
NESS Footprint
To respond to the COVID-19 pandemic, the NESS added warehousing capacity through temporary
warehousing and third-party logistics solutions. This has increased the footprint of the NESS by
approximately 2.8 million square feet of dedicated space to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic.
NESS Funding
As of September 2021, the NESS budget for COVID-19 response is approximately $7.4 billion for the
procurement of PPE, vaccine ancillary supplies, medical equipment and supplies, and for logistics and
warehousing. An additional$65.5 million has been approved for ongoing funding for medical
countermeasures.
Life-cycle Management
Taking into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic, PHAC will develop a comprehensive
management plan for the NESS that will focus on capacity and readiness of the NESS to support
responses to future public health emergencies. This will include a focus on key areas such as optimizing
operations, including logistics and life-cycle management; enhancing infrastructure and systems;
working closely with the provinces and territories and other key partners to strengthen Canada’s overall
preparedness; and conducting ongoing analysis on asset requirements.
Made-in-Canada Ventilators
As a result of ISED’s Call to Action, the Government of Canada identified five Canadian companies
capable of manufacturing made-in-Canada ventilators in support of the fight against COVID-19.
Since the spring of 2020, the evidence and public health guidance has evolved and ventilator use has
been de-emphasized for thetreatment of COVID-19 patients. Canada has successfully secured an
adequate supply and stockpile of ventilators to meet potential demand.
OAG Audit
The Office of the Auditor General (OAG) undertook a performance audit on the Government of Canada’s
ability to meet the needs of provinces and territories, and the healthcare sector, for PPE and medical
devices to respond to the COVID-19 pandemic. The audit period covered January 2020 through to
August 31, 2020 and implicated the PHAC, PSPC and HC.
Overall,the OAG found that PHAC, PSPC and HC helped to meet the needs of provincial and territorial
governments for PPE and medical devices during the pandemic. The report does however highlight that
as a result of long-standing unaddressed problems with the systems and practices in place to manage
the NESS, PHAC was not as prepared as it could have been to respond to the needs of provinces and
territories for PPE and medical devices.
PHAC and HC have both committed to addressing the recommendations from the OAG within one year
of the end of the COVID-19 pandemic.
SECURITY AT THE NATIONAL MICROBIOLOGY LABORATORY
Issue
Following a motion for the production of papers by the Special Committee on Canada-China relations,
there hasbeen a renewed interest in security protocols at the National Microbiology Laboratory.
Key Facts
• Canada’s National Microbiology Laboratory (NML) is known around the world for scientific
excellence and contributions to global health. The Public HealthAgency of Canada (PHAC) engages in
important scientific research relationships to advance public health research and science aimed at
improving public health. Collaborations with labs outside of Canada are critical to advance public health
research into infectious diseases.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada takes threats to research security, intellectual property and business
interests seriously.
• The National Microbiology Laboratory is a world class facility and abides by all Government of
Canadamandatory procedures for secure facilities.
• All individuals working within the National Microbiology Laboratory undergo a security
screening and must adhere to Government of Canada security protocols, procedures and policies based
on the level of accessrequired.
If pressed on scientific collaborations with other countries
• Collaborations with laboratories outside of Canada are critical to advancing public health
research and science aimed at improving public health on a global scale, including research into
infectious diseases.
• As an institution with global partnerships, the National Microbiology Laboratory looks to open
science and collaboration as core to its work, and has policies and processes that allow for scientific
collaboration.
If pressedon collaborations between NML and China
• While the NML does not have institutional-level collaborations with China, Canada’s scientists
have collaborated with Chinese scientists to contribute to the global public health fight against deadly
diseases, such as Ebola. These collaborations have yielded vaccine and treatment candidates for
diseases, as documented in peer-reviewed journals.
Background
Collaborations
The NML Science Excellence Program launched in September 2019 and is aimed at strengthening
policies and processes that allow for appropriate scientific collaboration while adhering to established
security controls.
While active collaborations may be timelimited, publications resulting from collaborations can be
expected for many years. Publications must acknowledge the contributions of the individuals involved
through the scientific process, from inception to final write up. It is not possible to say howmany future
publications could result from previous experimentation. The research work is intended to result in
academic publications for the advancement of science and knowledge, and so the intent is that papers
will be openly published in the normal community of peer-reviewed journals. The preparation and
publication of these manuscripts is being done in accordance to government policy in support of open
science.
Queries Regarding Employment Status
PHAC has received numerous questions from media as wellas members of parliament regarding the
employment status of individuals as well as work performed at the NML. PHAC has important
obligations under the Privacy Act. As such, employment status with PHAC is not considered personal
information, but any additional information about individuals that are not or were not employees is
considered personal information and cannot be disclosed.
Security Screening at PHAC
Federal departments and agencies are responsible for managing the security screening process
following the Treasury Board Policy on Government Security.
OPIOID OVERDOSE CRISIS
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has worsened long-standing challenges regarding substance use and
the overdose crisis, with most jurisdictions reporting record high rates of overdose deaths and harms.
• In addition, people who use drugs are also facing additional barriers and risks related to the
toxicity of the illegal drug supply and reduced access to health and social services, including life-saving
harm reduction and treatment.
KEY FACTS
• Most recent national data indicates that 24,626 apparent opioid toxicitydeaths occurred
between January 2016 and June 2021. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the
crisis with as many as 87% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths in 2021 (January to June)
involving fentanyl.
• Our commitment tothis crisis has seen us invest over $700 million, including $182 million to
community organizations.
• This includes $150 million through the Emergency Treatment Fund for provinces and territories
to improve access to evidence-based treatment services, which, when cost-matched by provinces and
territories, will result in an investment over $300 million.
• In addition, since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received more than 3.3
million visits, reversed almost 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 148,000
referrals to health and social services.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the most serious and
unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s history.
• We continue tosupport efforts to improve access to treatment and harm reduction services,
strengthen enforcement to reduce the toxic illegal drug supply, increase awareness and prevention, and
invest in research and surveillance.
• We remain committed to working closely with our provincial, territorial, and municipal partners,
Indigenous communities and people with lived and living experience, to save lives and reverse this
national public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEW NUMBERS DISCLOSED IN THE OPIOID REPORT …
• Our Government remains deeply concerned over the tragic loss of so many lives to the overdose
crisis. The lack of available treatment, safer supply, and other services remain challenging.
• That is why our Government remains committed to addressing theoverdose crisis through a
comprehensive approach, including naloxone access and training, supervised consumption sites and
safer supply programs. Without these, the number of deaths would be exponentially worse.
• Our Government remains committed to working with all our partners to end this complex public
health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON TREATMENT…
• Our Government recognizes that improved access to treatment services can help those
struggling with substance use and save lives.
• We have approved the use ofnew medications for treatment, removed barriers to prescribing
and dispensing, and supported the development of clinical guidelines for injectable opioid agonist
treatment.
• Our Government has provided $150 million through the Emergency Treatment Fund for
provinces and territories to improve access to evidence-based treatment services, which, when cost-
matched by provinces and territories, will result in an investment of over $300 million.
IF PRESSED ON HARM REDUCTION…
• The evidence is clear–harm reduction measures save lives.
• The Government has committed funding to innovative projects, such as providing medication as
an alternative to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• Supervised consumption sites save lives. Since 2017, federally authorized supervised
consumption sites have reversed nearly 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site.
• Our Government has also increased access to life-saving naloxone across the country, including
to remote and isolated First Nations and Inuit communities.
• Wehave also proactively provided the authority for provinces and territories to establish
temporary urgent public health need sites, otherwise known as overdose prevention sites, to address
rising number of overdoses.
IF PRESSED ON AWARENESS AND PREVENTION…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of investing in prevention and awareness.
• We have invested in prevention campaigns that include engaging youth and young adults on
risks and harms of substance use and the impact of stigma on people who use drugs.
• We supported school-based approaches that enhance student well-being in order to prevent
substance use related harms for this important population.
• We are also funding projects that promote changes in the health system to help enhance the
pathways to care for people who use drugs.
IF PRESSED ON SAFER SUPPLY…
• Our Government is aware that the pandemic has led to an increasingly dangerous and
unpredictable illegal drug supply.
• We have taken action to save lives by providing funding through theSubstance Use and
Addictions Program to support projects that provide people who use drugs with safer, pharmaceutical-
grade alternatives to the toxic illegal drug supply.
• We have also allowed pharmacists to extend, renew and transfer prescriptions to support better
access to medications, including for the treatment of substance use disorders.
IF PRESSED ON SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION SITES…
• Evidence shows that supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save lives.
• Since 2017, supervised consumption sites in Canada have received more than 3.3 million visits,
reversed almost 35,000 overdoses without a single death at a site, and made over 148,000 referrals to
health and social services.
• These sites also provide access to other health and social services, including opportunities to
access treatment.
• We will continue to work with provinces, territories, and stakeholders so that Canadians
continue to have access to these lifesaving services.
IF PRESSED ON MOMS STOP THE HARM (MSTH) LITIGATION REGARDINGALBERTA’S RECOVERY
ORIENTED OVERDOSE PREVENTION SERVICES GUIDE (NEW MEASURES FOR SUPERVISED CONSUMPTION
SITES) …
• The Government of Canada is committed to a comprehensive public health approach to the
overdose crisis that includes evidence-based harm reduction activities, such as supervised consumption
sites and services.
• The evidence is clear-supervised consumption sites reduce harms and save lives. I intend to
continue to engage and work with provinces and territories, as well as municipalities, to enable access
to evidence based services.
• We will continue to follow the litigation closely and consider its impact on federal policy and
legislation.
IF PRESSED ON THE EXPERT TASK FORCE ON SUBSTANCE USE …
• We are committed to a comprehensive public health approach to substance use that is focused
on reducing harms, saving lives, and getting people the supports they need.
• We are studying the Expert Task Force on Substance Use recommendations on how we can
better treat substance use as a health issue. These recommendations are publicly available on the
Health Canada website.
IF PRESSED ON PAIN…
• In May 2021, the Canadian Pain Task Force published their final report with recommendations
to ensure people with pain are recognized and supported, andthat pain is understood, prevented, and
effectively treated.
• We have invested over $175M in research through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and close to $19M in funding for 12 initiatives through the Substance Use and Addictions Program
(SUAP) focused on improving opioid prescribing practices and pain management.
• We will continue to work with our partners to explore implementing the recommendations.
IF PRESSED ON DIACETYLMORPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE (DAM) …
• Our Government is committed to a comprehensive public health approach to support people
who are living with an addiction.
• On February 16, 2022, Health Canada authorized Diacetylmorphine Hydrochloride (DAM) as a
supervised injectable opioid agonist treatment.
• Diacetylmorphine has alreadybeen approved in a number of European countries. Evidence
shows that it can help stabilize and improve the health of some people who are living with an addiction,
including increasing their retention in treatment programs.
• As with all authorized drugs, Health Canada will monitor its safety and effectiveness and will
take prompt action should concerns arise.
IF PRESSED ON SUAP FUNDING …
• Through Budget 2021, $116M over two years (2021/2022 and 2022/2023) was provided to SUAP
to support a range of innovative approaches to prevention, harm reduction, and treatment.
• In response, the department launched a national call for proposals and a directed call seeking
new efforts to reduce, prevent, and address the harms associated with substance use–which have
grown more serious during the ongoing COVID-19 pandemic.
• Hundreds of SUAP proposals were received and Health Canada has consulted with numerous
experts, and with Provincial officials, to determine where new investments should be made.Applicants
will be notified of funding decisions imminently.
BACKGROUND
Most recent national data indicates that 24,626 apparent opioid toxicity deaths occurred between
January 2016 and June 2021. Fentanyl and its analogues continue to be major drivers of the crisis with
asmany as 87% of accidental apparent opioid toxicity deaths so far in 2021 (January to June) involving
fentanyl. While Canadians of all walks of life are affected, there are striking patterns, with death most
common among males and individuals aged 20 to 49years old.
The COVID-19 pandemic is compounding the ongoing overdose crisis, and people who use drugs are
experiencing higher risks related to an increasingly toxic illegal drug supply and reduced access to
treatment and harm reduction services. Severaljurisdictions have observed unprecedented numbers
and rates in relation to the wider impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Although these increases have been observed across the country, Western Canada continues to be
highly impacted. In 2020, the British Columbia Coroners Service reported 1,724 illegal drug toxicity
deaths, a 75% increase over the number of deaths in 2019. Additionally, the crisis in BC continued into
2021 with 1,782 suspected illicit drug toxicity deaths from January to October, a 24% increase over the
same in the previous year (1,438 deaths) and a 112% increase from the same period of time in 2019
(January to October 2019–840 deaths).
Tragically, overdose deaths among First Nations people in BC have also surged, increasing by 119% in
2020compared to 2019. Data released by Alberta in December 2021 indicated that from January to
October 2021 the province reported 1,372 deaths from all substances, the highest number per year
since the province began tracking such deaths in 2016. Of these deaths, 1,247 were related to opioids.
The highest opioid-related death count was in Edmonton (473) followed by Calgary (390).
FEDERAL ACTIONS TO ADDRESS THE OVERDOSE CRISIS
Since 2017, the federal government has taken significant actions and made investmentsof over $700M
to address the overdose crisis and substance use-related harms. Additional actions to date include:
improved access to treatment and harm reduction, reduced regulatory barriers to treatment;
strengthened law enforcement, developed of educational products and tools for the public and health
care providers, and research and surveillance to build the evidence base.
This includes Budget 2019 investments of $106.7M over five years with $1M ongoing and $66M
announced in the Fall Economic Statementto help support community-based organizations responding
to substance use issues address the additional challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic. In March
2021, the government announced $20 million in funding for the distribution of naloxone kits and opioid
overdose response training to support communities that have been particularly affected by the opioid
overdose crisis and are experiencing challenges in improving health outcomes of their residents. Budget
2021 also committed an additional $116 millionto fund projects through the Substance Use and
Addictions Program (SUAP).
In addition to these investments, the Government of Canada has also taken action to make it easier for
people being treated for substance use disorder to access medications and forfrontline service
providers to establish overdose prevention sites in temporary shelters.
The Minister of Health established an Expert Task Force on Substance Use in March 2021 that provided
expert advice on Canada’s federal drug policy, including examining potential alternatives to criminal
penalties for personal drug possession. The Task Force provided its final advice on alternatives to
criminal penalties in May 2021, and on federal drug policy in June 2021. Both reports of the Task Force
have been made publicly available and can be found online at https://www.canada.ca/en/health-
canada/corporate/about-health-canada/public-engagement/external-advisory-bodies/expert-task-
force-substance-use/reports.html.
CHALLENGE TO THE PROVINCE OF ALBERTA’S RECOVERYORIENTED OVERDOSE PREVENTION SERVICES
GUIDE
On August 13, 2021, Moms Stop the Harm Society (MSTH) and Lethbridge Overdose Prevention Society
(LOPS) commenced a legal action in the Court of Queen’s Bench of Alberta against Her Majesty the
Queen in Right of Alberta seeking an Order declaring the provincial Recovery Oriented Overdose
Prevention Services Guide to be constitutionally invalid and inoperable, and of no force and effect on
the basis that it is outside of provincial jurisdiction, and violates Charter rights. Alberta’s Recovery
Oriented Overdose Prevention Services Guide imposes new measures on supervised consumption
services in Alberta, including the creation of a licencing regime for these services and includes an
obligation that supervised consumption service providers ask for a client’s personal health number at
initial intake.
DIACETYLMORPHINE HYDROCHLORIDE DRUG AUTHORIZATION
On February 16, 2022, Health Canada authorized Diacetylmorphine Hydrochloride (DAM) as a
supervised injectable opioid agonist treatment (siOAT) for adult patients with severe opioid use disorder
(OUD) who use injectable opioids and have been unsuccessful with previous attempts at opioid agonist
therapy, including methadone maintenance therapy.
DAM is available only by prescription. Health care professionals who meet the definition of ‘practitioner’
under the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act can prescribe controlled substances. Prescribing ability is
further controlled by provincial/territorial scope of practice and anyregulatory college requirements for
the prescribing of DAM.
As with any other form of care, a practitioner's decision to prescribe medications for safer supply
depends on:
• their professional judgement
• the unique needs of each patient
• the rules and regulations in their province or territory
Diacetylmorphine has been approved as a treatment option for severe OUD in a number of countries,
including Switzerland, the United Kingdom, Denmark, Germany and the Netherlands. Prior to this
authorization, internationally-produced DAM was only availableon an emergency basis through the List
of Drugs for an Urgent Public Health Need.
At this time, only one company has applied for the authorization of DAM in Canada. Should additional
companies wish to apply for authorization, Health Canada would reviewtheir submissions. The company
receiving the authorization, Pharmascience Inc., expects to initially provide DAM supply only for the
province of British Columbia.
The new authorized indication for DAM is as an evidence-based treatment option for severe OUD; this
Health Canada authorization adds a new tool for practitioners to care and prevent harms for people
with severe opioid disorder, including overdose.
PAXLOVID AND OTHER THERAPEUTICS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• The COVID-19 pandemic has created unprecedented challenges to Canada’s healthcare system,
and there is a need for treatments to support the response.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to
proactively identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinical trials and treatments related to
COVID-19.
• Health Canada has authorized 5 drugs to treat COVID-19, including remdesivir for hospitalized
patients requiring supplemental oxygen, as well as Paxlovid and 3 biologic treatments for non-
hospitalized patients who have mild or moderate COVID-19 symptoms and are at risk of developing
severe disease. Several other treatments for COVID-19 are under review.
• On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid, an oral antiviral treatment of
adults diagnosed with COVID-19 with mild-to-moderate symptoms and who are at a high risk of
progressing to severe disease, including hospitalization or death. Paxlovid is a combination of the oral
antivirals nirmatrelvir and ritonavir, which can be taken at home in pre-packaged doses. As an oral drug
it is expected to ease the burden on the health care system.
• Paxlovid has been shown to reduce the risk of hospitalization or death by up to 89%, compared
to placebo, whentaken within 5 days of symptom onset.
• On December 3, The Government of Canada signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an
initial quantity of 1 million treatment courses of the oral antiviral, nirmatrelvir to be used in combination
with ritonavir (Paxlovid).
• Emergency or conditional approvals have also been granted in the US, UK, Australia and the EU.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all treatments for COVID-19 while continuing to
ensure that these products meet standardsfor safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada has authorized 5 drugs to treat COVID-19, including remdesivir, for hospitalized
patients requiring supplemental oxygen, as well as Paxlovid and 3 biologic treatments for non-
hospitalized patients who havemild or moderate COVID-19 symptoms and are at risk of developing
severe disease.
• Several other treatments to help prevent or treat COVID-19, including oral antivirals, are under
review. While the interim results from clinical trials for oral antiviralscan be promising, all drugs must be
subjected to rigorous regulatory review to ensure the product is safe, efficacious and of high quality
before being authorized for sale in Canada.
• The Government of Canada has procured many of these treatments and continues to engage
proactively with domestic and international companies to negotiate advance purchase agreements for
the procurement of treatments to ensure timely access.
IF PRESSED ON PAXLOVID (Pfizer)
• I am happy to share that on January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Pfizer’s Paxlovid. This
drug is the first oral treatment approved in Canada for non-hospitalized adult patients diagnosed with
COVID-19 who are at a high risk of progressing to severe disease.
• On December 3, 2021, our Government signed an agreement with Pfizer to procure an initial
quantity of 1 million courses of this oral antiviral.
• Paxlovid provides a new tool in the toolkit against COVID-19 at a crucial time in the pandemic as
we are faced with new variants. Importantly, itis a more easily administered antiviral treatment for
those at high risk of progression to severe COVID-19.
• However, no drug is a substitute for vaccination. Vaccination and public health measures remain
the most important tools in preventing illnessfrom COVID-19 infection, and we continue to strongly
recommend vaccination for all eligible Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments, as well as on products under regulatory review.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of the omicron variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron variant, Health Canada will
prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while maintaining high
standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON MOLNUPIRAVIR
• Molnupiravir is an oral antiviral treatment that has been reported to show some promise in
treating non-hospitalized COVID-19 patients with mild to moderate COVID-19 and at high risk for
progression to severe disease.
• Since August 13, 2021, Health Canada has been working with Merck and international regulatory
partners to expedite review of the drug submission.
• Health Canada is aware that the efficacy of molnupiravir is lower than previously reported.
Because this is a rolling submission, Merck will continue to submit evidence to Health Canada to support
the product’s safety, efficacy and quality and Health Canada will conduct a full review of all the evidence
prior to making a decision.
IF PRESSED ON IVERMECTIN
• There is no evidence that ivermectin works to prevent or treat COVID-19, and it is not
authorized for this use. To date, Health Canada has not received any drug submission or applications for
clinical trials forivermectin for the prevention or treatment of COVID-19.
• A veterinary version of this medication is available to treat parasitic infections in animals. People
should not use the veterinary version of this product to treat or prevent COVID-19 or for any other
reason. Canadians should never consume health products intended for animals because of the potential
serious health dangers posed by them.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS
• Health Canada put in place temporary Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19
drugs and vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized under the
InterimOrder can continue to be sold and that new COVID-19 products can be reviewed and authorized
using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food and Drug Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Moderna, Novavax and
Medicago have been authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, suchas those from Sanofi and Vaccigen, are also
being reviewed under the new Regulations.
• A number of treatments not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as oral antivirals and
monoclonal antibodies, are also being reviewed under the new Regulations.Pfizer’s Paxlovid was
granted authorization under the new Regulations.
IF PRESSED ON INTERNATIONAL COLLABORATION
• Health Canada is leveraging its strong international partnerships with the US Food and Drug
Administration, the European Medicines Agency, andthe Access Consortium, amongst others, to share
information and to raise our collective level of awareness of evidence-based approaches for treatments.
The objective is to work towards alignment on regulatory requirements and to stay informed of any
potential treatments.
BACKGROUND
Stakeholder Engagement
Information about health products for COVID-19 has been consolidated into a website for the health
product industry, so they know how to apply for regulatory approval and who to contact for questions.
Information relevant to health professionals and Canadians is provided on the COVID-19 website.
Health Canada is actively engaging with stakeholders in the health product industry to proactively
identify, track and provide support to sponsors of clinicaltrials and treatments related to COVID-19.
Treatments
Dexamethasone
Although not specifically authorized for the treatment of COVID-19, clinical trial results announced in
June 2020, showed that dexamethasone, used since the 1960s to reduce inflammation, cut death rates
by around a third among the most severely ill COVID-19 patients admitted to hospital. As a result, the
World Health Organization’s (WHO) has updated its guidelines on treating people with COVID-19.
COVID-19 Authorized Treatments
Remdesivir
On 27 July 2020, Health Canada authorized the drug remdesivir (brand name Veklury) for the treatment
of patients (12 years of age or older, who weigh at least 40 kg) with severe symptoms of COVID-19 who
have pneumonia and require extra oxygen tohelp them breathe. Health Canada approved this drug with
conditions for the manufacturer to ensure its continued safety, efficacy and quality. The US Food and
Drug Administration (FDA) and the European Medicines Agency (EMA) granted authorizations for the
expanded use of remdesivir for the treatment of non-hospitalized patients with mild-to-moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of progressing to severe disease on January 21, 2022 and December 21,
2021. Health Canada received an application with data toexpand the authorized indication to these
patients on December 30, 2021 and the submission is under review.
Bamlanivimab
On November 20, 2020, Health Canada authorized the Eli Lilly drug bamlanivimab, a monoclonal
antibody. Bamlanivimab was authorized under the Interim Order and is currently under review under
the amended Food and Drug Regulations. The updated clinical information is included in the submission
under review and will inform the regulatory decision.
Casirivimab and imdevimab combination
Casirivimab and imdevimab are monoclonal antibodies that are administered together by intravenous
infusion as a single dose, and this product has shown a clear benefit for patients with mild to moderate
COVID-19 who are at high risk of hospitalization and/or death. This combination drug treatment was
developed by U.S. company Regeneron Pharmaceuticals Inc. and is distributed in Canada by Hoffmann-
La Roche Ltd. A Health Product Risk Communication was posted on January 7 indicating significantly
reduced neutralization potency and a high risk of treatment failure with the casirivimab and imdevimab
combination against Omicron.
Sotrovimab
On July 30, 2021, Health Canada authorized Sotrovimab from GlaxoSmithKline. This monoclonal
antibody is approved for the treatment of mild to moderate COVID-19 in adults and adolescents (12
years of age and older weighing at least 40 kg) who are at high risk for progressing to hospitalization
and/or death.
Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination with ritonavir)
On January 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized Paxlovid (nirmatrelvir in combination with ritonavir) for
the treatment of COVID-19 in non-hospitalized adult patients at risk of progressing to serious disease
including hospitalization and death). Nirmatrelvir is an oral anti-viral drug developed by Pfizerthat is co-
administered with another drug, ritonavir, which acts as a booster to maintain the required
concentration of nirmatrelvir for antiviral effect. Previously, all existing COVID-19 treatments required IV
administrationor injection in a hospital and clinical setting. Oral anti-virals, such as Paxlovid, can be
easily administered at home, thereby reducing the strain on the health care system.
COVID-19 Treatment Submissions Under Review
Baricitinib is being investigatedas a treatment that may reduce the complications related to the
cytokine storm as well as potentially inhibiting cell proteins that have a role in viral replication. On May
13, Eli Lilly filed a drug submission for baricitinib with Health Canada and as ofDecember 1, this
submission is under review. Health Canada is awaiting results from an ongoing clinical trial that will
conclude in February 2022.
Molnupiravir is an anti-viral, in capsule form, for the treatment of adults with mild-to-moderate COVID-
19 and who are at risk of progressing to severe COVID-19 disease. Merck’s drug submission with Health
Canada is under review. The United Kingdom’s (UK) Medicines and Healthcare products Regulatory
Agency (MHRA) authorized the use of molnupiravir on November 4.The EMA issued advice on
November 19, allowing member states to begin using the product for emergency use situations while it
continues its on-going rolling review for market authorization. On December 23, 2021, the US FDA
issued an emergency use authorization for molnupiravir. Australia’s Therapeutic Goods Administration
(TGA) granted provisional approval for molnupiravir on January 20, 2022. Swissmedic’s (Switzerland)
review for temporary approval is still on-going.
Health Canada has four other submissions for monoclonal antibody treatments (AstraZeneca’s Evusheld
(tixagevimab and cilgavimab), Eli Lilly’s estesevimab and bamlanivimab combination, Celltrion’s
Regdanvimab and Hoffman La Roche’s Actemra (tocilizumab). Monoclonal antibodies are being tested
both as treatment for mild/moderate COVID-19, and also as prophylaxis, to prevent infection.
Tocilizumab (Actemra) is a recombinant humanized anti-human interleukin 6 (IL-6) receptor monoclonal
antibody of the immunoglobulin (Ig) IgG1 subclass with a H2L2 polypeptide structure that is already
authorized in Canada for non-COVID use. On February 4, 2022, Health Canada received a submission for
a COVID-19 indication that is under review, and PHAC’s external advisory body (Clinical Pharmacology
Task Group) made recommendations for use. FDA issued an Emergency Use Authorization on June 24.
On December 6, the EMA recommended approval for certain hospitalized adult COVID-19 patients.
Evusheld is a monoclonal antibody for prophylaxis of COVID-19. The submissionwas received on
November 3, 2021, and is under review. The clinical package was filed on February 2, and the quality
package was received on February 10, 2022. The Advanced Purchase Agreement has been finalized and
supply could be available in April 2022 pending authorization. The company is exploring pre-positioning
as an option. Additional data is being requested on effectiveness against Omicron. On February 24,
2022, the FDA authorized an increase in dose in response to Omicron subvariants BA.1 and BA.1.1.
AstraZeneca noted that they are not proposing a change in dose for their Canadian submission. Evusheld
is expected to have greater neutralizing activity against BA.2.
COVID-19Treatment Submissions Withdrawn
On June 7 2021, the submission to authorizecolchicine as a treatment of COVID-19 was withdrawn by
the manufacturer. Colchicine remains authorized in Canada for the prophylaxis and treatment of gout
flares and Familial Mediterranean Fever. Although unproven at the time, Colchicine was used to treat
the Former President Trump and gained a lot of media attention.
The Sanoclear (Nitric Oxide) submission was withdrawn Sept. 01, 2021, with an expectation that it will
be refiled once additional clinical data is available, and the leronlimabsubmission was withdrawn
September 16, 2021.
On February 24, 2022, Dr. Reddy’s Laboratories withdrew its submission for favipiravir.
PHARMACARE
ISSUE
• In Budget 2019 and 2021, the 2020 Speech from the Throne and the Fall Economic Statement,
the Government committed to implement national pharmacare, beginning with the creation of a
Canadian Drug Agency, a national formulary and a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the
Implementation of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. On June 12, 2019, the Council’s
final report was tabled, recommending the implementation of national universal pharmacare.
• Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a
Transition Office to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also
announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million
per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
• On August 11, 2021, the federal government announced an agreement to providePrince
Edward Island with $35 million over four years (from 2021-22 to 2024-25) to support the province’s
efforts to provide its residents with more affordable access to prescription drugs.
KEY MESSAGES
• No Canadian should have to choose between payingfor prescription drugs and putting food on
the table.
• The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare.
• We have established a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office and are taking steps to develop a
national formulary, while moving forward with developing a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases
in collaboration with provinces, territories, stakeholders, and the public.
• We have signed a first agreement with the Government of Prince Edward Island to improve
access to medications for Island residents and inform the advancement of national universal
pharmacare.
IF PRESSED ON THE GOVERNMENT’S COMMITMENT TO IMPLEMENT NATIONAL PHARMACARE
• The mandate letter from the PrimeMinister reiterated the Government of Canada’s
commitment to continue engaging with willing provinces and territories towards national universal
pharmacare, while proceeding with a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases and advancing the
establishment of the Canadian Drug Agency.
IF PRESSED ON STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases.
IF PRESSED ON THE AFFORDABILITY OF PRESCRIPTIONMEDICATIONS…
• We have already taken action to improve accessibility and affordability of prescription drugs. For
example, we modernized the way patented drug prices will be regulated in Canada, which will help
Canadians afford the prescription medicinesthey need, improve the health of Canadians and better
meet health care system needs.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADIANDRUG AGENCY TRANSITION OFFICE…
• The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office is working closely with provinces and territories,
partner organizations, patients, care providers, and stakeholders to develop an approach that addresses
shared objectives for better health outcomes for patients and a more sustainable pharmaceuticals
management system.
BACKGROUND
Private Member’s Bill on Pharmacare
OnFebruary 24, 2020, NDP MP Peter Julian tabled Private Member’s Bill C-213, An Act to Enact the
Canada Pharmacare Act, in the House of Commons. This bill would provide for a legislative framework
for a public single-payer drug coverage system in Canada. OnFebruary 24, 2021, Bill C-213 was defeated
on second reading with a vote of 295 against and 32 for.
Opposition Motion on Pharmacare
On March 13, 2020, the House of Commons unanimously adopted a motion from NDP MP Don Davies
(Vancouver Kingsway, BC) that called on the government to negotiate with the PTs to establish a
dedicated fiscal transfer for universal, single-payer, public pharmacare. The motion was passed with the
Government’s support.
Text of the motion:
(a) acknowledge the government’s intention tointroduce and implement national pharmacare;
(b) call on the government to implement the full recommendations of the final report of the Hoskins
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare, commencing with the immediate
initiation of multilateral negotiations with the provinces and territories to establish a new, dedicated
fiscal transfer to support universal, single-payer, public pharmacare that will be long term, predictable,
fair and acceptable to provinces and territories;
(c) urge the government to reject the U.S.-style private patchwork approach to drug coverage, which
protects the profits of big pharmaceutical and insurance companies, but costs more to Canadians; and
(d) recognize that investing in national pharmacare would help stimulate the economy while making life
more affordable for everyone and strengthening our health care system.
Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
In Budget 2018, the Government announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation
of National Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins. The Council engaged with Canadians, patients,
provincial, territorial and Indigenous leaders, health care experts, and stakeholders through regional
roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire, and written submissions. On June 12, 2019, the
Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the implementation of national universal
pharmacare over several years.
Budget 2019 Commitments
Guided by the recommendations of the Advisory Council, Budget 2019 announced federal investments
to move forward on three foundational elements of national pharmacare:
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices;
o As part of the work of the Agency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effectivetreatments they need.
Budget 2019 announced $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition Office
to support the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency and national formulary. It also announced an
investment of up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year
ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need.
These commitments were reiterated in the Speech from the Throne, Fall Economic Statement and
Budget 2021.
Prince Edward Island Initiative
On August 11, 2021, the Government of Canada announced the signing of the first agreement with the
Government of Prince Edward Island (PEI) to inform the advancement of national universal pharmacare.
Through this agreement, PEI willreceive $35 million over four years in federal funding to add new drugs
to its list of covered drugs, and lower out of pockets costs for drugs covered under existing public plans
for Island residents. The Government of Canada will use early lessons from PEI’s efforts to inform its
ongoing work to advance national universal pharmacare.
Modernization of the Patented Medicines Regulations
On August 21, 2019, the Government modernized the Patented Medicines Regulations (‘Amendments’)
to ensure the Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to fulfill its
mandate to protect consumers from excessive patented medicine prices. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry, and some patient groups, have expressed concerns that theamendments
could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
The Government has delayed the coming into force of the amendments four times due to
considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. The most recently delay of the coming into
force date to July 1, 2022, also allows the Government to further engage stakeholders on the application
of these amendments within the changing pharmaceutical landscape.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and SuperiorCourt of Quebec by
Innovative Medicines Canada (IMC) and sixteen subsidiaries of brand-name companies. On June 29,
2020, in the ruling of the case IMC v Canada, the Federal Court upheld most of the regulatory
amendments, but struck down the collection ofconfidential rebate information. On December 18, 2020,
a similar decision was issued by the Quebec Superior Court in Merck et al vs the Attorney General of
Canada to uphold the constitutionality of the existing regime and regulatory amendments. Following
this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022, upheld the constitutionality of the existing
regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator countries, but found that the three new
price regulatory factors in addition to the collectionof confidential rebate information to be invalid.
DEMANDES D’AUTORISATION DE POSSESSION PERSONNELLE EN VERTU DU PARAGRAPHE 56 (1)
ISSUE
• In response to the ongoing overdose crisis, the Government of Canada isreceiving increasing
interest from stakeholders and multiple jurisdictions across Canada to use section 56 of the Controlled
Drugs and Substances Act as the fastest mechanism to allow for the possession of small amounts of
controlled substances for personal use.
• Three jurisdictions–the Province of British Columbia, the City of Vancouver, and Toronto Public
Health–have formally requested exemptions from federal drug laws to allow for the personal
possession of controlled substances in those jurisdictions.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada has received requests for an exemption from federal drug laws to allow for the
possession of small amounts of controlled substances for personal use from the City of Vancouver (May
28, 2021), the Province of British Columbia (November 1, 2021), and Toronto Public Health (January 4,
2022). These requests are under review. Several other municipalities have reached out to Health Canada
for information on the exemption process (Calgary and Edmonton).
• A number of other municipalities are calling on the Government of Canada to allow for the
personal possession of controlled substances at a national level.
• Section 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act gives the Minister of Health broad
powers to exempt people or controlled substances or precursors from the application of any of the
provisions of the Act or its regulation for medical or scientific purposes, or if otherwise in the public
interest.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is deeply concerned about the devastating impact of the overdose crisis on
communities all across Canada.
• Section 56 of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act allows the Government to grant
exemptions for the possession of small amounts of controlled substances for personal use.
• Health Canada is carefully reviewing requests for an exemption from federal drug laws to allow
for the possession of small amounts of controlled substances for personal use from the City of
Vancouver, the Province of British Columbia, and Toronto Public Health.
IF PRESSED ON S.56 (SPECIFIC TO BRITISH COLUMBIA, VANCOUVER AND TORONTO)
• Far too many lives have been lost to drug overdoses. We are committed to addressing substance
use as a health issue first and foremost.
• We have heard from stakeholders that removing the threat of criminal penalties would reduce
stigma around substance use and could help connect people who use drugs to access health and social
services.
• Our Government is carefully and thoroughly reviewing all requests to allow for the possession of
small amounts of drugs for personal use.
IF PRESSED ON NEW REQUESTS FOR EXEMPTIONS FROM OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• Health Canada will carefully and thoroughly review any request for an exemption to allow for
the personal possession ofcontrolled substances on a case-by-case basis, including evidence of potential
benefits and risks to the health and safety of Canadians.
• The Department will continue to work with provincial and municipal officials on options that
address regional needs and help people who use substances get the support they need.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVATE MEMBER’S BILL C-216
• We recognise that more needs to be done to address the worsening overdose crisis.
• Through the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, we are supporting a comprehensive
public health-focused approach. This includes investments of over $700M to address the overdose crisis
and substance use-related harms since 2017.
• We are also supporting measures to divert people who use drugs away from the criminal justice
system and towards health and social services, as in Bill C-5, An Act to amend the Criminal Code and the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act.
• The Bill is currently under review by federal officials. I look forward to receiving their
assessment.
BACKGROUND
The Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA) generally prohibits activities (e.g. possession,
production, sale) with controlled substances and precursors (including chemicals used to make illegal
drugs), unless those activities have been specifically authorized through regulations or an exemption
under the Act. Current criminal penalties for simple possession of some controlled substances can
include imprisonment up to seven years and/or fines.
Section 56 of the CDSA allows the Minister ofHealth to exempt any person or class of persons or any
controlled substance or precursor or class thereof from the application of all or any of the provisions of
the Act or the regulations if, in the opinion of the Minister, the exemption is necessary fora medical or
scientific purpose or is otherwise in the public interest.
As the overdose crisis continues to worsen, there have been increasing calls from stakeholders,
including health professionals, law enforcement and people with lived and living experience, for the
removal of criminal penalties for the possession of small amounts of drugs for personal use in order to
treat substance use as a health issue, reduce stigma around substance use and help connect people who
use drugs with health and social services.
Calls from jurisdictions across Canada to allow for personal possession of controlled substances are
increasing. To date HC is aware of over fifty-five municipalities who have publicly expressed interest in
decriminalization of personal possession. Several municipalities are studying or have advocated for the
federal government to decriminalize the possession of drugs for personal use, including Regina,
Saskatoon, Montreal and Ontario’s Big City Mayors (mayors from the province’s 29 largest cities).
On May 28, 2021, the City of Vancouver submitted its application with respect to its request for a
section 56 exemption under the CDSA to allow for the personal possession of certain amounts of
controlled substances. On November 1, 2021, British Columbia submitted an application with respect to
its request for a section 56 exemption under the CDSA to allow for the personal possession of certain
controlled substances commonly associated with overdose deaths in the province. On January 4, 2022,
Toronto Public Health submitted its request for a section 56 exemption under the CDSA to decriminalize
personal possession of small amounts of controlled substances within the city’s boundaries. During a
December 6 Board of Health (BoH) meeting, the Toronto BoH also reiterated its call to request the
Federal Minister of Health to use their authority under the CDSA to develop a national framework to
permit the possession of certain amounts of controlled substances for personal use; and support the
immediate scale upof prevention, harm reduction and treatment services. The requests from British
Columbia, Vancouver, and Toronto Public Health are currently under review. Several other
municipalities have reached out to Health Canada for additional information on the exemption process
for such requests including Calgary (December 18, 2021) and Edmonton (January 25, 2022). In response,
Health Canada has provided the type of information that could be helpful in informing the Department’s
review.
In addition to requests from jurisdictions to decriminalize simple possession, the Canadian Association
of People who Use Drugs (CAPUD) and four individual plaintiffs filed a Notice of Civil Claim on August 31,
2021 in the British Columbia Supreme Court that aims to decriminalize possession of all drugs, as well as
drug trafficking activities that are connected to subsistence, supporting personal drug use, or providing a
safe supply of drugs to other people who use drugs (“necessity trafficking”). The Government of Canada
filed a Response to Civil Claim on November 30, 2021, which sets out the facts and basic legal arguments
of the Government of Canada’s defence. The plaintiffs filed a reply to the Government of Canada’s
response on December 23, 2021. The litigation generated some media attention in September, and
continued interest is anticipated.
Under the Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy, the Government of Canada has taken a number of
steps to help create pathways away from the criminal justice system toward appropriate health services
and social supports for people who use drugs. This includes:
• In May 2017, the Good Samaritan Drug Overdose Act became law. It provides some legal
protection related to personal possession for individuals who seek emergency help during an overdose.
• On August 18, 2020, the Public Prosecution Service of Canada issued public guidance to
prosecutors stating that alternatives to prosecution should be considered for personal possession
offences, except when there are serious aggravating circumstances.
On December 15, 2021, Gord Johns, Member of Parliament for Courtenay-Alberni, BC (NDP), introduced
Private Member’s Bill C-216, an Act to amend the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act and to enact the
Expungement of Certain Drug-related ConvictionsAct and the National Strategy on Substance Use Act,
in the House of Commons. The Bill is divided into three parts:
• Part 1 would repeal sections 4 and 4.1 of the CDSA, thereby removing the prohibition on
possession of controlled substances (i.e. subsection 4(1) of the CDSA) and other provisions;
• Part 2 would establish a procedure for expunging convictions related to possession of controlled
substances through the Parole Board of Canada; and
• Part 3 would require the Minister of Health to develop a national strategy to address substance-
related harms.
The first hour of debate at second reading took place on March 2, 2022.
In February 2021, the Minister of Justice and Attorney General introduced Bill C-22 in Parliament, An Act
to amend the CriminalCode and the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act. Amongst other measures, the
Bill would have police and prosecutors consider alternative measures–including diverting individuals to
addiction programs, giving a warning or taking no further actions–instead of laying charges or
prosecuting individuals for simple drug possession. Bill C-22 died on the order paper with the calling of
the 2021 federal election. These proposed measures were reintroduced in the House of Commons on
December 7, 2021, through Bill C-5.
COVID-19 SCREENING AND TESTING
ISSUE
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada are working closely with the provinces
and territories, federal organisations, as well as distribution channels in the private sectorand non-
profit organisations, such as the Canadian chambers of commerce, Canadian Red Cross and pharmacies,
to distribute rapid tests and self tests
KEY FACTS
• On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of
the Safe Restart Agreement, to further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated
data management and information sharing systems.
• The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and
the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
• An additional off-cycle budget request of $2.5 billion was approved in January 2022. The
Minister sought Statutory Authority through the recently approved Bill C-10 to access these funds.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over
607M rapid tests, at a total cost of $4B.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has shipped over
398M rapidtests to provinces and territories, over 6.3M tests to large businesses, over 4.8M tests to
pharmacies, and over 4M to the Canadian Red Cross.
• From January 1st, the federal government has shipped over 287M rapid tests to Provinces and
Territories
• As ofMarch 9, the Government of Canada has approved 30 point-of-care rapid tests, as well as
11 self-tests.
• Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around 237,000
tests per day. However, resulting from the rapid surge in cases driven by the Omicron variant, access to
PCR testing has been restricted for symptomatic high priority groups in all provinces and territories.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is working aggressively to procure rapid tests, including self-tests, to meet
both current and future demand as testing needs exploded in December and January in particular,
following Omicron emergence.
• The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and
the Public Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
• With the recent approval of Bill C-10 the Minister of Health has the funding to ensure consistent
supply of rapid tests into the spring. The Bill also grants the Minister authority to distribute COVID-19
rapid tests to provinces and territories, any organization and any person in Canada.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over
607M rapid tests, at a total cost of $4B.
• As of March 9, the Government of Canada has approved 30 point-of-care rapid tests, as well as
11 self-tests.
• In the month of January alone, the federal government landed 140M tests in our country.
• In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has shipped over
398M rapid tests to provinces and territories, over 6.3M tests to large businesses, over 4.8M tests to
pharmacies, and over 4M to the Canadian Red Cross.
• Several steps were taken to expedite the delivery of rapid tests to provinces and territories
including continued work with suppliers and obtaining additional logistical capacity. We have also
continued working in close collaboration with provinces and territories to expand logistical capacity to
allow for a seven days a week operation and planned shipping schedules ona regular basis.
• As our top priority, we will be continuing all efforts to support jurisdictions in their efforts to
manage COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON THE RISKS ASSOCIATED WITH USE OF RAPID ANTIGEN TEST KITS
• Health Canada is aware of calls made to poison centres in Canada related to accidental exposure
to certain ingredients in rapid antigen test kits, which have resulted in minor health outcomes and no
lasting effects.
• Health Canada has advised Canadians about potential risks associated with the misuse or
accidental ingestion or spillage of COVID-19 rapid antigen test kit solutions.
• The kits are safe and effective when usedas intended.
• Distribution and use of testing devices should be done in accordance with provincial or
territorial guidance.
IF PRESSED ON WHICH TESTS WEREORDERED AND THEIR DISTRIBUTION…
• As part of this work, we ordered rapid and self-tests from various suppliers–the Cepheid
GeneXpert, Biomérieux Canada, Abbott ID NOW, Abbott Panbio, BD Veritor, Quidel Sofia, Quidel
QuickVue, Lucira, Roche SD Biosensor, BTNX Rapid Response, Artron COVID 19 antigen test, Switch
Health SD Biosensor, Trimedic Assuretech, CanAM SD Biosensor, Precision Compounds–and have
worked with our provincial and territorial counterparts to allocate and distribute them.
• In addition, the federal government continues to support multiple distribution channels to
achieve broad reach of rapid antigen tests and self-tests.
• In 2021, Health Canada distributed over 4.5 million to organizations of the private sector for
workplace testing.
• To improve access by small-medium sized organizations, Health Canada also developed
partnerships with pharmacies for test distribution to small-medium sized businesses. Until the end of
2021, over 2.3M tests were provided to pharmacies for this initiative.
• Health Canada has also collaborated with the Canadian Red Cross (CRC) to distribute tests to
non-profit and charitable organizations for workplace screening of employees and volunteers.
Approximately 300K tests were provided to the CRC for this initiative in 2021. Furthermore, with the
objective of ensuring that vulnerable people are able to accesstests and masks, Health Canada has also
worked with the CRC to identify community partners who would provide tests and masks to their
clients. In December, over 1.6M tests were provided to the CRC for this initiative
• In support of the federalvaccination mandate, as well as voluntary testing of front-line public
servants at organizations including Correctional Service Canada, Health Canada has also provided over
2.6M rapid tests to federal departments and agencies.
IF PRESSED ON NATIONAL DAILYCAPACITY…
• Under the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government funded the acceleration of the
development of testing capacity in the provinces and territories. The national capacity is about 237,000
per day.
• During the Omicron-driven wave of the pandemic, testing demand exceeded available
laboratory capacity in most jurisdictions. In response, most P/T jurisdictions limited the use of PCR
testing to diagnose COVID-19 to specific target groups, including the unvaccinated,
immunocompromised, or those working or living in high-risk settings, with public health testing
guidance varying between jurisdictions.
• We have also put into place surge support for provinces and territories, including for contact
tracing, testing sample collection, and test processing capacity in federal laboratories.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS INCREASING ITS TESTING CAPACITY…
• My department continues to work with their colleagues in Public Services and Procurement
Canada, Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada, and the National Research Council to
identify and support new and emerging testing and screening products and platforms.
• Thanks to the Government of Canada support, Artron, a rapid test developed and manufactured
in Canada has been approved by Health Canada and is now part of our procurement of rapid tests.
• As emerging testing and screening products such as self-tests, or platforms become available
and approved for use in Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada will work with provincial public
health laboratories to acquire them to augment existing testing capacity.
IF PRESSED ON BILL C-8 AND BILL C-10…
• Recent months have highlighted the extreme volatility in demand for rapid tests as well as the
challenges relating to logistics of global procurement. There is an urgent and ongoing need for the
continued procurement and distribution of rapid tests within Canada.
• With the recent approval of Bill C-10, the Minister of Health has the funding required to ensure
consistent supply of rapid tests intothe spring. The Bill also grants the Minister authority to distribute
COVID-19 rapid tests to provinces and territories, any organization and any person in Canada.
• An off-cycle request of $2.5 billion was approved in January 2022 and a Statutory Authority
through Bill C-10 was sought to access these funds.
IF PRESSED ON HOW CANADA IS EDUCATING PUBLIC ON PROPER USE OF RAPID TESTS…
• While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and
territorial jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts.
• In December 2021, Health Canada launched two national public health measures advertising
campaigns (The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practicing public
health measures, including the use of rapid tests.
• TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated to ensure Canadians have access to
the most updated information on testing, including use, distribution and procurement.
• The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge
sharing across provinces and territories.
IF PRESSED ON WHY AUTHORITIES FOR RAPID TESTS ARE BEING SOUGHT THROUGH SUPPLEMENTARY
ESTIMATES (C) AND BILLS C-8 AND C-10 …
• These kits are urgently needed by Canadians acrossthe country and are in high demand
globally. However, this close to the end of the fiscal year, the department does not have enough
flexibility left in existing authorities to sign more contracts or make payments for those purchases.
• By requesting boththe statutory and voted spending authorities, Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada will have maximum flexibility to arrange for the large-scale procurement of
these tests.
• Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada will pay foreach shipment with either
the statutory authority of Bills C-8 and C-10, or voted appropriations–not both. For any expenses
charged to the statutory authorities, equal amounts will be frozen in the voted appropriations and the
frozen amounts will be reported in the Public Accounts of Canada.
• With the tabling of Supplementary Estimates (C) in Parliament, additional contracts for test kits
can now be signed, but they must be delivered by March 31. However, payments cannot be made until
very late March,when Supplementary Estimates (C) receives Royal Assent.
• Bills C-8 and C-10 would provide the ability to place orders and make payments to suppliers
immediately if required. In addition, as Bill C-8 and C-10 are not limited to deliveries made by March
31st, the government will also be able to order test kits for delivery in April or later.
BACKGROUND
On July 27, 2020, the Government of Canada announced it will provide $4.28 billion, as part of over $19
billion announced by the Prime Minister on July 16,2020 as part of the Safe Restart Agreement, to
further expand testing and contact tracing capacity, and the associated data management and
information sharing systems. The objective of the Safe Restart Agreement is to ensure that Canada has
the resourcesand information it needs to reopen the economy safely.
Through the Safe Restart Agreement, the federal government provided funding to accelerate
development of provincial and territorial diagnostic testing capacity. National capacity is around 237,000
tests per day. However, resulting from the rapid surge in cases driven by the Omicron variant, access to
PCR testing has been restricted for symptomatic high priority groups in all provinces and territories.
The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests. In total, since the
beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 607M rapid tests, at a total
cost of $4B.
Since September 3, 2020, an online table monitors progress by provinces and territories in increasing
their testing capacity, including weekly updates on current testing capacity for each province and
territory compared to the capacity target agreed to under the Safe Restart Agreement.
The federal government has additional laboratory capacity available to assist provinces and territories
with the processing of tests. The labs will perform diagnostic analysis and relay results to public health
authorities. The six federal labs, plus two mobile trucks, can provide an additional capacity of
approximately 15,000 tests per day. To date, federal surge support for laboratory testing has responded
to requests from Prince Edward Island, Newfoundland, New Brunswick, Alberta, Manitoba and Ontario,
as well as Correctional Services Canada.
The infrastructure to maintain testing capacity will remain in place, even though provincial and
territorial testing has decreased. This will ensure preparedness if called uponfor support.
Testing will remain an important tool to detect and isolate new cases, follow up with close contacts,
stop spread of the virus and prevent outbreaks in the community.
Procurement and Distribution of Tests to Provinces and Territories
The Government of Canada has been a leader in funding, procuring and distributing rapid tests through
multiple channels across Canada, and has been providing rapid tests to provinces and territories since
October 2020.
In total, since the beginning of the pandemic, the Government of Canada has ordered over 607M rapid
tests, at a total cost of $4B.
Initial test approval focused on point of care molecular tests. Point of care molecular tests are widely
recognized as sound options for diagnostic testing in instanceswhere lab-based PCR testing is not
available. In consultations with provinces and territories, the Government of Canada prioritized the
procurement and deployment of molecular tests to health and long-term care settings as well as for
northern, remote andisolated communities.
In recent months, the focus has been on the procurement and distribution of rapid antigen tests,
including self tests, and rapidly boosting supply to respond to the increasing demand due to Omicron.
This also marked a shift away fromprevious demand-led supply of tests to provinces and territories,
most of which were early adopters of general population access to rapid testing in December, towards a
per capita allocation of tests as of January
In total, the federal government has shipped over 398M rapid tests to provinces and territories. These
rapid antigen tests have supported the broader testing strategies that provinces and territories have
implemented including for screening in hospitals and other health care settings, as well asfor expanded
school based testing, workplace screening, as well as community and general population testing.
The 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update proposed to provide $1.72 billion to Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada to continue supporting the procurement of rapid tests.
An additional off-cycle budget request of $2.5 billion was approved in January 2022. The Minister is
seeking a Statutory Authority through Bill C-10 to access these funds to ensure consistent supply and
distribution oftests into the Spring to PTs, organizations and any person in Canada.
A key priority of the Government of Canada is supporting domestic bio-manufacturing capacity for rapid
tests. The Government of Canada’s commitment to the bio-manufacturing sector is outlined in Budget
2021, which includes a $2.2 billion investment over the next seven years. Artron, a rapid test developed
and manufactured in Canada has been approved by Health Canada and is now part of Government of
Canada’s procurement of rapid tests. The Government of Canada has procured 15.7M tests from Artron
to date.
Public Education
While COVID-19 testing education and guidance predominately lies within provincial and territorial
jurisdiction, the Government of Canada supports these efforts through multiple prongs.
In December 2021, Health Canada launched two national public health measures advertising campaigns
(The Rhythm and Safe Celebrations) to encourage Canadians to continue practising public health
measures, including the use of rapid tests.
TheCanada.caCOVID-19 website continues to be updated on an ongoing basis to ensure Canadians
have access to the most updated information around testing importance, distribution to provinces,
workplaces and procurement they need.
Health Canada published the Pan-Canadian Testing and Screening Guidance in October 2020, and
updated it in August 2021. The updates to the guidance were informed by a report on Testing for
COVID-19 in Vaccinated Populations, which included recommendations based on the latest scientific
literature.
Public Health Agency of Canada’s National Microbiology Lab published an interim guidance on antigen
testing in October 2020.
In addition, the Minister of Health established a Testing and Screening Expert Advisory Panel in
November 2020 that provided evidence-informed advice in five reports covering testing and screening,
long-term care, schools, borders and self-testing. The Panel has been in hibernation since August 2021.
The Government of Canada also support many interprovincial fora to support knowledge sharing across
provinces and territories.
Workplace Screening
The workplace screening initiative will remain an integral part of the overall testing strategy. SMEs will
continue to be able to acquire rapid tests for workplace screening at select pharmacy locations in
Ontario, Manitoba, Saskatchewan, Alberta and British Columbia. Alternatively, SMEs can also pick up
rapid tests for free at participating local chambers of commerce in British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario,
New Brunswick and Nova Scotia. Charities, Non-Profits and Indigenous Community Organizations can
acquire rapid tests through the Canadian Red Cross for free, in British Columbia, Alberta, Saskatchewan,
Manitoba, Ontario, New Brunswick and Nova Scotia.
Building on workplace screening initiatives, the Government of Canada is increasing access to COVID-19
rapid antigen tests for people in Canada’s North. The Government of Canada is working with the
Governments of Northwest Territories and Nunavut to distribute COVID-19 rapid tests free of charge at
NorthMart and Northern stores across the two territories. Tests became available to local residents
starting February 25, 2022.
Health Canada has been working with manufacturers to enable market access for commercial diagnostic
devices in order to increase Canada’s COVID-19 diagnostic capacity.
2022-23 Main Estimates
Health Canada
% Change
2021-22 2022-23 This Year
Net
(in millions $) Main Increases Decreases Main over
Change
Estimates Estimates
Last Year
Voted 3,697.5 1,414.0 (1,397.4) 16.6 3,714.1 0.4%
Statutory 165.3 24.7 (26.1) (1.4) 163.9 (0.9%)
Total
3,862.8 1,438.7 (1,423.5) 15.2 3,878.0 0.4%
Budgetary
Health Canada has a proposed net increase of $15.2M in its 2022-23 Main Estimates (from $3,862.8M in
2021-22 to $3,878.0M in 2022-23).
Increases of $1,438.7M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TBSubmissions increase of $1,343.5M
• Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to
medical assistance in dying ($606.9M)
• Funding related to the COVID-19 contingency fund ($500.0M)
• Addressing the opioid crisis($65.1M)
• Continuing Canada’s chemical management regime ($61.7M)
• Extension of the Territorial Health Investment Fund ($27.0M)
• Supporting the Mental Health of Those Most Affected by COVID-19 ($18.6M)
• Funding to support access to sexual andreproductive health care information and services
($14.9M)
• Mental Health Commission of Canada ($14.3M)
• Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process ($12.9M)
• Funding to advancing pharmacare in Prince Edward Island ($10.7M)
• Ensuring the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program ($6.8M)
• Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care ($4.6M)
Funding Level Increases [$77.8M]
• Funding to support innovative approaches to COVID-19 testing ($22.5M)
• Net vote revenue adjustments ($17.1M)
• Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research ($12.2M)
• Canada Brain Research Fund Program ($11.7M)
• Creating a Pan-Canadian Database for organ donation and transplantation ($6.3M)
• Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program ($5.0M)
• Canadian Drugs and Substances Strategy ($3.0M)
Other [$17.4M]
• Various other increases under $2.0M ($9.9M)
• Transfer of the Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network Program fromthe Canadian Institutes of
Health Research ($5.2M)
• Funding for collective bargaining ($2.3M)
Decreases of $1,423.5M (including Statutory)
Sunset [$507.5M]
• Creation of a Critical Drug Reserve in collaboration with provinces and territories to support
access to drugs which treat COVID-19 symptoms for Canadians ($355.1M)
• Implementing a New Federal Framework for Legalization and Regulation of Cannabis ($105.0M)
• Funding to support operational critical COVID-19 focused functions ($24.0M)
• Funding tosupport regulatory critical COVID-19 focused functions ($23.4M)
Funding Level Decrease [$901.4M]
• Safe Long-Term Care Fund ($501.7M)
• Strengthening Canada's Home and Community Care and Mental Health and Addiction Services
Initiative ($300.0M)
• Canada Health Infoway ($43.3M)
• Improving the accessibility, affordability and appropriate use of prescription drugs and medical
devices ($18.8M)
• Substance Use and Addictions Program ($10.9M)
• Bringing Innovation to Regulation ($10.6M)
• Adaptation to ClimateChange ($6.1M)
• Canadian Partnership Against Cancer ($5.0M)
• Funding to the Canadian Institute for Health Information ($5.0M)
Other [$14.6M]
• Various other decreases under $2.0M ($5.9M)
• Funding to support Improving and Defending our Cyber Networks, Modernizing Critical IT
Infrastructure by Shared Services Canada ($4.1M)
• Budget 2021 travel reduction ($3.2M)
• Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan ($1.4M)
Statutory Appropriations-Net funding decrease of $1.4M relates mainly to employee benefit plan
adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2022-23 Main Estimates total statutory includes a statutory revenue
forecast of $51.5M for the internal shared services partnership between Health Canada and the Public
Health Agency of Canada. This is in line with the previous year.
2022-23 Main Estimates
Public Health Agency of Canada
% Change
2021-22 2022-23 This Year
Net
(in millions $) Main Increases Decreases Main over
Change
Estimates Estimates
Last Year
Voted 8,672.2 1,829.9 (2,086.4) (256.5) 8,415.7 (2.9%)
Statutory 78.9 14.4 (14.0) 0.4 79.3 0.5%
Total
8,751.1 1,844.3 (2,100.4) (256.1) 8,495.0 (2.9%)
Budgetary
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Public Health Agency of Canada has a proposed net decrease of $256.1M in its 2022-23Main Estimates
(from $8,751.1M in 2021-22 to $8,495M in 2022-23).
Increases of $1,829.9M (excluding Statutory)
• Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 therapeutics ($1,050.0M)
• Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines ($360.2M)
• Funding forthe procurement of influenza vaccines ($120.4M)
• Funding to support border and travel measures and isolation sites ($102.4M)
• Funding to improve mental health supports and services to help those most affected by COVID-
19 ($82.2M)
• Funding to strengthenpre-clinical and medical countermeasures in Canada ($47.4M)
• Funding to support Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care programs ($23.1M)
• Funding for the Pan-Canadian vaccine injury support program ($19M)
• Funding for Dementia Strategic Fund($6.5M)
• Funding to prevent and address gender based violence ($4.2M)
• Funding for strengthening foundational evidence of antimicrobial resistance ($3.8M)
• Various other increases under $3.0M ($10.7M)
Decreases of $2,086.4M (excluding Statutory)
• Funding for personal protective equipment ($1,576.3)
• Funding to support biomanufacturing ($350M)
• Funding to support COVID-19 surge capacity ($85.2M)
• Funding for the Sero-Surveillance Consortium ($43.6M)
• Funding for COVID-19 advertising ($21M)
• Various other decreases under $3.0M ($10.3M)
Statutory Appropriations-Net funding increase of $0.4M relates to employee benefit plan adjustments.
The 2022-23 Main Estimates also include statutory revenue forecast of $13.4M for the internal shared
services partnership between Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada. This is in line with
the previous year.
2022-23 Main Estimates
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
% Change
2021-22 2022-23 This Year
Net
(in millions $) Main Increases Decreases Main over
Change
Estimates Estimates
Last Year
Voted 638.7 55.1 5.8 49.3 688.0 7.7%
Statutory 147.0 7.3 4.5 2.8 149.8 1.9%
Total
785.7 62.4 10.3 52.1 837.8 6.6%
Budgetary
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Canadian Food Inspection Agency has a proposednet increase of $52.1M in its 2022-23 Main Estimates
(from $785.7M in 2021-22 to $837.8M in 2022-23).
Increases of $62.4M (including Statutory)
New and Renewed TB Submissions [$31.3M]
• Funding to maintain daily shift inspection presence in federally registered meat processing
establishments ($15.6M)
• Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures ($14.3M)
• Funding to address antimicrobial resistance ($1.4M)
Funding Level Increases [$23.0M]
• Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British Columbia ($13.2M)
• Funding to maintain core services at the CFIA ($9.1M)
• Funding for Food Fraud ($0.4M)
• Funding to establish a Canadian Food Safety Information Network ($0.3M)
Other[$8.1M]
• Voted increase from Internal transfer from Personnel Operating budget to Non-Pay Operating
budget ($3.2M)
• Funding for Collective Bargaining ($2.7M)
• Voted increase from Internal transfer from Personnel Capital budget to Non-Pay Capital budget
($1.1M)
• Legal Services employeebenefit plan adjustment ($0.8M)
• Transfer from Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad ($0.3M)
Decreases of $10.3M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Decrease [$0.8M]
• Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant, and animal products ($0.8M)
Other [$9.5M]
• Statutory decrease from Internal transfer from Personnel Operating budget to Non-Pay
Operating budget ($3.2M)
• Travel expenditures reduction ($2.4M)
• Reallocation of resources to Shared Services Canada for the Project Government IT Operations
($2.2M)
• Statutory decrease from Internal transfer from Personnel Capital budget to Non-Pay Capital
budget ($1.1M)
• Transfer to Health Canada for Improving Food Safety ($0.6M)
Statutory Appropriations-Net funding increase of $2.8M relates mainly to employee benefit plan
adjustments.
For information purposes, the 2022-23 Main Estimates total statutory includes a statutory revenue
forecast of $53.0M and statutory compensation payment forecast of$12.5M.
2022-23 Main Estimates
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
% Change
2021-22 2022-23 This Year
Net
(in millions $) Main Increases Decreases Main over
Change
Estimates Estimates
Last Year
Voted 1,246.7 46.2 58.1 (11.9) 1,234.8 (1.0%)
Statutory 7.2 0.5 - 0.5 7.7 6.9%
Total
1,253.9 46.7 (58.1) (11.4) 1,242.5 (0.9%)
Budgetary
Note: Figures may not add up due to rounding.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research has a proposed net decrease of $11.4M in its 2022-23 Main
Estimates (from $1,253.9M in 2021-22 to $1,242.5M in 2022-23).
While CIHR received additional funding for targeted health research investments in Budget 2021,the
net decrease is primarily attributable to time-limited funding that has ended or decreased since the
previous year’s Main Estimates.
Increases of $46.2M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Increases $39.3M
• Funding for the Centre for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies
($18.2M)
• Time-limited funding for Pediatric Cancer Research as announced in Budget 2021 ($14.9M)
• Time-limited funding for diabetes prevention as announced in Budget 2021 ($4.0M)
• Time-limited funding formental health research as announced in Budget 2021 ($2.2M)
Other $6.9M
• Funding due to the distribution of the Canada Graduate Scholarships ($6.9M)
Decreases of $58.1M (including Statutory)
Funding Level Decreases $56.3M
• Canada First Research Excellence Fund: time-limited funding for the program’s first competition,
which currently ends in 2022-23 ($15.7M)
• Medical Countermeasures (COVID-19): time-limited funding ended in 2021-22 ($15.0M)
• Transfer of the Networks of Centres of Excellence Program to the New Frontiers in Research
Fund ($12.1M)
• Transfer of the Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network program to the Canadian Agency for
Drugs and Technology in Health ($5.2M)
• Gradual transfer of the Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Researchand the
Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence programs to the Strategic Innovation Fund ($4.0M)
• Time-limited funding for research on climate change ended in 2021-22 ($2.5M)
• Transfer to the International Development Research Centre to supportresearch on women’s
health and economic well-being for a post-COVID-19 recovery ($1.8M)
Other Funding Decreases $1.8M
• The remaining variance is mainly a result of tri-agency programs in collaboration with the
Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council and the Social Sciences and Humanities Research
Council, as CIHR receives time-limited funding following each competition and depending on the
successful applications’ alignment with CIHR’s health-related mandate
Statutory Appropriations-Net funding increase of $0.5M relatesmainly to employee benefit plan
adjustments.
Health Canada’s 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions–Increases
- Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care,and safe access to
medical assistance in dying (Budget 2021)
o Following changes to the MAID legislation in March 2021, Budget 2021 committed
$13.2M over 5 years, with $2.6M ongoing, to ensure that Canada’s MAID framework is
implemented consistently and withall appropriate safeguards.
o Budget 2021 also committed $29.8M over 6 years, starting in 2021-22, to provide
Canadians with better access to palliative and end-of-life care, including culturally
sensitive care, and to advance the federal Action Plan on Palliative Care.
o 2021-22: 0.0
o 2022-23: 606.9
o Net change: 606.9
- Funding related to the COVID-19 contingency fund:
o The COVID-19 pandemic has been unpredictable, as highlighted that late last summer
when many jurisdictions started to think about winding down testing and then had to
pivot in response to Delta and Omicron variant.
o Furthermore, in the past number of days, many provinces and territories (PTs)
announced significant changes in their public health measures, with many PTs removing
most or all measures.
o Given the uncertainty of pandemic and the unknown impact of shift in public health
measures.
o 2021-22: 0.0
o 2022-23: 500
o Net change: 500
- Addressing the opioid crisis
o To help address the opioid overdose crisis and problematic substance use, Budget 2021
announced $116 million over two years to support a range of innovative approaches at
the community level through the Substance Use and Addictions Program.
o Funding will prioritize initiatives that focus on harm reduction related to substance use
and the toxic illegal drug supply; prevention, health promotion, and early intervention;
treatment and recovery; and, strengthening the substance use workforce.
o The net increase is comprised of the following:
 Budget 2021 funding of $79.6M to address the opioid overdose crisis, which
includes the reprofile from 2021-22 into 2022-23 of $22M.
 Funding level decrease of $12.4M related to the 2020 Fall Economic Statement
funding to address the opioids crisis.
 Funding level decrease of $2.1M related to the Budget 2019 Funding forActions
to Protect Canadians and Prevent Overdose Deaths.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 65.1
o Net change: 65.1
- Continuing Canada’s chemical management regime (Budget 2021)
o Funding for Canada's Chemicals Management Plan (CMP) for three years will continue
to protect human health and the environment from exposure to harmful chemicals by
continuing Canada's Chemicals Management Plan (CMP).
o This funding will maintain core CMP activities and fulfill the Government's legislative
responsibilities to manage toxic substances by:
 Conducting risk assessments for existing and new chemicals;
 Implementation and administration of risk management instruments;
 Promoting compliance and taking enforcement actions;
 Conducting research;
 Monitoring and surveillance activities; and,
 Undertaking engagement and outreach.
o Funding will also support a new Health Canada Contribution Program for Engagement
and Outreach to engage those impacted by CMP decision-making
o 2021-22: 0.0
o 2022-23: 61.7
o Net change: 61.7
- Extension of the Territorial Health Investment Fund (Budget 2021)
o Funding to extend the Territorial Health Investment Fund. This funding will continue to
support territories in undertaking innovative activities (such as exploring the use of
innovative models of care, including interdisciplinary team-based approaches, and the
use of technology to support service delivery) to strengthen health systems and improve
health outcomes, while also offsetting the costs associated with medical travel to
ensure Northerners have access to the care they need.
o 2021-22: 0.0
o 2022-23: 27
o Net change: 27
- Supporting the Mental Health of Those Most Affected by COVID-19 (Budget 2021)
o Funding to support the development of national standards for mental health and
substance use in priority areas, in collaboration with P/Ts, health organizations, and key
stakeholders.
o National standards will improve access to quality mental health services to services,
while also addressing domains of safety, effectiveness, patient-centeredness, cultural
appropriateness, and equity
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 18.6
o Net change: 18.6
- Funding to support access to sexual and reproductive health care information and services
(Budget 2021)
o While all Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health
resources and services no matter where they live, there are gaps in access, particularly
for marginalized populations.
o To address these gaps, Budget 2021 announced $45M over three fiscal years, starting in
2021-22, to organizations to address:
 training and support needs of health care professionals,
 gaps in educational resources and information for members of marginalized
populations,
 travel and logistics costs to access abortion services.
o 2021-22 : 0
o 2022-23: 14.9
o Net change: 14.9
- Mental Health Commission of Canada:
o Funding to support the Mental Health Commission of Canada. Funding will be used for
contributions to the organization'score activities to advance its mandated priority areas
of population-based initiatives, suicide prevention, mental health and substance use,
and engagement.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 14.3
o Net change: 14.3
- Strengthening the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process:
o The Government is committed to protecting human health and the environment from
the risks posed by pesticides. Pesticides are only registered in Canada after being
thoroughly assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the environment will result
from their use.
o Consistent with the Government’s announcement on August 4, 2021, this investment in
Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency will strengthen pesticide
oversight and protection, including improving the availability ofindependent data
supporting pesticide review decisions, and the transparency of regulatory decision-
making.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 12.9
o Net change: 12.9
- Funding to advancing pharmacare in Prince Edward Island
o No Canadian should have to choose between payingfor prescription drugs and putting
food on the table.
o The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing provinces and
territories towards national pharmacare.
o In August 2021, the Government announced a first agreement with Prince Edward
Island to improve access to medications for Island residents and inform the
advancement of national universal pharmacare. This agreement provided $35M over
four years to PEI.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 10.7
o Net change: 10.7
- Ensuring the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program (Budget 2021)
o As the occupational health service provider of the federal public service, PSOHP
provides specialized occupational health evaluations, communicable disease prevention
services, and technical adviceto help departments meet their Canada Labour Code
obligations.
o Despite evolving and increasing occupational health needs, PSOHP has been operating
under the same funding level since 1984, which has limited the program’s capacity to
deliver services to client departments.
o Funding received through Budget 2021 enables the program to make changes to
continue to operate and meet the needs of client departments. However, increased
service demands paired with new service lines, like mental health screening services,
have highlighted the need to seek a sustainable source of funds in the future.
o 2-21-22: 0
o 2022-23: 6.8
o Net change: 6.8
- Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care (Budget 2021)
o Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over 3 years, starting in2021-22, for Indigenous
Services Canada (ISC) and Health Canada (HC) to implement the short-term suite of
measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health systems. Of this funding,
$14.9M over three years was announced for Health Canada to establish the Addressing
Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program (“the Program”) with
$13.9M in contribution funding ($13M in Project Stream; $900k in Engagement Stream).
o The Program was established in response to the three National Dialogues to Address
Anti-Indigenous Racism in Canada’s Health Systems. The Program also services as a
flagship initiative of the Federal Pathway–the federal government’s contribution to the
National Action Plan to End Violence Against Indigenous Women, Girls, and
2SLGBTQQIA People, and supports broader federal efforts including Canada’s Anti-
Racism Strategy and Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 4.6
o Net change: 4.6
Funding Level–Increases
- Funding to support innovative approaches to COVID-19
o Reprofile of funds into 2022-23 from 2021-22 to support innovative approaches to
COVID-19 testing
o The 2020 Fall Economic Statement (FES) announced $45.0M funding to Health Canada
to support innovative approaches in COVID-19 testing.
o This funding will help ensure equal access to COVID-19 tests by expanding delivery
channels, address evidence gaps related to COVID-19 test performance, ascertain the
health-economic benefits to testings, and expand wastewater surveillance in Canada.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 22.5
o Net change: 22.5
- Net vote revenue adjustments
o Increase in Employee Benefit Plans related to an increase in net vote revenue for:
 Revised fees to increase revenues for reinvestment in stabilizing, modernizing,
andtransforming regulatory compliance and enforcement activities; and, re-
investing in key regulatory activities that contribute to Canadians having access
to safe and effective health products and healthy and nutritious food.
 Specialized Health Services dueto an increased demand in the employee
assistance program and related services, as well as growth of the Federal Public
Service.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 17.1
o Net change: 17.1
- Terry Fox Research Institute and Ovarian Cancer Canada in support of cancer research
o Budget 2019 provided Health Canada $160M over six years (2019-20 to 2024-25) to
support cancer research. This investment will advance precision medicine in cancer,
including ovarian cancer.
o $32.5M for Terry Fox Research Institute and $2.3M for Ovarian cancer Canada in 2022-
23.
o 2021-22: 22.6
o 2022-23: 34.8
o Net change: 12.2
- Canada Brain Research Fund Program
o Reprofile of funds into 2022-23 from previous years of the Canada Brain Research Fund
Program
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 11.7
o Net change: 11.7
- Creating a Pan-Canadian Database for organ donation and transplantation:
o This initiative aims to significantly modernize the Organ Donation and Transplantation
(ODT) data and performance reporting system improving jurisdictional data collection,
interoperability and reporting capabilities.
o The funding will be provided through contributions to the Canadian Institute for Health
Information and Canada Health Infoway, two long-standing and trusted pan-Canadian
Health Organizations.
o 2021-22: 9.2
o 2022-23: 15.5
o Net change: 6.3
- Canadian Thaliomide Survivors Support Program
o Reprofile of funds into 2022-23 from 2021-22 to continue supporting the
implementation of the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 5
o Net change ;5
- Canadian Drungsand Substances safety
o Reprofile of funds into 2022-23 from 2020-21 for the Canadian Drungs and Substance
strategy
o 2022-21: 0
o 2022-23: 3
o Net change: 3
Other–Increases
- Various other increases under $2.0M
o A total of $9.9M comprise of various items with funding levels increases under $2M.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: 9.9
- Transfer of the Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network Program from the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research
o Transfer to facilitate the movement of the Drug Safety and EffectivenessNetwork
program of the Canadian Institutes of Health Research for the contribution to the
Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) at the Department of
Health. The funds will be incorporated within CADTH’s existing contribution agreement
with Health Canada, through amendments to the agreement’s Terms and Conditions, to
support the continued generation of post-market drug safety and effectiveness
evidence in Canada.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 5.2
o Net change: 5.2
- Funding the collective bargaining
o A total increase of $2.3M in 2022-23 related to collective agreement funding received
by the department
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: 2.3
Sunset–Decreases
- Creation of a Critical Drug Reserve in collaboration with provinces and territories tosupport
access to drugs which treat COVID-19 symptoms for Canadians
o Funding for the Creation of a Critical Drug Reserve in collaboration with provinces and
territories to support access to drugs which treat COVID-19 symptoms for Canadians
sunsets in 2021-22.
o $5M is expected to be reprofiled into 2022-23.
o 2021-22: 335.1
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (355.1)
- Implementing a New Federal Framework for Legalization and Regulation of Cannabis
o Funding for Implementing a New Federal Framework for Legalization and Regulation of
Canada sunsets in 2021-22. Funding for 2022-23 is expected to be renewed through the
2022-23 Supplementary Estimates B.
o 2021-22: 105
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (105)
- Funding to support operational critical COVID-19 focused functions
o Funding to supportoperational critical COVID-19 focused functions sunsets in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 24
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (24)
- Funding to support regulatory critical COVID-19 focused functions
o Funding to support regulatory critical COVID-19 focused functions sunsets in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 23.4
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (23.4)
Funding level–Decreases
- Safe Long-Term Care Fund
o In the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government committed to fund up to $1
billion for a Safe Long-Term Care Fund to help provinces and territoriesprotect people
from COVID-19 in long-term care.
o The funding level decrease in 2022-23 is due to the contribution funding coming to an
end in 2021-22 for the Strengthening Canada's Home and Community Care and Mental
Health and the Addiction Services Initiative as well as Contribution funding to improve
health care quality and patient safety.
o 2021-22: 502.6
o 2022-23: 0.9
o Net change: (501.7)
- Strengthening Canada’s Home and Community Care and Mental Health Addiction Services
Initiative
o Budget 2017, committed $11billion, over 10 years (fiscal years 2017-18 to 2026-27) to
help provinces and territories improve access to home and community care ($6 billion),
mental health and addiction services ($5 billion).
o Over the first five years of this investment (2017-18 to2021-22), $5 billion has been
transferred to provinces and territories. To provide the time needed to implement
services, funding increased annually over this time, reaching a peak of $1.5 billion in
fiscal year 2021-22.
o Consistent with the funding profileestablished in Budget 2017, up to $1.2 billion per
year is available to provinces and territories over the next five fiscal years (2022-23 to
2026-27) for the Strengthening Canada’s Home and Community Care and Mental Health
and Addiction Services Initiative.
o 2021-22: 1500
o 2022-23: 1200
o Net change: (300)
- Canada Health Infoway:
o Funding of $80M for Canada Health Infoway sunsets in 2021-22. This is partially offset
by a reprofile of $36.7M into 2022-23 for virtual care and digital health tools in
responding tothe COVID-19 pandemic.
o 2021-22: 80
o 2022-23: 36.7
o Net change: (43.3)
- Improving the accessibility, affordability and appropriate use of prescription drugs and medical
devices
o The funding level decrease is due to funding for the regulatory transformation portion
of the Accessibility theme ending in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 30.8
o 2022-23: 12
o Net change: (18.8)
- Substance Use and Addictions Program
o Reprofile of funds into 2021-22 for the Substance Use and Addiction Program came to
an end in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 5.9
o 2022-23: (5)
o Net change: (10.9)
- Bringing Innovation to Regulation:
o The funding level decrease is due to existing Health Canada resources being re-allocated
to the Health and Biosciences Roadmap for modernizing food and clinical trial
regulations beginning in2022-23.
o 2021-22: 24.1
o 2022-23: 13.5
o Net change: (10.6)
- Adaptation to Climate Change
o • The funding level decrease is due to the Climate Change and Health Adaptation
contribution program along with its associated operating funds coming to an end in
2021-22.The $1.8M in ongoing funding starting in 2022-23 will continue to protect
Canadians from the risks of climate change, reduce the costs of climate change impacts,
and help society to thrive in a changing climate.
o 2021-22: 7.9
o 2022-23: 1.8
o Net change: (6.1)
- Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
o Reprofile of funds into 2021-22 for the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer came to an
end in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 5
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (5)
- Funding to the Canadian Institute for Health Information
o The funding level decrease is due to $15M in ongoing funding starting in 2022-23 to
continue promoting a more innovative health care system through the Canadian
Institute for Health Information
o 2021-22: 20
o 2022-23: 15
o Net change (5)
Other–decreases
- Various other decreases under $2M
o A total of $5.9M comprised various items with funding levels decreased under $2M.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23:-
o Net change (5.9)
- Funding to support Improving and Defending our Cyber Networks, Modernizing Critical IT
Infrastructure by Shared ServicesCanada
o Budget 2021 approved a permanent reallocation of resources to Shared Services Canada
from its 43 partner organizations, effective April 1, 2022, to support the Enterprise
funding model for Government IT services.
o The reduction for Health Canada is$4,147,202 per year, starting in 2022-23.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: (4.1)
o Net change: (4.1)
- Budget 2021 travel reduction
o As per Budget 2021, departments and agencies with the highest historical travel costs
would be reduced by $1.1 billion over five years starting in 2021-22, and $225.5 million
ongoing.
o The reduction for Health Canada is $3,160,000 per year, starting in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: (3.2)
o Net change: (3.2)
- Year over year change in Employee Benefit Plan
o A total decrease of $1.4M in net year-over-year changes related to employee benefit
plan.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: (1.4)
Public Health Agency of Canada’s 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New and Renewed Funding–Increases
- Funding for the procurement of COVID-19therapeutics
o Funding to support the acquisition of new and emerging COVID-19 therapeutics,
including funding to exercise options under advanced purchase agreements, as well as
funding for secondary costs associated with storage, distribution and deployment
logistics.
o Currently all existing COVID-19 treatments require an intravenous infusion or injection
at hospitals or health care clinics. The availability of new antiviral COVID-19 therapies
will make outpatient treatment much easier and are expected to bein high demand by
healthcare practitioners and their patients.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 1050.0
o Net change: 1050
- Funding for the procurement of COVID-19 booster vaccines
o Funding for bilateral purchase agreements for COVID-19 boosters, second-generation,
and pediatric vaccines as well as associated logistics costs.
o The initiatives to procure vaccines and ancillary supplies, and the funding for human
resources in support of ongoing initiatives critical to COVID-19 vaccination programs,
will allow Canada to maintain momentum and achieve success through future COVID-19
vaccination efforts.
o 2021-22: 5000
o 2022-23: 5360.2
o Net change: 360.2
- Funding for the procurement of influenza vaccines
o Funding will support vaccination programs and protect the most vulnerable Canadians
against influenza and pneumococcal infections.
o Maintain advance readiness contracts ensures that Canadians will have timely and
equitable access to an assured supply of pandemic influenza vaccines.
o 2021-22: 19.2
o 2022-23: 139.6
o Net change: 120.4
- Fundingto support border and travel measures and isolation sites
o Funding will be used to
 secure border testing capacity;
 maintain critical border operations, such as:
 maintaining strengthened border and travel health operations;
 continuing operation of designated quarantine facilities for travelers
testing positive after arrival in Canada with augmented infection
prevention control and outbreak management at sites; and
 sustaining strengthened compliance and enforcement activities.
 enable Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program (SVISP) funding recipients to
continue operating their respective voluntary isolation projects.
o 2021-22: 236.1
o 2022-23: 338.5
o Net change: 102.4
- Funding to improve mental health suppor and services to help those most affected by COVID-19
o Budget 2021 announced funding for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to
address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
o This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion and
mental illness prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two years to
address PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential workers and others who are
disproportionately affected.
o It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators tomonitor the impact of
national mental health service standards and set up data collection and data
infrastructure for standards reporting.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 82.2
o Net change: 82.2
- Funding to strengthen pre-clinical and medical courtermeasures in Canada
o In July 2020, a decision was made to provide funding to the Public Health Agency of
Canada, for the amount of $420.5 million over five years (on a cash basis), starting in
2020-21, with $52 million ongoing, to support a new pre-clinical and medical
countermeasures facility at the National Microbiology Laboratory.
o This facility will address capacity issues and strengthen medical countermeasures
capacity in Canada by providing additional containment level 2 and containment level 3
laboratory space to supportresearch and pre-clinical testing of medical
countermeasures, relieving supply chain pressures related to a supply of appropriate
animal models for testing, addressing capacity issues to implement a national biobank,
and expanding operational infrastructure and capacity.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 47.4
o Net change: 47.4
- Funding to Support Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care programs
o Funding will
 ensure that more Indigenous families have access to high-quality and culturally
relevant programs and services;
 support repairs and renovations at existing Indigenous Early Learning and Child
Care centres; and
 give authority for a 3 percent funding escalator to be applied to all new and
existing Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care grants and contributions
funding sought in this submission starting in 2027-2028, as well as for legacy
funding amounts for the Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern
Communities program.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 23.1
o Net change: 23.1
- Funding for the Pan-Canadian vaccine injury supportprogram
o $75.0 million from 2021-22 to 2025-26 and $9.0 million per year ongoing is required to
establish and maintain the pan-Canadian Vaccine Injury Support Program (VISP) that will
ensure fair and timely access to financial support for all people in Canada in the event
that they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of receiving a Health
Canada authorized vaccine administered in Canada.
o The implementation of a VISP addresses a longstanding gap in Canada’s national
immunization programming, and brings Canada in line with other G7 countries.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 19
o Net change: 19
- Funding for Dementia Strategic Fund
o As part of Budget 2019, the Government of Canada announced $50 million over 5 years
to support the implementation of key elements of A Dementia Strategy for Canada:
Together We Aspire, which was released in June 2019. The strategy has three national
objectives focused on prevention, advancing therapies and finding a cure, and
improving the quality of life of people living with dementia and caregivers.
o Most of Budget 2019 funding ($40 million) will be administered through the Dementia
Strategic Fund (DSF), which is supporting a variety of activities, including the
development and implementation of a national public education/awareness campaign,
targeted awareness raising initiatives, and initiatives that support access to and use of
dementia guidance.
o 2021-22: 11.6
o 2022-23: 18.1
o Net change: 6.5
- Funding to prevent and address gender based violence
o Budget 2021 announced funding to enhance the Federal Strategy and to advance
towards a National Action Plan to End Gender Based Violence, including $50 million over
five years ($22.1 million in new funding and $27.9 million in existing funding) for PHAC’s
Preventing Family Violence and its Health Impacts investment, starting in 2021.
o This enhancement of PHAC’s family violence investment will support the design,
delivery, and testing of health promotion interventions that promote safe relationships
and prevent family violence. The enhancement will include a stronger emphasis on
prevention and more targeted engagement with populations that are disproportionately
impacted by family violence.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 4.2
o Net change: 4.2
- Funding for strengthening foundational evidence of antimicrobial resistance
o This funding will improve the ability to identify new and emerging patterns in drug-
resistant infections to mitigate the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and the
emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance in Canada.
o This funding willsupport ongoing interdepartmental efforts and build on existing actions
to further monitor and understand the risks and trends of inappropriate use of
antimicrobials and the emergence and spread of antimicrobial resistance in Canada in
order to inform additional future actions needed to preserve the effectiveness of
antimicrobials, prevent the spread of resistance, and mobilize research to spur
innovation to mitigate the risk of antimicrobial resistance and to protect the safety and
security of Canadians.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 3.8
o Net change: 3.8
- Various other increases under 43.0M
o A total of $10.7 million comprised of various items with funding levels increases under
$3 million
o 2021-22:-
o 2-22-23:-
o Net change: 10.7
Decreases
- Funding for personal protectiveequipment
o Funding decrease in the bulk procurement of PPE, medical equipment and supplies to
meet urgent needs of federal partners and provinces and territories.
o This bulk procurement is in support of large-scale efforts to combat COVID-19.
o 2021-22: 1743.5
o 2022-23: 167.2
o Net change: (1576.3)
- Funding to support bio-manufacturing
o Sunset of funding that was aimed at investing in Canada’s bio-manufacturing ecosystem.
o Historically, underinvestment has left Canada vulnerable to critical capacity shortages,
particularly in fill and finish, the final stage of manufacturing that includes sterilizing,
filling, sealing and labelling vials of vaccines.
o 2021-22: 350
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change (350)
- Funding for COVID-19 surge capacity
o Funding to stabilize key resources and operations to maintain a sustained response to
the COVID-19 pandemic in four key areas.
 Strengthened Surveillance, Data, Guidance, and Scientific Capacity;
 Laboratory Research, Response and Support;
 Emergency Management Operations; and
 Sustaining Horizontal Operations and Coordination to Support COVID-19
Response.
o 2021-22: 424.7
o 2022-23: 339.5
o Net change: (85.2)
- Funding for the sero-surveillance consortium
o Funding to establish and support the activities of the Canadian COVID-19 ImmunityTask
Force (CITF). The mandate of the CITF is to conduct a series of serological studies that
will determine the extent of SARS-CoV-2 infection in the Canadian population and in
specific high risk subgroups in order to better understand potential immunity; and
o Deliver a clear and comprehensive Pan-Canadian sero-surveillance strategy that aligns
researchers across Canada with the aim of generating best evidence on these (and
other) questions as quickly as possible to inform better management of the epidemicin
the near and medium term.
o 2021-22: 99.2
o 2022-23: 55.6
o Net change: (43.6)
- Funding for COVID-19 advertizing
o Sunset funding to the COVID-19 prevention advertising campaign and for the seasonal
flu vaccination advertising campaign
o 2021-22: 21
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (21)
- Various other decreases under &3.0M
o A total of $10.4 million comprised of various items with funding levels decreases under
$3 million.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: 0
o Net change: (10.4)
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary(in millions)
New and Renewed TB Submissions–Increases
- Funding to maintain daily shift inspection presence in federally registered meat processing
establishments
o The Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) will access $15.6M per year (excluding
$0.8M reserved for accommodation and IT services) in 2021-22 and 2022-23 to maintain
the Daily Shift Inspection Presence program (DSIP) in all federal meat processing
establishments to meet the United States inspection frequency requirement and
maintain market access.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 15.6
o Net change: 15.6
- Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
o CFIA sought Treasury Board approval to renew sunsetting funding in the amount of
$31.4M over two years (2021-22 and 2022-23), to maintain and further strengthen food
safety measures. The measures supported by this funding will maintain and strengthen
Canada’s food safety system by targeting inspection activities to high risk domestic and
imported food and food products, support work with countries wishing to send food to
Canada, and facilitate industry compliance with existing and future food safety
requirements across the food supply chain.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 14.3
o Net change: 14.3
- Funding to address antimicrobial resistance:
o CFIA will receive funding of $7.5 million over five years, from 2021-22 to 2025-26, and
$0.8 million per year ongoing to expand efforts to monitor, prevent and control
antimicrobial resistance and support the appropriate use of antimicrobials in Canada.
Initiatives in the areasof human health, and animal health and in the food chain will
enhance capacity for data analysis to lay the foundation for specific future interventions
for the required federal leadership to slow the development of antimicrobial resistance,
help preservethe effectiveness of existing antimicrobials in humans and animals, reduce
the need for routine use of antimicrobials in food producing animals and help reduce
rates of antimicrobial resistance infections in Canada.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 1.4
o Net change: 1.4
Funding level increases
- Funding to build the new Centre for Plant Health in Sidney, British-Columbia
o As part of the federal government’s commitment to establishing and maintaining
modern federal science infrastructure, Budget 2017 committed $80.0M over five years
to replace the Sidney Centre for Plant Health with a new, world class plant health
research facility to help support the safety of Canada’s agriculture and agri-food sector,
while facilitating trade and economic growth that benefits Canadians.
o Thenew, world-class Centre for Plant Health will support the science outcomes detailed
in the Federal Science and Technology Infrastructure Initiative (FSTII) Memorandum to
Cabinet (MC), help to set the stage for portfolio management of scientific assets and
infrastructure, and implement IM/IT solutions to support federal scientists in their
important work.
o 2021-22: 12
o 2022-23: 25.3
o Net change: 13.2
- Funding to maintain core services at the CFIA
o The CFIA is accessing $147.8M over five years ($11.5M in 2020-21, $27.2M in 2021-22,
$36.3M in 2022-23, 36.3M in 2023-24 and $36.3M in 2024-25) and $36.3M ongoing to
improve the CFIA’s existing domestic and import safety control systems through
increased surveillance and inspection, continue to support Canadian exports through
the inspection and certification of goods and continue the digitization of the Agency’s
internal and public-facing business. This funding is critical to alleviating the resource
pressures faced by the CFIA in responding to new and developing risks and market
opportunities from increased import and export activities.
o 2021-22: 27.2
o 2022-23: 36.3
o Net change: 9.1
- Funding for Food Fraud
o As announced in Budget 2019, CFIA received $2.8M in 2019-20, $5.2M in 2020-21
$4.8M in 2021-22, $5.2M in 2022-23 and $4.8M ongoing.
o Building on its existing programming to prevent fraud in food labeling, with new
funding, the CFIA, in collaboration with HC, will continue to work to strengthen Canada’s
response to food fraud, address known food fraud issues and incorporate modern
targeted methodologies, pursue definitive investigations into potential incidences of
food fraud, and inspections, control actions, investigations and prosecutions where
appropriate.
o 2021-22: 4.8
o 2022-23: 5.2
o Net change: 0.4
- Funding to establish a Canadian Food Safety Information Network
o The CFIA renewed funding of $9.1M over five years ($1.5M in 2020-21, $1.7M in 2021-
22, $2.0M in 2022-23, $2.0M in 2023-24 and $2.0M in 2024-25) and $2.0M per year on
an ongoing basis to activate the CFSIN, and to permit lifecycle maintenance of critical
IM/IT infrastructure enabling CFSIN capabilities. CFSIN is a pan-Canadian “Network of
Networks” that will connect food safety authorities and laboratories to leverage
expertise and information across jurisdictions towards a more preventive and risk-based
food safety system. CFSIN will also provide space for collaboration and coordination of
efforts and resources during emergencies to better protect the health and wellbeing of
Canadians. By having better information to demonstrate the strength of its food safety
system, CFSIN will maintain and improve Canada’s reputation as a trusted producer and
exporter of food products.
o 2021-22: 1.7
o 2022-23: 2
o Net change: 0.3
Other–increases
- Voted increase from Internal transfer from Personnel Operation budget to Non-Pay Operating
budget
o The Agency sought an ongoing transfer, $12.0M from operating pay to $15.2M
operating non pay, to better align reference levels with annual spending requirements.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: 3.2
o Net change: 3.2
- Funding for Collective Bargaining:
o A total increase of $2.7M in 2022-23 related to collective agreement funding received
by the department.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: 2.7
o Net change: 2.7
- Votedincrease from Internal transfer from Personnel Capital budget to Non-Pay Capital budget
o The Agency sought an ongoing transfer, $4.0M from capital pay to $5.1M capital non
pay, to better align reference levels with annual spending requirements.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: 1.1
o Net change: 1.1
- Legal Services employee benefit plan adjustment
o CFIA received $0.8M of ongoing funding from 2022-23 onward to account for the
implementation of comprehensive EBP rates for legal services.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: 0.8
o Net change: 0.8
- Transfer from Global Affairs Canada for staff on missions abroad
o Transfer from GAC to the CFIA in the amount of $0.3M to adjust funding previously
provided for departmental staff located at missions abroad. The transfer will be on an
ongoing basis.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 0.3
o Net change: 0.3
Funding Level–Decreases
- Funding to digitize export certification for food, plant and animal products
o Budget 2019 announced funding of $25.1M over 5 years ($2.5M in 2019-20, $5.7M in
2020-21, $6.3M in 2021-22, $5.5M in 2022-23 and $5.2M in 2023-24) for the CFIA to
continue digitizing its export certification activities. This is in line with the Government’s
commitment to providing Canadians with reliable, accessible and secure services that
are seamless and digitally enabled.
o 2021-22: 6.3
o 2022-23: 5.5
o Net change: (0.8)
Other–decreases
- Statutory decrease from Internal transfer from Personnel Operation budget to Non-Pay
Operating budget
o The Agency sought an ongoing transfer, $12.0M from operating pay to $15.2M
operatingnon pay, to better align reference levels with annual spending requirements
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23 ((3.2)
o Net change: (3.2)
- Travel expenditure reduction
o Budget 2021 approved a reduction to the operating budgets of departments and
agencies with the highest historical travel costs, resulting in combined savings of $1.1
billion over five years, starting in 2021-22, and $222.5 million per year ongoing. For
CFIA, this translates to a reduction of $2.4M annually.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: (2.4)
o Net change: (2.4)
- Reallocation of resources to Shared Services Canada for the Project Government IT Operations
o Budget 2021 approved a permanent reallocation of resources to Shared Services Canada
(SSC) from its 43 partner organizations, effective April 1, 2022, to support the enterprise
funding model for Government IT services. CFIA’s contribution will be $2.2M annually
on an ongoing basis from 2022-23 onward.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: (2.2)
o Net change (2.2)
- Statutory decrease from Internal transfer from Personnel Capital budget to Non-PayCapital
budget
o The Agency sought an ongoing transfer, $4.0M from capital pay to $5.1M capital non
pay, to better align reference levels with annual spending requirements.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: (1.1)
o Net change: (1.1)
- Transfer to Health Canada (HC) forImproving Food Safety
o Transfer from CFIA to HC in the amount of $0.6M in 2022-23 to develop risk profiles for
current and emerging foodborne pathogens and other food hazards. This transfer will
facilitate an effective mechanism by which Department of Health standards, policies,
guidance and risk assessments are applied in order to better support CFIA’s risk-based
approaches for preventive measures as well as risk control actions that improve food
safety measures across Canada.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: (0.6)
o Netchange (0.6)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary (in millions)
New TB Submissions–Increases
- Funding for the Center for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies
(CRPPHE)
o The establishment of the CRPPHEwill ensure that, between and during pandemics and
other health emergencies, Canada has access to the best available research evidence to
prevent, prepare for, respond to and recover from these crises. The Centre will develop
and expand Canada’s capacityto fund, conduct, and apply this research.
o The CRPPHE will help protect the health of all Canadians by developing and mobilizing
well-coordinated research for pandemic and health emergency preparedness,
prevention, response and recovery that contributes meaningfully to timely equitable
and effective government actions.
o $18.2 million per year starting in 2021-22 (provided through Supps A) and on-going.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 18.2
o Net change: 18.2
- Funding for Pediatric Cancer Research–Budget 2021
o As announcedin Budget 2021, a total of $30 million was allocated to CIHR over three
years to fund pediatric cancer research leading to the development of new scientifically
proven treatments and cures that can lead to better outcomes and healthier lives for
young patients.
o With this funding, CIHR will:
o Support excellent investigator-initiated research in pediatric cancer; and
o Create a Pediatric Cancer Consortium to synergize efforts and drive research results
forward which includes training the next generation of researchers.
o $0.3 million in 2021-22 (provided through Supps C), $14.9 million in 2022-23, and $14.6
million in 2023-24.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 14.9
o Net change: 14.9
- Funding for diabetes prevention–budget 2021
o As announced in Budget 2021, a total of $35million was allocated to PHAC ($15 million)
and CIHR ($20 million), as follows:
 Research and Surveillance ($22.3 million, $20 million to CIHR)
 Diabetes Challenge Prize ($10 million)
 Development of a National Framework for Diabetes ($2.7 million).
o With this$20 million, CIHR will develop, launch, and deliver new competitive funding
opportunities and fund research projects relevant to both type 1 and type 2 diabetes
according to international standards of research excellence.
o For CIHR: $4 million per year starting in 2021-22 (provided through Supps C) and ending
in 2025-26.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 4
o Net change: 4
- Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19–Budget 2021
o As announced in Budget 2021, a total of $257 million was allocated to four components,
one of which was $45 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to HC, PHAC, and CIHR
to help develop national mental health and substance use service standards, in
collaboration with P/Ts, Indigenous partners, health organizations, and key
stakeholders.
o Ofthe $45 million, $37.5 million was for HC, $4.5 million for CIHR and $3.0 million for
PHAC.
o The focus of this funding is to develop national mental health, and substance use service
standards through two catalyst grant funding opportunities.
o For CIHR: $2.25 million in each of 2021-22 (provided through Supps B) and in 2022-23.
o 2021-22: 0
o 2022-23: 2.2
o Net change: 2.2
Funding Level Increases
- Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS) Master’s and Doctoral program
o The CGS program provides special recognition andfinancial support to students who are
pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in Canada.
o The increase is a result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting agencies
(NSERC and SSHRC), to re-align with the research landscape.
o 2021-22: 28.6
o 2022-23: 35.5
o Net change ;6.9
Other–increases
- Various other increases
o Relates mainly to employee benefit plan adjustments
o 2021-22: 7.2
o 2022-23: 7.7
o Net change: 0.5
Sunset–Decreases
- Medical Countermeasures (COVID-19)
o As various COVID-19 responses continued to rollout across Canada, CIHR invested the
$15 million in 2021-22 in funding and coordinating continued research and knowledge
mobilization and dissemination efforts on COVID-19.
o 2021-22: 15
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: (15)
- Funding for Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change–Budget 2017
o As announced in Budget 2017, CIHR funded the development and implementation of a
targeted research initiative on health and climate change specific to the underlying
issues of food security and Lyme disease. Funding was time-limited, ending in 2021-22.
o 2021-22: 2.5
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: (2.5)
Funding Level–Decreases
- Canada First Research Excellence Fund (CFREF)
o Launchedin December 2014, the CFREF invested $1.5 billion over 10 years (across the
three granting agencies) to propel Canadian research at universities and colleges from
world-class to world leading in areas that create long-term economic advantages for
Canada.
o The CFREF objectives are to support the full range of research, from fundamental to
applied, and to give institutions the ability to:
 pursue the best in the world for talent and partnership opportunities to enable
breakthrough discoveries;
 seize emerging opportunities and strategically advance their greatest strengths
on the global stage; and
 implement large-scale, transformational and forward-thinking institutional
strategies.
o CFREF is administered by the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of
Canada on behalf of the three granting agencies.
o Economic Action Plan 2015 reaffirmed the Government’s commitment to CFREF and
provided an additional $46 million per year to the granting agencies.
o The decrease is due to time-limited funding for the program’s inaugural competition,
which ends in 2022-23.
o 2021-22: 43.8
o 2022-23: 28.1
o Net change (15.7)
- Networks of Centers of Excellence Program (NCE)
o The program supports large-scale academically led research networks that harness the
creativity and inventivenessof Canadian health, natural, and social scientists and
engineers. Partners from industry, government and not-for-profit organizations
contribute additional expertise and cash and in-kind support.
o The last cohort of renewed funding for the NCEs took place in 2020.
o Since then, funding for the NCE program has been gradually transferred to the New
Frontiers in Research Fund, until fully phased out (CIHR funding is ending in 2023-24).
o 2021-2022: 17.7
o 2022-23: 5.6
o Net change (12.1)
- Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network (DSEN)
o The DSEN is an initiative created by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research and
Health Canada in 2009 to increase the evidence on drug safety and effectiveness
available to regulators, policymakers, health care providers and patients andto build
capacity within Canada to undertake high-quality post-market research in this area.
o A new model design and approach has been developed which will see the transfer of the
majority of the DSEN funding elements to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and
Technology in Health (though Health Canada).
o 2021-22: 8.9
o 2022-23: 3.7
o Net change: (5.2)
- Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR)
o As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the CECR and the
Business-ledNetworks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE) programs are being
consolidated and transferred to the Strategic Innovation Fund (managed by ISED).
o CIHR funding is ending in 2022-23.
o 2021-22: 7.2
o 2022-23: 4.1
o Net change: (3.1)
- Women’s health and economic well-being for a post-COVID-19 recovery
o Transfer to the International Development Research Centre to support actionable
research on how women’s health and their work (paid or unpaid) intersect and interact
in the context of preparing, responding to and recoveryfrom a major health emergency
such as COVID-19.
o CIHR will transfer a total of $9 million to IDRC: $5.6 million in 2021-22 (through Supps C),
$1.8 million in 2022-23, $1.4 million in 2023-24, and $0.3 million in 2024-25.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23: (1.8)
o Net change: (1.8)
- Business-let Network of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE)
o As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the Centres of
Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR) and the BL-NCE programs are
being consolidated and transferred to the Strategic Innovation Fund (managed by ISED).
o CIHR funding is ending in 2023-24.
o 2021-22: 2.4
o 2022-23: 1.5
o Net change: (0.9)
Other–decreases
- Various other decreases:
o CIHR’s reference levels also varies as a result of:
 Tri-agency programs incollaboration with SSHRC and NSERC, for which funding
varies by fiscal year
 time-limited funding received from other federal departments and agencies for
targeted initiatives.
o 2021-22:-
o 2022-23:-
o Net change: (1.8)
Health Canada’s2022-23 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Grants
- Territorial Health Investment Fund
o Purpose/Objectives
 Building on an initial investment of $70 million in contribution funding (2014-15
to 2017-18), the Territorial Health Investment Fund(THIF) was renewed as a
grant program in 2017-18 with an additional $108 million over four years (2017-
18 to 2020-21) and then extended in 2021-22 with an additional $54 million
over two years. In 2021-22 and 2022-23, $12.8 million will be allocated to the
Yukon, $14.2 million to the Northwest Territories, and $27 million to Nunavut.
This funding will enable each territory to continue pursuing innovative activities
in support of strong, sustainable health systems and to offset costs associated
with medicaltravel to support Northerners' access to the health care they need.
o Expected Results
 The THIF supports territorial efforts to innovate and transform their health care
systems and help offset costs associated with medical travel. The expected
results for Northerners are: improved access to health care services; health care
needs being met; and improved health status.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 27,000,000
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 27,000,000
- Innovative Solutions Canada
o Purpose/objectives
 Innovative Solutions Canada is a horizontal Government of Canada initiative,
coordinated by Innovation Science and Economic Development Canada, in
which participating departments and agencies can issue challenges to Canadian
businesses to develop solutions for operational or sector-specific issues and
fund the early stage research and development of these innovations. Health
Canada’s participation will enable innovators and entrepreneurs to generate
novel solutions to help Canadians maintain and improve theirhealth.
o Expected results
 Expected results include the generation of new Canadian Intellectual Property,
commercialization of early stage research and development, and increasing the
employment of highly skilled workers in the Canadian innovation ecosystem.
 Results will be reported under Innovation, Science and Economic Development
Canada's monitoring and evaluation processes which encompass the entirety of
the Innovative Solutions Canada Program, including Health Canada's
participation therein.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 1,400,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 2,000,000
Contributions
- Substance Use and Addictions Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides funding for a wide
range of evidence-informed and innovative problematic substance use
prevention, harm reduction and treatment initiatives across Canada at the
community, regional and national levels. Initiatives target a range of substances,
including opioids, stimulants, cannabis, alcohol, tobacco and vaping products.
 Projects funded by the SUAP contribute to individual capacity and
organizational, system and community level program, policy and practice
change by: preventing problematic substance use and reducing harms;
facilitating treatment serviceand related system enhancements; and, improving
awareness, knowledge, skills and competencies of targeted stakeholders and
Canadians.
o Expected results
 The SUAP provides contribution funding in support of Health Canada’s Canadian
Drug and Substance Strategy, as well as the delivery of three of the
department’s Programs: Cannabis, Tobacco Control and Controlled Substances.
 In addition to providing funding to many community, regional and national
organizations, SUAP also provides funding to the Canadian Centreon Substance
Use and Addictions to fund research on the impact of cannabis legalization and
regulation as well as the Mental Health Commission of Canada to inform and
advance research on the impacts of cannabis use on the mental health of
Canadians.
 It isexpected that through these investments Canadians and stakeholders will
have access to evidence-based information on substance use and increased
availability of harm reduction, safer alternatives and treatment services. This
will lead to better data andresearch evidence on drugs, substance use, and
emerging drug trends as well as a reduction in risk-taking behaviour among
people with problematic drug, alcohol and substance use. These investments
may also have a broader impact on Canadians who use drugs and substances
and result in reduced drug-related harms and deaths in the long term.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 74,569,386
o 2021-2022 main estimates: 115,226,457
o 2022-23 main estimates: 170,638,118
- Contribution to the Canadian Institute for Health Information
o Purpose/objectives
 The Canadian Institute for Health Information (CIHI) is an independent, not-for-
profit organization supported by federal, provincial and territorial governments
(FPT) that provides essential data and analysis on Canada's health system and
the health of Canadians. CIHI was created in 1994 by the FPT Ministers of Health
to address significant gaps in health information.
 Between 1994 and 2018, the Government of Canada allocated approximately
$1,232 million in total to CIHI through a series of contribution agreements. In
early 2018, the current contribution agreement was signed, providing close to
$365 million over five years (2017-18 to 2021-22). Subsequent amendments
valued at an additional $115.9M over six years (2017-18 to 2022-23) are as
follows:
 February 2019, $140,000 to undertake an environmental scan of data
gaps for addiction treatment services.
 December 2019 $500,000 for initiating a pan-Canadian collaborative
project to enhance organ donation and transplantation (ODT) data and
reporting across the country.
 October 2020 $3.405 million in funding to CIHI, in partnership with
Infoway, to continue to advance the ODT data and reporting system
project in 2020-21.
 March 2021 up to $7.245M in fiscal year 2021-22, to enhance timely
data on hospital, ICU, emergency room capacity, long term care and
virtual care in response to the pandemic through the Safe Restart
Agreement, and accelerate work on ODT.
 August 2021, an additional $97,324,979 to allow CIHI to continue its
work until finalization of its Strategic Plan in March 2023.
 Presently, Health Canada funds 81% of CIHI's total budget, while the provincial
and territorial governments contribute 17%. The remaining funds are generated
largely through product sales.
o Expected results
 CIHI will continue to address data gaps in priority areas, including home care,
long-term care, mental health and addictions, hospital capacity and virtual care
in 2022-23. Funding allows CIHI to provide essential information on Canada's
health care systems and the healthof Canadians. CIHI data is used to accelerate
improvements in health care, health system performance and population health
across the continuum of care. CIHI's stakeholders use the broad range of the
Institute's health system databases, measurements and standards, together
with their evidence-based reports and analyses, in their decision-making
processes. CIHI protects the privacy of Canadians by ensuring the confidentiality
and integrity of the health care information they provide.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 99,593,979
o 2021-22 main estimates: 101,373,979
o 2022-23 main estimates: 97,324,497
- Health Care Policy and Strategies Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Health Care Policy and Strategies Program provides time-limited
contribution funding for projects that address specific health care systems
priorities, including palliative and end-of-life care, home and community care,
mental health, and federal and provincial/territorial and other emerging
priorities. Through the implementation of contribution agreements and a
variety of stakeholder engagement activities, Health Canada contributes to the
development and application of effective approaches to support sustainable
improvements to health care systems. The Program also supports the Terry Fox
Research Initiative, Ovarian Cancer Canada, the Sexual and Reproductive Health
Fund, and Medical Assistance in Dying Policy and Practice.
o Expected results
 Program funding will support a wide range of projects designed to ultimately
contribute to improvements in the accessibility, quality, sustainability and
accountability of the health care system. These improvements could ultimately
benefit either specific target populations, or all Canadians. For example,
projects that produce and transfer knowledge in key areas will help improve
Canada’s health care systems and advance health policy. Other projects will
identify, develop, implement, assess and promote new or modified tools,
approaches and best practices that respond to identified health care system
priorities and promote people-centred health care. Another range of projects
will identify, develop, implement, assess and promote training and skills
development, standards,products and technological solutions that will help
modernize health care systems delivery.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 33,618,129
o 2021-22 main estimates: 46,987,703
o 2022-23 main estimates: 85,875,248
- Contribution to Canada Health Infoway
o Purpose/objectives
 Canada Health Infoway (Infoway) is an independent, not-for-profit corporation
that is federally funded to work with jurisdictions and other stakeholders to
support the development and adoption of digital health technologies across
Canada. Between 2001 and 2010, the Government of Canada invested $2.1
billion in Infoway, through grants or up-front multi-year funding, to focus on
electronic health records, and other priorities in digital health. In 2016 Infoway
received an additional $50 million over two years via a Contribution Agreement
to support short-term digital health activities in e-prescribing and telehomecare.
This was followed by an additional Contribution Agreement in 2017 for $300
million over five years to expand e-prescribing and virtual care initiatives,
support the continued adoption and use of electronic medical records, help
patients to access their own health records electronically, and better link
electronic health record systems to improve access by all providers and
institutions. Budget 2019further provided $36.5 million over five years with $5
million per year ongoing, for Infoway and the Canadian Institute for Health
Information to support the creation of a pan-Canadian data and performance
reporting system for Organ Donation and Transplantation. Finally, in 2020,
Infoway was allocated $50 million over two years via a Contribution Agreement
to support provinces, territories and others to expand virtual health services to
Canadians.
 As part of its Driving Access to Care Strategy, Infoway is currently focussing on:
driving digital health adoption by collaborating with stakeholders to improve
access to care, addressing challenges, and ensuring that virtual care is a viable
and effective option for all; and accelerating pan-Canadian interoperability by
improving effective data sharing, supporting sharing of resources across
jurisdictions, and supporting jurisdictional efforts. Further, Infoway continues to
work with the Canadian Institute for Health Information and key stakeholders to
support thecreation of data management solutions for a pan-Canadian data
and reporting system for organ donation and transplantation.
o Expected results
 Expected results of the Canada Health Infoway Program include:
provincial/territorial governments and stakeholders are engaged in expanding
digital health technologies; health care providers and patients access digital
health technologies and digital health information; and health care providers
and patients are equipped with the knowledge and skills to use digital health
technologies and digital health information. Over time, this work is expected to
lead to: health care providers using digital health technologies to provide more
efficient and high quality health care; and patients using digital health
technologies to manage and/or improve their health. The Program will
ultimately lead to a modern and sustainable health care system where
Canadians have access to appropriate and effective health care.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 84,380,788
o 2021-22 main estimates: 85,554,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 47,580,000
- Contribution to the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
o Purpose/objectives
 The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is an independent, not-for-
profit corporation established to implement the Canadian Strategy for Cancer
Control. This Strategy was developed in consultation with Canadians, including
cancer experts and stakeholders with the following objectives:
 Reducing the expected number of new cases of cancer among
Canadians;
 Enhancing the quality of life of those living with cancer; and,
 Lessening the likelihood of Canadians dying from cancer.
 CPAC is the sole recipient of the Contribution to the Canadian Partnership
Against Cancer Program. CPAC received $250 million from the federal
government for its first five-year term (2007 to 2012) and $241 million for its
second five-year term (2012 to 2017). Budget 2016 confirmed ongoing funding
for CPAC, which is governed by a five-year agreement (2017 to 2022) for $237.5
million. Health Canada is currently reviewing CPAC’s funding proposal for fiscal
year 2022-23 to 2027-28.
o Expected results
 While Budget 2016 confirmed ongoing funding for CPAC, it continues to be
funded in five-year terms, with its current contribution agreement expiring in
March 2022. The next contribution agreement for 2022-23 to 2026-27 is yet to
be finalized.
 CPAC is expected to continue to enhance cancer control through knowledge
management and the coordination of efforts among the provinces and
territories, cancer experts, stakeholder groups, and Indigenous organizations to
champion change, improve health outcomes related to cancer,and leverage
existing investments.
 A coordinated, knowledge-centered approach to cancer control is expected to
significantly reduce the economic burden of cancer, alleviate current pressures
on the health care system, and bring together information for all Canadians, no
matter where they live.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 50,943,947
o 2021-22 main estimates: 52,500,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 47,500,000
- Official Languages Health Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Official Languages Health Program has a total budget of$191.2 million over
five years (2018-2023), and $38.46 million per year ongoing after 2023. The
Program supports the federal government's commitment to maintain a strong
and effective publicly funded health care system by ensuring that official
language minority communities (OLMCs) have access to bilingual health services
in the language of their choice. Through the implementation of contribution
agreements and micro-grants, Health Canada supports investments that
improve the active offer of health servicesfor OLMCs, through training and
retention of health care providers, networking activities and innovative projects
that increase access to health services for OLMCs.
o Expected results
 Program funding will support training and retention of health professionals,
health networking and innovative projects to improve access to health services
for OLMCs. These activities are expected to increase access to bilingual health
professionals in OLMCs, and to increase the active offer of health services in the
minority language to address the health needs to OLMCs.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 37,364,999
o 2021-22 main estimates: 37,475,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 37,600,000
- Canada Brain Research Fund Program
o Purpose/objectives
 In Budgets 2011, 2016, and 2019, and through a subsequent funding
commitment in 2021, the Government of Canada provided a cumulative $200
million, in matched funding with non-federal government donors, for the
Canada Brain Research Fund Program "to support the very best Canadian
neuroscience” and “to help the medical community better understand the brain
and brain health.” The Program provides funding for the Brain Canada
Foundation (Brain Canada) which fundraises to match the federal contribution
with donations from its private and charitable-sector donors and partners and
then allocates grants to researchers across Canada. The Program’s objectives
are to: 1) to serve as a focal point for private investment in brain research by
attracting private and charitable donations to match federal funding; and, 2) to
support research that advances knowledge of the brain through grants to
researchers.
o Expected results
 Funding for brain research is expected to lead to discoveries that will inform the
development of prevention, diagnostic, therapeutic, clinical, technological and
health system solutions for brain diseases/disorders. Ultimately, these advances
are expected to improve the health and quality of life of Canadians who are at
risk of or affected by brain diseases/disorders. To contribute to this outcome,
the recipient, in partnership with donors and private organizations, funds merit-
based research awards across Canada, to: support interdisciplinary and
collaborative research; increase access to equipment, expertise and data across
research networks; and develop the next generation of Canadian brain
researchers.
 In 2022-23, Brain Canada will expand its investment in knowledge mobilization,
including through targeted research awards. It will also continue to advance
equity, diversity and inclusion throughout its organizational policies and
activities, including the research selection processes, as well as by funding
research initiatives seeking to improve health outcomes for diverse groups.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 10,851,675
o 2021-22 main estimates: 20,000,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 31,682,739
- Contribution to the Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
o Purpose/objectives
 The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH) is an
independent, not-for-profit agency funded by Canadian federal,provincial, and
territorial governments to provide credible, impartial and evidence-based
information about the clinical/cost-effectiveness and optimal use of drugs and
other health technologies to Canadian health care decision makers.
 The contribution agreement provides financial support for CADTH's core
business activities, namely, the Common Drug Review, pan-Canadian Oncology
Drug Review, Health Technology Assessments and Optimal Use Projects.
Through these activities, CADTH is able to create and disseminate evidence-
based information about the effectiveness and cost of drugs and non-drug
technologies. Provinces and territories use this information to help decide
whether or not public health plans should include the particular health products
in question.
o Expected results
 Additional funding announced in Budget 2017 is supporting CADTH's ongoing
transition to a health technology management organization in order to deliver
results that better meet the needs of the healthcare system.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 26,058,769
o 2021-22 main estimates: 29,058,769
o 2022-23 main estimates: 31,248,352
- Contribution funding to Improve Health Care Quality and Patient Safety
o Purpose/objectives
 In late 2020, the Canadian Foundation for Healthcare Improvement and the
Canadian Patient Safety Institute amalgamated their organizations, forming
Healthcare Excellence Canada (HEC). As such, the Department’s annual funding
to each organization has been combined and is now dispersed directly to HEC
via the Contribution to Improve Health CareQuality and Patient Safety Program.
 This Program supports the federal government's interest in achieving an
accessible, high quality, sustainable and accountable health system adaptable to
the needs of Canadians. It is designed to: find and promote innovators and
innovations, drive rapid adoption and spread of quality and safety innovations,
build capacities to enable excellence in healthcare and catalyze policy change.
o Expected results
 In the short-term, HEC’s work will contribute to: spreading promising
innovations, sustaining meaningful relationships with those HEC works with and
assisting in preparing health leaders to lead improvement efforts. In the
medium-term, HEC’s work will contribute to: assisting the settings represented
by the intermediaries HEC reaches (e.g. long-term care facilities, primary care
facilities) in employing evidence-informed practices, implementing policy
changes to catalyze health quality and patient safety improvement and
developing cultures conducive to improvement. In the long-term, HEC’s work
will contribute to sustaining, spreading and scaling improvements as well as
assisting settings reached by HEC in providing high-quality, safe, patient-
orientated and culturally safe care
o 2020-21 expenditures: 31,300,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 26,300,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 24,600,000
- COVID-19 Safe Restart Agreements transfer payment program
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of the COVID-19 Safe Restart Agreements Program is to enhance
Canadian testing, contact tracing and data management/sharing for COVID-19
to manage the pandemic.
 The objectives of the Program are to:
 Testing Stream: Spread and scale evidence-based approaches to
national testing, screening and surveillance capacity to help contain the
virus and support economic restart;
 Contact Tracing Stream: Enhance the capacity to perform contact
tracing and advance the implementation of tools and approaches to
slow virus transmission, including the COVID Alert exposure notification
app to reduce strain on tracing; and
 DataManagement Stream: Modernize health data management to
enhance the sharing of relevant public health and health data and
information across all orders of governments.
o Expected results
 These investments are intended to support 13 Provinces/Territories (PT)efforts
to conduct more testing, perform more contact tracing, and improve the sharing
of data to slow the transmission of COVID-19.
 The following immediate result shows stakeholders, provinces and territories
are engaged in health care improvements in priority areas of testing and
screening, contact tracing, and data management. Specifically that all PTs are
submitting data on all key variables on 100% of their case reports in the
National COVID-19 Case Dataset, all PTs report initiating COVID-19 contact
tracing following the identification of a positive case to 24 hours, and all
jurisdiction have expanded their testing capacity. Ultimately, these changes will
contribute to Canada having modern and sustainable health care systems.
 Recipients will work towards reducing the number of national Covid-19 cases,
increasing the number of PCR tests performed per day and shortening Covid-19
contact tracing turnaround time between positive case determination and when
tracing begins.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 22,500,000
- Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Program objectives are to ensure that, for the remainder of their lives,
eligible thalidomide survivors:
 Receive ongoing tax-free payments based on their level of disability; and
 Have transparent and timely access to the Extraordinary Medical
Assistance Fund.
o Expected results:
 Expected results are that thalidomide survivors will access care, treatment
and/or support which in turn will contribute to their aging with dignity.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 10,073,011
o 2021-22 main estimates: 12,503,960
o 2022-23 main estimates: 17,128,148
- Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Mental Health Commission of Canada (MHCC), an arm's length, not-for-
profit organization, was established in March 2007 with a ten-year mandate to
improve health and social outcomes for people and their families living with
mental illness. Between 2007 and 2017, the Government of Canada invested
$130 million in the MHCC through a grant, to develop a mental health strategy
for Canada, conduct an anti-stigma campaign and create a knowledge exchange
centre. In 2016, the MHCC's mandate was renewed for a 10-year period, from
2017-18 to 2026-27 to advance work on mental health priorities, including
linkages to substance use, suicide prevention, support for at-risk populations
and engagement. The Government of Canada has made a contribution of $14.25
million per year since 2017-18 for these mandated priority areas.
o Expected results
 The Mental Health Commission of Canada Contribution Program is expected to
contribute to the improved mental health and well-being of Canadians,
specifically in the areas of problematic substance use, suicide prevention, and
stigma reduction.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 14,250,000
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 14,250,000
- Improving Affordable Access to Prescription Drugs Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Government of Canada’s purpose in funding the Improving Affordable
Access to Prescription Drugs Program is to help willing jurisdictions improve the
affordability and accessibility of their public drug plans, as well as provide key
learnings to help inform future decisions around national pharmacare. The
objectives ofthe Program are to enhance and improve alignment across public
drug plan formularies and, support more affordable access to prescription
drugs.
 PEI was the first province to sign an agreement with the Government of Canada
to accelerate the implementationof national universal pharmacare. Lessons
learned from PEI’s efforts will inform the Government of Canada’s work to
advance national universal pharmacare with other willing provinces and
territories.
o Expected results
 Expected immediate results include an increased understanding of public drug
coverage differences among provinces and territories, and an increased capacity
to implement changes to public drug plans. Intermediate results include
identifying prescription drugs that are more affordable for residents, as well as,
the residents having access to a list of prescription drugs that better meet their
needs, and public drug plans. In the long-term, the Program will result in
improved alignment across provincial and territorial public drug plans and
increase the knowledge to inform future decisions by all levels of government
on the implementation of national pharmacare.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 10,700,000
- Organs, Tissues, and Blood Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The Organs, Tissues, and Blood Program provides support for safe, effective,
accessible and responsive organ, tissue and blood systems that will improve and
extend the quality of the lives of Canadians while respecting federal, provincial,
and territorialscopes of authority. Canadian Blood Services (CBS) is the sole
recipient of the Program funding.
o Expected results:
 With the support of the Organs, Tissues and Blood Program, CBS is expected to
generate numerous knowledge products and learning events and to play a role
in public education, engagement and awareness. It also plays a significant role in
training highly qualified people in important areas such as basic and applied
research. CBS develops collaborative arrangements, establishes partnerships
and identifies and responds to emerging issues related to organ, tissue and
blood systems, in collaboration with the provinces and territories as
appropriate.
 Various stakeholders, including Health Canada, use the knowledge generated by
blood research and development projects and organ donation and
transplantation projects to inform changes to practices and standards. This will
contribute to greater safety, effectiveness, accessibility and responsiveness of
the organ, tissue and blood systems to improve and extend the quality of lives
of Canadians
o 2020-21 expenditures: 10,046,381
o 2021-22 main estimates: 8,780,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 8,580,000
- Chemicals Management Plan Engagement and Outreach contribution Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of this Programis to support the capacity of Canadians, with an
emphasis on vulnerable populations and Indigenous peoples, to engage in the
Chemicals Management Plan (CMP) and environmental health programs,
allowing for a broad range of expertise and opinions to be heardand
considered. The Program will also support partnerships to increase outreach to
Canadians about environmental health issues, using tailored tools and
messaging. This will include raising awareness of the impacts of chemicals on
human health and how toreduce the risks.
o Expected results
 The expected results are:
 Canadians have improved capacity to participate in the implementation
of the CMP and broader environmental health initiatives; and
 Canadians and intermediaries have access to information and funding to
minimize environmental health risks.
 Performance indicators will be published as part of the Call for Proposals, and
progress will be monitored through annual reports from recipients.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 418,000
- Random Outreach Contribution Program
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of the Radon Outreach Contribution Program is to protect and
improve human health and well-being in Canada from the impacts of indoor
radon exposure, by aiding in the education of Canadians about the importance
of testing their homes, schools and workplaces for radon and reducing the
radon levels where necessary.
o Expected results
 The expected results are:
 Canadians and stakeholders are aware of strategies and tools to reduce
exposure to radon; and
 Canadians and stakeholders are enabled to manage risk from exposure
to radiation.
 These expected results will be measured by the following indicators:
 Percentage of Canadians surveyed who are knowledgeable about radon
… Target: 65%by March 31, 2023
 Percentage of Canadian homeowners surveyed who have tested their homes for
radon … Target: 10% by March 31, 2026
o 2020-21 expenditures: 237,477
o 2021-22 main estimates: 250,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 250,000
Other transfer payments
- Payments to provinces and territories for the Purpose of Home Care and Mental Health
o Purpose/objectives
 The Government of Canada is investing $11 billion over ten years (from 2017 to
2027) to support the provinces and territories in improving access to home and
community care ($6 billion) and mental health and addictions ($5 billion)
services in their jurisdictions, in accordance with the Common Statement of
Principles for Shared Health Priorities which was jointly agreed to by federal,
provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health (with the exception of
Quebec) in August 2017.
 Governments agreed to common objectives in each of home and community
care and mental health and addiction services, and in particular to improving
access to mental health andaddictions through one or more of the following
areas of action:
 Expanding access to community-based mental health and addiction
services for children and youth (age 10-25), recognizing the
effectiveness of early interventions to treat mild to moderate mental
health disorders;
 Spreading evidence-based models of community mental health care and
culturally-appropriate interventions that are integrated with primary
health services; and,
 Expanding availability of integrated community-based mental health
and addiction services for people with complex health needs.
 Similarly, on home and community care, FPT governments agreed to work
together to improve access to services through one or more of the following
areas of action:
 Spreading and scaling evidence-based models of home and community
care that are more integrated and connected to primary health care;
 Enhancing access to palliative and end-of-life care at home or in
hospices;
 Increasing support for caregivers; and,
 Enhancing home care infrastructure, such asdigital connectivity,
remote monitoring technology and facilities for community based
service delivery.
 Governments also agreed to develop a focused set of common indicators to
measure progress on these priority areas. The Canadian Institute for Health
Information (CIHI) led a collaborative process which culminated in May 2018
when federal, provincial and territorial Ministers of Health endorsed a suite of
12 common indicators to be implemented over the coming years. CIHI will
continue to work with governments across Canada to report annually on these
indicators.
 Following agreement on the Common Statement of Principles for Shared Health
Priorities in 2017, the federal government negotiated and signed the first of two
sequential bilateral agreements with all13 provinces and territories which set
out details of how each jurisdiction is using federal investments to improve
access to home and community care and mental health and addiction services.
The bilateral agreements with the provinces and territories will be renewed
starting in 2021-22 for the remaining five years of the ten-year commitment.
o Expected results
 It is expected that through these investments Canadians will experience tangible
improvements in access to home and community care as well as mentalhealth
and addictions services. This will lead to better health outcomes and a more
sustainable health care system, as care is shifted from expensive hospital care to
more patient-centric settings in the home and in the community. These
investments could also have a broader, positive impact on Canada's economy,
by making the health care system more sustainable in the long term, and by
enhancing workforce productivity and social participation.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 1,346,991,846
o 2021-22 main estimates: 2,000,000,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 1,800,310,000
Health Portfolio’s 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Public Health Agency of Canada-2022-23 Main Estimates
Summary of Transfer Payment Program Variances
Note: Matches pageproofs found on II-175 of the Main Estimates document
Grants
- Grants to individuals and organizations in support of health promotion projects in the areas of
building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnershipbuilding/intersectoral collaboration
o Explanation of variance
 New COVID-19 funding
 $10.0M to support the mental health of those most affected by the
COVID-19 Pandemic.
 The purpose of this program is to address the mental health impacts of
the COVID-19 pandemic.
 The funding will be used to fund the delivery and evaluation of diverse
mental health promotion and mental illness prevention interventions, in
addition to equipping service providers and organizations to address
new and complex needs emerging from the pandemic. These activities
are an important complement to treatment and specialist services, and
can help reduce demands on the health care system.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 13,030,820
o 2021-22 main estimates: 53m459,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 67,953,882
o Main estimates variance: 14,494,882
- Grants to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
o Explanation fo variance
 Reprofile COVID-19 funding
 Reprofiled $50.0M for Sero-Surveillance into 2022-23. Previous FY had
funding for $94.0Mcausing a variance for $44.1M.
 The purpose of this program is for COVID-19 immunity task force (CITF)
funded studies (e.g. recruiting, laboratory processing).
 The funding will be used to fund the Canadian COVID-19 Immunity Task
Force to connect and leverage expertise to deliver a coordinated
agenda, using serological surveillance (testing of antibodies in the
blood), to measure the scope and scale and rapidly feed this
information to decision-makers.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 45,876,512
o 2021-22 main estimates:100,983,060
o 2022-23 main estimates: 54,100,000
o Main estimates variance: (46,883,060)
- Grants to eligible non-profit international organizations in support of their projects or programs
on health
o Explanation of variance
 Transfer $167K from Health Canada to support activities related to chemical
management, capacity building and climate change. HC will leverage PHAC’s
International Terms and Conditions to make payments to international
organizations.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 1,788,209
o 2021-22 main estimates: 2,180, 000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 2,347,119
o Main estimates variance: 167,119
- Diabetes Challenge
o Explanation of variance
 New grant program 2022-23
 The purpose of this program is to provide opportunities to engage,
collaborate and support activities of key stakeholders, including
provinces, territories and not-for-profit organizations.
 The funding will be used to help surface novel approaches to diabetes
prevention and promote the development and testing of new
interventions to reduce the risks associated withType 2 diabetes.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates : 0
o 2022-23 mai nestimates: 633,179
o Main estimates variance: 633,179
- Grants to graduate students, post-graduate students and Canadian post-secondary institutions
to increase professionalcapacity and training levels in order to build an effective public health
sector
o Explanation of variance
 Transfer $800K to CIHR to support the Health Research Training Platform pilot
within the research area of “Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness
for LGBTQ/2S Populations.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 1,260,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 460,00
o Main estimates variance: (800,000)
Contributions
- Contributions to individuals and organizations to support health promotion projects inthe areas
of building community capacity, stimulating knowledge development and dissemination, and
partnership building/intersectoral collaboration
o Explanation of variance
 New COVID-19 funding
 $68.4M to Support the Mental Health of those Most Affected bythe
COVID-19 Pandemic.
o The purpose of this program is to address the mental health
impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
o The funding will be used to fund the delivery and evaluation of
diverse mental health promotion and mental illness prevention
interventions, in addition to equipping service providers and
organizations to address new and complex needs emerging
from the pandemic. These activities are an important
complement to treatment and specialist services, and can help
reduce demands on the health care system.
 $6.0M Reprofile funding for Dementia.
o The purpose of this program is to support awareness raising
initiatives, focused on actions that can be taken to prevent
dementia, reduce stigma, and encourage and support
communities to become more dementia-inclusive.
o The funding will be used to support the development and
implementation of a national public education/awareness
campaign, targeted awareness raising initiatives, and initiatives
that support access to and use of dementia guidance.
o 2020-21expenditures: 96,878,726
o 2021-22 main estimates: 82,002,726
o 2022-23 main estimates: 158,361,497
o Main estimates variance: 76,358,771
- Contributions to non-profit organizations to support, on a long-term basis, the development and
provision of preventative and early intervention services aimed at addressing the health and
developmental problems experienced by young children at risk in Canada
o Explanation of variance:
 No variance
o 2020-21 expenditures: 81,214,320
o 2021-22 main estimates: 83,978,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 83,978,000
o Main estimates variance: 0
- Contribution to individuals and organizations in support of public health infrastructure
o Explanation of variance:
 New COVID-19 funding
 $18.5M funding increase to enable Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites
Program (SVISP).
o The purpose of this program is for the recipients to continue
operating their respective voluntary isolation projects until the
end of 2022-23.
o The funding will be used to fund the additional testing
requirements for Omicron and provide border andtesting
funding to the Agency in 2022-23. Further developments on the
long-term border strategy will inform the future funding
requirements.
 Vote Transfer
 $6.0M from operating to contribution funding for National Microbiology
Laboratory (NML) Innovative Technology.
o The purpose of this program is for research, development and
modelling initiatives for the COVID-19 response.
o The funding will be used to co-invest in a portfolio of P/T labs
driven project to make more effective use of existing resources
(equipment, personnel, and networks).
o 2020-21 expenditures: 40,266,030
o 2021-22 main estimates: 49,500,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 75,500,000
o Main estimates variance: 26,000,000
- Contributions to incorporated local or regional non-profit Aboriginal organizationsand
institutions for the purpose of developing early intervention programs for Aboriginal pre-school
children and their families
o Explanation of variance:
 New COVID-19 funding
 $21.7M for Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) Program
Transformation.
 The purpose of this program is to ensure that more Indigenous families have
access to high-quality Early Learning and Child Care Programming.
 The funding will be used to fund improvements of the quality and accessibility
of care, and contribute to building, training and retaining a skilled workforce.
Funding will include new investments in Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and
Northern Communities (AHSUNC).
o 2020-21 expenditures: 43,825,624
o 2021-22 main estimates: 35,427,272
o 2022-23 main estimates: 58,221,001
o Main estimates variance: 22,793,729
- Pan-Canadian vaccine injury support program
o Explanation of variance
 New contribution program in 2022-23
 $19M for vaccine injury support program.
 The purpose of this program is to address a longstanding gap in Canada’s
national immunization programming and bring Canada in line with other G7
countries.
 The funding will be used to strengthen national immunization efforts by
ensuring that all people in Canada who have experienced a serious and
permanent injury have fair and timely access to financial support.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 0
o 2021-22 main estimates: 0
o 2022-23 main estimates: 19,000,000
o Main estimates variance: 19,000,000
- Contributions in support of the Federal Initiative on HIV/AIDS
o Explanation of variance
 Vote Transfer
 $430K from operating to contributions to support the 24th International AIDS
Conference in Montreal in July 2022.
 The purpose of this program is for the AIDS 2022 conference, presenting a
unique opportunity for the Government of Canada to demonstrate its
commitment to meet the newly adopted 2025 interim global HIV targets, on the
path towards the 2030 global targets of zero new HIV infections, zero AIDS
deaths, and zero stigma and discrimination.
 The funding will be used to support the delivery of AIDS 2022 in Canada,
including program management, logistics, IT, etc. The funding provided to a
community based organization that will run the Canada Pavilion will support
both a virtual and in-person Canada Pavilion in the AIDS 2022 exhibition hall,
which will include Canadian programming and resources, a space for dialogue
and networking and scholarships for approximately 100 people living with HIV
and key populations
o 2020-21 expenditures: 23,013,357
o 2021-22 main estimates: 15,631,758
o 2022-23 mainestimates: 16,061,758
o Main estimates variance: 430,000
- Contributions to Canadian Blood Services and/or other designated transfusion/transplantation
centres to support adverse event surveillance activities
o Explanation of variance:
 No variance
o 2020-21 expenditures: 1,460,998
o 2021-22 main estimates: 2,150,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 2,150,000
o Main estimates variance: 0
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Grants
- Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC)
o Purpose/objectives
 The ISC program supports the generation of new and unique intellectual
property (IP), stimulation of Research and Development collaborations, and
growth of small businesses in the Canadian innovation ecosystem.
o Expected results:
 CFIA's Innovative Solutions Canada grants will promote the development of
innovative approaches to improve sector outcomes.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 299,646
o 2021-22 main estimates: 750,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 613,779
Contributions
- Federal Assistance Program (FAP)
o Purpose/objectives
 The FAP supports projects and initiatives that advance CFIA's strategic outcome
of a safe and accessible food supply and plant and animal resource base.
o Expected results:
 The expected results include:
 a. scientific and technical knowledge is advanced and/or enhanced
 b. individual knowledge and skills are developed and/or improved
 c. international collaborations are expanded and/or strengthened, and
 d. organizations or initiatives are established or sustained
o 2020-21 expenditures: 294,019
o 2021-22 main estimates: 600,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 600,000
Other transfer payments
- Compensation Payments
o Purpose/objectives
 Compensate Canadians, in accordance with the appropriate regulations, for
plants or animals ordered destroyed for thepurpose of disease control.
o Expected results:
 In accordance with the Health of Animals Act and the Plant Protection Act,
owners and/or producers will be compensated for ordered destruction of
animals or plants for the purpose of disease control. Compensation will be
provided according to the market value of the animals or plants.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 10,346,580
o 2021-22 main estimates: 12,500,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 12,500,000
Health Portfolio’s 2022-23 Main Estimates Summary of Transfer Payment Programs
Canadian Institutes of Health Research–2022-23 Main estimated
Grants for research projects and personnel support transfer payment program
- Funding for the Centre for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies
(CRPPHE)
o Purpose/objectives
 The primary objective of the CRPPHE is to protect the health of all Canadians by
developing and mobilizing health research for pandemic and health emergency
preparedness, prevention, response and recovery that contributes meaningfully
to timely, equitable and effective responses and recovery.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 This investment will build on Canada’s research capacity to prevent, prepare for,
respond to and recover from pandemics and health emergencies. Bolstered by
strategic funding opportunities and activities that advance knowledge, build and
sustain critical research infrastructure and relationships, and mobilize research
evidence, this increased capacity inpandemic preparedness and health
emergencies research will contribute meaningfully to the health and well-being
of Canadians.
o 2020-21 expenditures:-
o 2021-22 main estimates:-
o 2022-23 main estimates: 15,000,000*
- Funding for Pediatric Cancer Research–Budget 2021
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose to fund pediatric cancer research leading to the development of
new scientifically proven treatments and cures that can lead to better outcomes
and healthier lives for young patients.
 With this funding, CIHR will:
 support excellent investigator-initiated research in pediatric cancer; and
 create a Pediatric Cancer Consortium to synergize efforts and drive research
results forward which includes training the next generation of researchers.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 Will support the mobilization of health research related to pediatric cancer, with
the potential for major impacts on the health and wellbeing of pediatric cancer
patients and their families through improved evidence-based decision-making.
o 2020-21 expenditures:-
o 2021-22 main estimates:-
o 2022-23 main estimates: 14,113,000*
- Funding for diabetes prevention–budget 2021
o Purpose/objectives
 CIHR will develop, launch, and deliver new competitive funding opportunities
and fund research projects relevant to both type 1 and type 2 diabetes
according to international standards of research excellence.
 The majority of the new investments will be made in type 1 diabetes in
partnership with JDRF Canada, who have committed to match $15 million of
CIHR funding 1:1 to support new research.
 In addition, new investments will be made in type 2 diabetes focused on
optimizing prevention and treatment among youth and young adults,
particularly those disproportionately affected by diabetes.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 Will support the mobilization of the health research community in key areas of
strategic importance, with the potential for major impacts on health and
improved evidence-based decision-making through:
 Development of more precise approaches to treatment for diabetes
 Development of evidence-based prevention approaches generated through
research that are appropriate for children and young adults, in particular, for
ethnic groups that are disproportionately affected by diabetes.
 Building the evidence base to improve diabetes prevention and treatment
o 2020-21 expenditures:-
o 2021-22 main estimates:-
o 2022-23 main estimates: 3,770,000*
- Supporting Mental Health Affected by COVID-19–Budget 2021
o Purpose/objectives
 The focus of this funding is to develop national mental health, and substance
use service standards through two catalyst grant funding opportunities.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 Research will contribute to the evidence base to inform the development of the
standards, which are expected to positively impact the mental health of
Canadians and reduce problematic substance use by supporting the delivery of
accessible and high-quality mental health and substance use services
consistently and equitably.
o 2020-21 expenditures:-
o 2021-22 main estimates:-
o 2022-23 main estimates: 1,914,713*
- Medical Countermeasures (COVID-19)
o Purpose/objectives
 As various COVID-19 responses continued to rollout across Canada, CIHR used
the $15 million for the Centre for Research on Pandemic Preparedness and
Health Emergencies in 2021-22 to fund and coordinate continued research and
knowledge mobilization and dissemination efforts on COVID-19.
 CIHR also reprofiled $111.04 million of the Medical Countermeasures 3 funding
from 2020-21 into 2021-22 to support COVID-19 research. Along with this
funding, CIHR used the $15 million to invest in a series of competitions designed
in an iterative way in consultation with partners so that these investments
strategically targeted key emerging research priorities and gaps that best
contributed to Canada’songoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and
rapid way (in similar fashion to our response to variants).
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 Sustained, coordinated healthresearch investments in prevention,
preparedness, response and recovery will ensure that the health research
system delivers the evidence that matters most, before, during, and after health
emergencies
o 2020-21 expenditures: 36,260,000*
o 2021-22 main estimates: 15,000,000*
o 2022-23 main estimates:-
- Drug Safety and Effectiveness Network (DSEN)
o Purpose/objectives
 The DSEN is an initiative created by the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and Health Canada in 2009 to increase the evidence on drug safety and
effectiveness available to regulators, policymakers, health care providers and
patients and to build capacity within Canada to undertake high-quality post-
market research in this area.
 A new model design and approach has been developed which will see the
transfer of the majority of the DSEN funding elements to the Canadian Agency
for Drugs and Technology in Health (though Health Canada).
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 DSEN'skey objectives are to increase the:
 evidence on drug safety and effectiveness available to regulators,
policy-makers, health care providers and patients; and
 capacity within Canada to undertake high-quality post-market research
in this area.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 1,712,597
o 2021-22 main estimates: 7,435,516
o 2022-23 main estimates: 3,316,930
- Funding for Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change–Budget 2021
o Purpose/objectives
 CIHR funds were used to develop and implement of a targeted research
initiative onhealth and climate change specific to the underlying issues of food
security and Lyme disease. Funding was time-limited, ending in 2021-22.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program
o Expected results
 Building climate resilience in the areas of Lyme disease and food security in the
North.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 1,915,525*
o 2021-22 main estimates: 2,300,000*
o 2022-23 main estimates:-*
- Women’s health and economic well-being for a post cOVID-19 recovery
o Purpose/objectives
 The objective of the program is to support actionable research on how women’s
health and their work (paid or unpaid) intersect and interact in the context of
preparing, responding to and recovery from a major health emergency such as
COVID-19.
 Specifically, the program will support population and public health research that
addresses UN Research Roadmap for the COVID-19 Recovery’s Priority 3.5:
“How have recent economic changes disproportionately affected women and
women’s health, and how can COVID-19 recovery strategies be inclusive, gender
transformative and health promoting for women?”.
 The decrease represents the transfer of funding to the International
Development Research Centre to support the program.
 *Falls under the “Grants for research projects and personnel support” transfer
payment program.
o Expected results
 Action-oriented, gender-transformative research projects will contribute to the
evidence base to understand the relationships between women’s work and
health before, during andafter COVID-19.
o 2020-21 expenditures:-
o 2021-22 main estimates:-
o 2022-23 main estimates: (1,750,000)*
Other transfer payment programs
- Canada Graduate Scholarship (CGS) Master’s and Doctoral program
o Purpose/objective
 The CGS program provides special recognition and financial support to students
who are pursuing masters and doctoral degrees in a health-related field in
Canada.
 The objective of the master’s component is to help develop research skills and
assist in the training of highly qualified personnelby supporting students who
demonstrate a high standard of achievement in undergraduate and early
graduate studies.
 The objectives of the doctoral component are to reward and retain top-level
graduate students at Canadian institutions, to enable a high-quality research
training experience for award holders and to foster impacts within and beyond
the research environment.
o Expected results
 The increase is a result of the adjustment of the distribution of Canada Graduate
Scholarships allocations within the program, between the three granting
agencies (NSERC and SSHRC), to re-align with the research landscape.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 26,818,458
o 2021-22 main estimates: 28,635,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 35,547,500
- Canada First Research excellence Fund (CFREF)
o Purpose/objective
 Launched in December 2014, the CFREF invested $1.5 billion over 10 years
(across the three granting agencies) to propel Canadian research at universities
and colleges from world-class to world leading in areas that create long-term
economic advantages for Canada.
 The decrease is due to time-limited funding for the inaugural competition,
which ends in 2022-23.
o Expected results
 The CFREF objectives are to support the full range of research, from
fundamental to applied, and to give institutions the ability to:
 pursue the best in the world for talent and partnership opportunities to enable
breakthrough discoveries;
 seize emerging opportunities and strategically advance their greatest strengths
on the global stage; and
 implement large-scale,transformational and forward-thinking institutional
strategies.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 43,803,272
o 2021-22 main estimates: 43,803,272
o 2022-23 main estimates: 28,117,817
- Networks of Centres of Excellence Program (NCE)
o Purpose/objective
 The program supports large-scale academically led research networks that
harness the creativity and inventiveness of Canadian health, natural, and social
scientists and engineers. Partners from industry, government and not-for-profit
organizations contribute additional expertiseand cash and in-kind support.
 As per Budget 2018, funding for the NCE program has been gradually
transferred to the New Frontiers in Research Fund, until fully phased out (CIHR
funding is ending in 2023-24).
o Expected results
 NCEs focus on issues that arecritical to Canadians, and to the world by:
 Mobilizing multi-disciplinary research capacity from across Canada.
 Engaging partners from multiple academic institutions and various public and
private-sector organizations.
 Training the next generation of highly qualified people.
 Working with end users to accelerate the creation and application of new
knowledge.
 Increasing collaboration between researchers in Canada and abroad.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 19,207,540
o 2021-22 main estimates: 17,702,449
o 2022-23 main estimates: 5,575,440
- Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR)
o Purpose/objectives
 As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the CECR
and the Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE) programs are
being consolidated and transferred to the Strategic Innovation Fund (managed
by ISED).
 The decrease represents the wind-down and gradual transfer of funding to the
Strategic Innovation Fund.
o Expected results
 The CECR program bridges the challenging gap between innovation and
commercialization. The program matches clusters of research expertise with the
business community to share the knowledge and resources that bring
innovations to market faster. Centres advance research and facilitate
commercialization within four priority areas: the environment; natural
resources and energy; health and life sciences; and information and
communications technologies.
o 2020-21 expenditures: 6,981,000
o 2021-22 main estimates: 7,206,000
o 2022-23 main estimates: 4,133,000
- Business-led Networks of Centres of Excellence (BL-NCE)
o Purpose/objectives
 As per Budget 2018, the research and commercialization activities of the
Centres of Excellence for Commercialization and Research (CECR) and the BL-
NCE programs are being consolidated and transferred to the Strategic
Innovation Fund.
 The decrease represents the wind-down and gradual transfer of funding to the
Strategic Innovation Fund.
o Expected results
 The BL-NCE funds large-scale collaborative research networks that bring a wide
range of research expertise to bear on specific challenges identified by an
industrial sector. Led by a not-for-profit consortium of industrial partners,
networks enhance private sector innovation by blending academic expertise
with the private sector’s drive to respond to real-world challenges. BL-NCEs
increase private sector investments in Canadian research, support training of
skilled researchers, and accelerate the transfer of ideas from the laboratory into
solutions needed by the private sector.
o 2020-21expenditures: 3,692,367
o 2021-22 main estimates: 2,432,376
o 2022-23 main estimates: 1,496,334
Health Canada’s 2021-22 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Health Canada
- Funding for the procurement of additional rapid test kits (COVID-19)
o Total: $3,200,000,000
o Taskforce
o Key messages
 The Government has played a leadership role throughout the pandemic
including procuring and distributing COVID-19 rapid tests to ensure equitable
access for all Canadian residents.
 COVID-19 rapid tests will remain a critical tool to minimize community
transmission as Canada reduces restrictive public health measures and opens up
the economy.
 With the global shortage of these tests, ongoing federal procurement is
required to ensure test access for smaller jurisdictions with less buying power.
o Purpose/objectives
 This additional funding provided the financial means by which the Government
was able to continue to procure COVID-19 rapid tests at theonset of the
Omicron variant and the means to ensure equitable access to tests across all
jurisdictions in the coming months.
 The ongoing federal procurement role will also provide critical support to
workplaces and non-profit sectors by continuing to makeavailable tests through
the workplace direct delivery program, for small and medium enterprises,
through local pharmacies, and non-profit sector and vulnerable populations
through the Canadian Red Cross.
o Expected results
 All jurisdictions will have a stable supply of COVID-19 rapid tests distributed on a
per capita basis over the coming months.
 In support of the roll-out of the anti-viral PAXLOVID, clinicians will have access
to point of care COVID-19 rapid diagnostic tests to ensure the early confirmation
needed for optimal therapeutic benefit of the treatment.
 Northern/Remote/Isolated communities have the testing capacity needed to
minimize community transmission.
o Voted : 3,200,000,000
o Statutory:-
- Funding to support emergency measures related to the pandemic (COVID-19)
o Total: $500,000,000
o Taskforce
o Key messages
 The COVID-19 pandemic has been unpredictable, as highlighted late last
summer when many jurisdictions started to think about winding down testing
and then had to pivot in response to Delta and Omicron variant
 Furthermore, in the past number of days, many provinces and territories (PTs)
announced significant changes in their public health measures, with many PTs
removing most or all measures.
 Funding to support emergency measures given theuncertainty of the pandemic
and the unknown impact of shifts in public health measures.
o Purpose/objectives
 This Contingency will provide the funding for Health Canada to respond to
unexpected shifts in the pandemic including, but not limited to, enhanced point
of care diagnostic testing, as PTs shift lab-based testing capacity away from PCR
testing to other critical medical testing, expanded testing in
northern/remote/isolated communities.
 This funding will also provide the monies to offset unexpected expenses
associated with the distribution of tests. The recent geo-political landscape
globally resulted in exponential increases in international and domestic logistics
demand.
o Expected results
 Health Canada will have the capacity to continue to support PTs,workplaces
and non-profit entities in response to possible future surges/waves in the
pandemic.
 In the event of future waves and/or more localized outbreaks, Canadians have
equitable access to COVID-19 tests.
o Voted: 500,000,000
o Statutory:-
- Funding for the Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (Budget 2019)
o Total: $9,737,861
o SPB
o Key messages
 Budget 2019 announced $35 million over 4 years, starting in 2019–20, to
establish a Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office that would provide
dedicated capacity and leadership to work with PTs and stakeholders, conduct
analysis and develop options for the creation of a Canadian Drug Agency. The
Office was formally established in Spring 2021.
 The Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office has undertaken significant
engagement with over 170 meetings with PTs, partner organizations, implicated
federal entities, patient advocates, experts, and international leaders in
pharmaceuticals management to inform analysis on the potential scope and
functions of a Canadian Drug Agency.
o Purpose/objectives
 Engage with PTs and key stakeholders to obtain advice on key challenges and
opportunities in the pharmaceuticals ecosystem.
 Undertake analysis and advance options for establishing a CDA to improve the
pharmaceutical system and deliver results to Canadians.
o Expected results
 Development of options for the role, functions and plan for the CDA.
 Health system partners (PTs, stakeholders, academics and experts) are engaged
to inform the development of options for the role, functions, and plan for a
CDA.
o Voted: 9,118,727
o Statutory: 619,134
- Funding to strengthen the capacity and transparency of the pesticide review process
o Total: $8,654,364
o PMRA
o Key messages
 The Government is committed to protecting human health and the environment
from the risks posed by pesticides. Pesticides are only registered in Canada after
being thoroughly assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the
environment will result from their use.
 Consistent with the Government’s announcement on August 4, 2021, this
investment in Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency will
strengthen pesticide oversight and protection, including improving the
availability of independent data supporting pesticide review decisions, and the
transparency of regulatory decision-making.
o Purpose/objective
 Funds will support the transition to a better informed, more transparent,
accessible and more responsive pesticide regulatory system. This will be
achieved through a number of proposed measures intended to: increase
independent data generation, including water quality monitoring and pesticide
use data; the creation of an external science advisory committee process to
provide advice prior to pesticide regulatory decisions, including maximum
residue limits; and the establishment of modernized business processes to
implement a continuous and risk-based oversight approach
 Several measures will also help increase public confidence and engagement in
the pesticide regulatory process, including plain language communication of the
results of PMRA decisions, and improvements to public accessibility of test data
supporting pesticide regulatory decisions.
o Expected results
 Activities under this initiative align with key Pesticide Program performance
outcomes: that pesticides meet current scientific standards with respect to
health and the environment; that Canadians have confidence in the pesticide
regulatory system; and that the health of Canadians and the environmentare
protected from risks associated with the use of pesticides.
 Establishing the external scientific committee process and increasing the
availability of independent data will strengthen evidence-based pesticide
regulatory decision-making.
 To support implementation of the proposed measures, the Government will
also be conducting broad consultations as part of a targeted review of Pest
Control Products Act (2002) in Winter/early Spring 2022. The review will focus
on specific provisions that support improved transparency, increased use of
real-world data and independent advice, and modernized pesticide business
processes.
o Voted: 8,105,411
o Statutory: 548,953
- Funding to address anti-Indigenous racism in health care (Budget 2021)
o Total: $3,590,871
o SPB
o Key messages
 Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over 3 years, starting in 2021-22, for
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) and Health Canada (HC) to implement a short-
term suite of measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health
systems. Of this funding, $14.9M over three years was announced for Health
Canada to establish the Addressing Racism and Discrimination in Canada’s
Health Systems Program (“the Program”) with $13.9M in contribution funding
($13M in Project Stream; $900k in Engagement Stream).
 The Program was established in response to the three National Dialogues to
Address Anti-Indigenous Racism in Canada’s Health Systems. The Program also
services as a flagship initiative of the Federal Pathway–the federal
government’s contribution to theNational Action Plan to End Violence Against
Indigenous Women, Girls, and 2SLGBTQQIA People, and supports broader
federal efforts including Canada’s Anti-Racism Strategy and Canada’s Strategy to
Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence
o Purpose/objectives
 The Program was established to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination through investments to support systems-level, community-
supported projects that address systemic racism and discrimination.
 It will also support racialized and marginalized communities to meaningfully
engage on health priorities, such as anti-racism and discrimination.
 Potential initiatives under the Program could include implementing tools,
standards, guidelines, training/learning materials, anti-racism and anti-
discrimination resources, and other cultural safety, inclusion, and clinical
competency products.
o Expected results
 With the three years of funding allocated in Budget 2021 and with a focus on
Indigenous peoples, the expected short-term outcome will be improved access
to appropriate, effective, and culturally sensitive health services. Through the
engagement stream, thedevelopment of Health Canada programs and services
will be more reflective of Indigenous priorities through the support provided for
engagement.
 The intermediate and longer-term results strategy will be developed and
included in the 2023-24 return to Cabinet
o Voted: 3,548,940
o Statutory: 41,931
- Funding for the Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (reprofile)
o Total: $3,500,000
o SPB
o Key messages
 The Government of Canada is committed to supporting Canadian thalidomide
survivors and helping them age with dignity.
 The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) application
period is open until June 3, 2024.
 The Program currently supports 124 survivors.
o Purpose/objective
 The CTSSP provides ongoing financial assistance, and access to an Extraordinary
Medical Assistance Fund to help pay for home or vehicle adaptations,
specialized surgeries and other ongoing costs. Newly confirmed survivors also
receive a one-time ex gratia payment to assist with immediate health needs.
o Expected results
 Canadian thalidomide survivors will be able to access care, treatment and other
supports they need.
 The CTSSP is intended to contribute to meeting the lifetime needs of eligible
Canadian thalidomide survivors so they may age with dignity.
o Voted: 3,500,000
o Statutory:-
- Funding to support long-term care, improved access to palliative care, and safe access to
medical assistance in dying (Budget 2021)
o Total: $3,356,596
o SPB
o Key messages
 Following changes to the MAID legislation in March 2021, Budget 2021
committed $13.2Mover 5 years, with $2.6M ongoing, to ensure that Canada’s
MAID framework is implemented consistently and with all appropriate
safeguards.
 Budget 2021 also committed $29.8M over 6 years, starting in 2021-22, to
provide Canadians with better access to palliative and end-of-life care, including
culturally sensitive care, and to advance the federal Action Plan on Palliative
Care.
 In 2021-22, $3.4M of this funding is needed, including work on MAID ($2.6M),
while $0.8M is needed for palliative care.
o Purpose/objectives
 Funding for MAID will be used via contribution agreements ($2M) to support
MAID curriculum development, and policy-oriented research to address existing
data gaps and evaluate best practices.
 An additional $410,160 is required to supporta MAID Expert Reference
Network, including contract work and meeting costs (translation, accessibility
support and travel), and for administrative/other costs related to supporting the
expanded responsibilities of the MAID Secretariat and internal policy
development.
 For palliative care, $255,319 is designated this year for the development of the
palliative care and grief literacy awareness campaign.
 The remaining funding ($734,521) will cover the cost of 4 FTEs needed to
complete this work ($189,840 forMAID; $544,681 for palliative care).
o Expected results
 For MAID, the expected results include an improved understanding of socio-
cultural aspects of MAID from the standpoint of applicants and their families;
and availability of training and guidance materials for MAID practitioners.
 The palliative care investments will support the development of a public
awareness campaign, including public opinion research (POR) among health
care providers and Canadians living with life-limiting illness and their familiesto
determine level of understanding and awareness of grief and the benefits of
palliative care. This will lay the groundwork for a broader public awareness
campaign to be launched in 2022-23.
o Voted: 3,222,004
o Statutory: 134,592
- Funding to ensure the ongoing integrity of the Public Service Occupational Health Program
(Budget 2021)
o Total: $3,606,955
o CSB
o Key messages
 As the occupational health service provider of the federal public service, PSOHP
provides specialized occupational health evaluations, communicable disease
prevention services, and technical advice to help departments meet their
Canada Labour Code obligations.
 Despite evolving and increasing occupational health needs, PSOHP has been
operating under the same funding level since 1984, which has limited the
program’s capacity to deliver services to client departments.
 Funding received through Budget 2021 enables the program to make changes to
continue to operate and meet the needs of client departments. However,
increased service demands paired with new service lines, like mental health
screening services, have highlighted the need to seek a sustainable source of
funds in the future.
o Purpose/objective
 Maintain service delivery through the staffing, training and professional
development of health professionals (e.g., doctors, nurses, nurse practitioner’s,
etc.), program administrators and support staff.
 Develop and pilot a new, user-friendly online service request and health records
system that will reduce the need for paper files and enable quick and secure
access to client files.
 Explore innovative mechanisms to meet the complex needs of clients, which
includes developing and implementing program-wide SGBA+ strategies.
o Expected results
 PSOHP has the staff necessary to deliver its mandated services and address GOC
priorities (i.e. SGBA+).
 PSOHP has an enhanced ability to track performance against service delivery
standards and address gaps.
 Clients departments have timely access to service request results, enabling
them to make effective decisions abouttheir staff.
o Voted: 2,982,706
o Statutory: 624,249
- Funding to advance pharmacare in Prince Edward Island
o Total: $2,900,000
o SPB
o Key messages
 No Canadian should have to choose between paying for prescription drugs and
putting food on the table.
 The Government of Canada is committed to continue working with willing
provinces and territories towards national pharmacare.
 In August 2021, the Government announced a first agreement with Prince
Edward Island to improve access to medications for Island residents andinform
the advancement of national universal pharmacare. This agreement provided
$35M over four years to PEI.
o purpose/objectives
 The PEI demonstration initiative will enable the province to expand its public
formulary (list of drugs covered) and improve the affordability of its public drug
plans.
 This initiative will provide key learnings about public drug coverage in PEI to
inform future decisions to advance national universal pharmacare.
 This initiative will also build on the foundational steps towards national
pharmacare that are already in progress (Canadian Drug Agency, national
formulary, national strategy for drugs for rare diseases).
o expected results
 Increased understanding of public drug coverage gaps and the capacity to
implement public drug plan changes in PEI.
 Increased prescription drug access and affordability for PEI residents (drugs
added to formulary; co-pays and deductibles reduced).
 Increased knowledge to inform future decisions to advance national universal
pharmacare.
o Voted: 2,900,000
o statutory:-
- Funding for investments in cannabis public education, awareness, research, and mental health
(reprofile)
o Total: $514,194
o CSCB
o Key messages
 In 2018, the Cannabis Act established a new control framework for cannabis
designed to better protect public health and public safety, and minimize harms
associated with cannabis use.
 The Government of Canada provided $62.5 million over five years, starting in
2018–19, for public education initiatives. Funding supports community-based
organizations andIndigenous organizations in educating their communities on
the health effects associated with cannabis use.
 The Government also provided $10 million over five years for the Mental Health
Commission of Canada to help assess the impact of cannabis use on themental
health of Canadians, and $10 million over five years to the Canadian Centre on
Substance Use and Addiction to support research on cannabis use in Canada.
o Purpose/objective
 Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) is the
mechanismthrough which these resources will be channeled. SUAP provides
contribution funding for projects that respond to substance use issues in
Canada, including those related to cannabis.
 The $514,194 in SUAP funding will be used to support community-based
organizations and Indigenous organizations in educating their communities on
health effects associated with cannabis use, and to support research on
cannabis use in Canada, including the impact of cannabis use on the mental
health on Canadians.
o Expected results
 Projects funded by SUAP are expected to improve awareness, knowledge, skills
and competencies of targeted stakeholders and Canadians.
o Voted: 514,194
o Statutory:-
- Funding to address antimicrobial resistance (Budget 2021)
o Total: $468,544
o HPFB
o Key messages
 Budget 2021 allocated $28.4 million over five years, beginning in fiscal year
2021-2022, with $5.7 million per year ongoing, to support Health Canada, Public
Health Agency of Canada, and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to expand
efforts to monitor,prevent, and control antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and
support the appropriate use of antimicrobials in Canada.
 Health Canada’s portion of these funds is $3 million over five years and $0.4
million ongoing and will support:
 additional future actions to preserve the effectiveness of antimicrobials; and,
 prevent the spread of resistance, and mobilize research to spur innovation to
mitigate the risk of AMR and ultimately, protect the health and safety of
Canadians.
 These initiatives also support mandate commitments outlined in the 2019 and
2021 Minister of Health’s Mandate Letters to monitor, prevent and mitigate the
serious and growing public health threat of antimicrobial resistance by
developing and implementing actions with partners to preserve the
effectiveness of antimicrobials.
o Purpose/objective
 This funding will support ongoing interdepartmental efforts and build on
existing actions to promote antimicrobial stewardship and further monitor and
understand the risks and trends of inappropriate use of antimicrobials and the
emergence and spread of AMR in Canada.
 Funds will support initiatives in the areas of human and animal health and lay
the foundation to:
 help preserve the effectiveness of existing antimicrobials by promoting their
prudent and appropriate use in human and veterinary medicine; support the
availability of alternative health products that may reduce the need for routine
use of antimicrobials in food producing animals;
 slow the development of antimicrobial resistance; and,
 lower rates of antimicrobial resistance infections in Canada.
o Expected results
 With this funding, Health Canada will enhance the responsible use of
antimicrobials in human and animal medicine through the following initiatives:
 creating a Canada-specific list of reserved antimicrobials for human use, to
provide clear information to prescribers on which antimicrobials must be
protected and used only as a last resort;
 mandating the distribution of educational materials to patientson the
appropriate use of antimicrobials to support a greater understanding on their
role in antimicrobial stewardship;
 facilitating access to Veterinary Health Products (VHPs) as additional tools to
improve animal health and wellness, so there is a reduced need for
antimicrobials in animals; and,
 collaborating with CFIA to continue incremental progress on the VHP in-feed
pilot program to improve access to these products to keep animals healthy,
reduce need for, and use of antimicrobials.
o Voted: 418,583
o Statutory: 49,961
- From the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the Canadian
Safety and Security Program
o Total: $812,000
o HECSB
o Key messages
 Health Canada will receive $812,000 from the Department of National Defence
under the scrutiny and governance framework of the Canadian Safety and
Security Program.
 The funding is to purchase four pieces of laboratory equipment to support
national security and public health emergency response.
o Purpose/objective
 The objective of these acquisitions is to enhance Canada’s ability to support
Canada’s national security interests and mandates:
 Detecting and attributing radiological and nuclear incidents; and,
 Responding to chemical incidents, by identifying and quantifying chemical
residues in biological and environmental samples to support of Health Canada,
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and other national law enforcement
agencies.
o Expected results
 This funding will strengthen federal emergency preparedness by enhancing
federal capabilities to support national security and public health emergency
response.
o Voted: 812,000
o Statutory:-
- From the Canadian Food Inspection Agency to the Department of Health to develop risk profiles
for current and emerging foodborne pathogens and other food hazards
o Total: $600,000
o HPFB
o Key messages
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s transfer of funds to Health Canada will
provide funding via a Memorandum of Understanding to continue
strengthening and modernizing Canada’s food safety system by targeting food
risks through improved risk intelligenceand oversight.
 This will be carried out through different activities related to:
 analyzing and interpreting data for health risk assessments;
 risk analysis to develop/update food safety standards and guidelines; and,
 the development of new or updated risk profiles for foodborne pathogens and
other food hazards.
o Purpose/objective
 The Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s transfer of funds to Health Canada will
facilitate an effective mechanism by which Health Canada standards, policies,
guidance and risk assessments are applied in order to better support the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s risk-based approaches for preventive
measures as well as risk control actions that improve food safety measures
across Canada.
 With this funding, Health Canada will provide scientific support, which aims to:
 develop and apply the Canadian Food Inspection Agency’s interim risk
management approaches for emerging issues while Health Canada focuses on
the development of long-term standards, guidelines and policies; and,
 contribute by supporting the development of risk summaries.
o Expected results
 This funding will support activities to ensure that the:
 most up-to-date information is used to inform risk management approaches;
 oversight of food safety standards and guidelines remains current and
responsive to emerging issues; and,
 activities will also inform priorities and evidence-based risk management
decisions.
o Voted: : 600,000
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Indigenous Services to the Department of Health to provide
microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation communities
o Total: $520,625
o ROEB
o Key messages
 Microbiological and physical-chemical testing of drinking water in First Nation
communities.
o Purpose/objective
 In collaborationwith ISC in the Quebec Region, HC supports the delivery of
clean, safe and reliable drinking water to First Nations communities through:
 Regular monitoring of all publicly accessible drinking water systems (this
includes 29 public drinking water systems and 12 semi-public systems in 26 First
Nations communities in Quebec).
 Providing well water bacteriological testing services to residents, upon request
and free of charge.
o Expected results
 The funds will allow ROEB laboratories to perform microbiological andphysico-
chemical analyses of drinking water.
o Voted: 520,625
o Statutory:-
- From the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Department of Health to support the Innovative
Solutions Canada Program
o Total: $200,000
o SPB
o Key messages
 This funding will enable Health Canada to support Canadian innovators develop
solutions to tackle the shared Health Canada-PHAC priority of addressing
Antimicrobial-resistant infections.
 This funding is necessary to ensure that Health Canada meets its funding
obligations of $969,995 for FY 2021-22, as established in the individual grant
agreements for this challenge.
o Purpose/objective
 Health Canada will apply this funding to support Canadian innovators through
Innovative Solutions Canada.
o Expected results
 This funding will help fund the development of prototypes for novel, easy to use
and cost-effective rapid point-of-care diagnostic and detection tools to identify
antibiotic-resistant bacteria and differentiate between viral and bacterial
infections.
o Voted: 200,000
o Statutory:-
- From various organizations to the Treasury Board Secretariat for Financial Community
Developmental Programs and the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility initiative
o Total: ($8,333)
o CFOB
o Key messages
 While TBS maintains the responsibility for the designand updates to the
programs and other community wide initiatives; limited resources have
impacted the Financial Managers Community Development’s capacity to deliver
on this.
 Additional funding is needed to ensure that the leadership development
initiatives of the financial management community are being met as the
community matures and the environment evolves.
o Purpose/objective
 The CFO Talent Management
 Advisory Committee supports a cost-recovery program with Large Departments
and Agencies (LDAs) to fundthe delivery of certain OCG Financial Management
Community Developmental Programs (FMCD); as well as, Inclusion, Diversity,
Equity and Accessibility (IDEA) initiatives.
 In addition, funds are used for an additional resource (FI-04) within OCG to lead
the implementation of IDEA strategic recruitments on behalf of the financial
management community; as well as, integrate changes needed to existing
development programs.
o Expected results
 To foster greater diversity, inclusion, and accessibility in the financial
management community. To address systemic barriers for recruitment and
advancement for ensuring that the financial community is representative of the
people of Canada.
 To have better prepared and experienced finance professionals in order to
become well-rounded employees and leaders.
o Voted : (8,333)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the
evaluation of harm reduction approaches to address the opioid crisis
o Total: ($75,000)
o CSCB
o Key messages
 The Government of Canada recognizes that the overdose crisis is one of the
most serious and unprecedented public health threats in Canada’s history.
 Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2021, we continue to
support efforts to improve access totreatment and harm reduction services,
strengthen enforcement to reduce the toxic illegal drug supply, increase
awareness and prevention, and invest in research and surveillance.
o Purpose/objective
 Health Canada’s Substance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides
contribution funding for projects that respond to substance use issues in
Canada, including those related treatment and harm reduction services.
 The $75,000 in SUAP funding will be used to support the Canadian Institutes of
Health Research (CIHR) in their ongoing evaluation of a number SUAP-funded
safer supply projects in Canada.
o Expected results
 The CIHR evaluation will provide an assessment of the impact that select SUAP-
funded safer supply pilot projects have on overdose and other substance-
related outcomes within the communities from which they are being operated.
o Voted: (75,000)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research to advance
policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
o Total: ($94,300)
o SPB
o Key messages
 Dr. Cara Tannenbaum, Scientific Director of the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research’s Institute on Gender and Health is Health Canada’s Departmental
Science Advisor.
 Dr. Tannenbaumprovides science advice to Health Canada Senior Management
as well as many of our programs in supporting science informed decision-
making.
o Purpose/objective
 To provide for the professional services of Dr. Tannenbaum in her official
position of Health Canada’s Departmental Science Advisor.
 Dr. Tannenbaum will advise Senior Management, champion support for Health
Canada scientists, deliver specific flagship science initiatives, and participate on
the federal Departmental Science Advisor Network supporting the federal Chief
Science Advisor.
o Expected results
 Develop an online learning tool for policy analysts and scientists as an aid for
policy-science integration at Health Canada.
 Further the integration of SBGA+ in departmental programs.
 Champion the Health Canada scientist network to promote and retain our
researchers and scientists.
 Support Departmental efforts toward greater connections with Indigenous
knowledge and researchers in departmental programs.
o Voted: (94,300)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support tobacco
control
o Total: ($125,000)
o CSCB
o Key messages
 Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to
protecting the health of young people and non-smokers.
 Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature
death, and we are working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5%
by 2035
 Canada’s Tobacco Strategy provides $330 million over five years, starting in
2018, to help meet this goal.
 Canada is a recognized leader in tobacco control internationally, and provides
funding and support to other countries to advance their tobacco control efforts.
o Purpose/objective
 The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) International Health Grants
Program is themain mechanism used by Health Canada and PHAC to fund
international activities and strategic initiatives.
 Under the World Health Organization’s Framework Convention on Tobacco
Control, to which Canada is a party, it is recognized that some low-and middle-
income countries face challenges sustaining funding for tobacco control
activities.
 Health Canada is transferring $125,000 to PHAC in 2021-22 to support capacity-
building projects related to tobacco control in low-and middle-income countries
in the Americas.
o Expected results
 This funding will help build the knowledge and skillsets of tobacco control civil
society organizations in the Americas through capacity-building workshops,
webinars and the development of resource materials.
 This funding willsupport the publication of an annual flagship report outlining
the dimensions of the global funding gap for tobacco control, specifically
examining new data on development aid for this area of work.
o Voted: (125,000)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Food and
Agriculture Organization to support the development of a database on ileal amino acid
digestibility of foods and diets
o Total: ($132,604)
o HPFB
o Key messages
 Funding we be transferred through an Interdepartmental Letter of Agreement
from Health Canada to the Public Health Agency of Canada to the Food and
Agriculture Organization to support the development of a fully accessible,
robust database on amino acid digestibility of foods and diets from different
regions around the world.
o Purpose/objective
 The funding will support the development of a global database of true ileal
amino acid digestibility for human foods.
o Expected results
 This funding will be used to provide a dataset which will be:
 used to provide accurate information on protein quality of foods for the Food
Agriculture Organization/World Health Organization Joint Expert Meeting on
Nutrition, which provides scientific advice to the Codex Committee on Nutrition
and Special Dietary Uses in the development of international standards, as well
as inform domestic food standards; and,
 of importance for the health of consumers, including Canadian consumers, as it
will support the assessment of protein quality of individual protein sources as
well as mixeddiets commonly consumed by humans.
o Voted: (132,604)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services for the Thunderbird
Partnership Foundation to conduct an Indigenous Community Cannabis Survey
o Total: ($171,995)
o CSCB
o Key messages
 In 2018, the Cannabis Act established a new control framework for cannabis
designed to better protect public health and public safety, and minimize harms
associated with cannabis use.
 The Government of Canada provided $62.5 million over five years, starting in
2018–19, for public education initiatives. Funding supports community-based
organizations and Indigenous organizations in educating their communities on
the health effects associated with cannabis use.
 The Government supports a public health approach to cannabis access and use
and is working alongside community leaders to ensure that all Indigenous
Peoples have a good understanding of the facts, considerations, and health
effects of cannabis use.
o Purpose/objective
 Health Canada’sSubstance Use and Addictions Program (SUAP) provides
contribution funding for projects that respond to substance use issues in
Canada, including those related to cannabis.
 This $171, 995 in SUAP funding will be transferred to Indigenous Services
Canada forthe Thunderbird Partnership Foundation to undertake an Indigenous
Cannabis Survey. The goal of the survey is to obtain a better understanding of
community strengths and knowledge related to cannabis use following
legalization in Canada, and will identifyIndigenous needs related to cannabis.
o Expected results
 The Indigenous Cannabis Survey will contribute to a better understanding of
community strengths and knowledge related to cannabis use following the
legalization of cannabis, supporting the federal government’s priorities on
cannabis.
o Voted: (171,995)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agency of Canada to support the
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development Health Committee
o Total: ($200,000)
o SPB
o Key messages
 Thework of the OECD Health Committee supports the Government of Canada’s
health policies and programs.
 This work benefits Canada by providing internationally comparable data and
policy analysis to support improvements in the health system, and allows
Canadians to more easily measure the performance of Canada’s health system
against those of other OECD countries.
 Funding from Canada will position Canada as a more influential member of the
Health Committee so that more of Canada’s priorities are acted upon by the
OECD, including data and policy analysis to support the health system response
to COVID-19.
o Purpose/objective
 The transfer to the OECD Health Committee will support its work to foster
improvements in the performance of member countries’ health systems in the
areas of financial sustainability and efficiency of health and long-term care
systems, and the provision of high-quality health care to all.
 The Health Committee’s work is focused on the development of health data and
statistics and providing analyses on the financial sustainability, efficiency, and
quality of health and long-term care systems.
o Expected results
 The Government of Canada contributes to, and regularly uses, OECD reports to
assess Canada’s health care system achievements. The Health Committee’s data
and policy analysis supports Canada’s health priorities such as the health system
response to COVID-19 and Health Canada’s activities to improve the health care
system.
 The funding to the Health Committee would also demonstrate Canada’s support
for the OECD’s work in health and promote Canada’s continued engagement on
global health issues related to health system strengthening and universal health
coverage.
o Voted: (200,000)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Public Health Agencyof Canada to support activities
related to chemicals management, capacity building and climate change
o Total: ($267,119)
o HECSB
o Key messages
 The transfer of $267,119 from Health Canada to PHAC’s International Health
Grants Program will be used to support thework of international partners in the
areas of chemicals management and climate change adaptation, as follows:
 The United Nations Environment Programme’s (UNEP) development and
implementation of a capacity building strategy for the sound management of
chemicals and waste ($75,000);
 The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development’s (OECD)
implementation of the Chemicals and Biotechnology Committee’s Global
Outreach Strategy ($50,000);
 The World Health Organization’s (WHO) implementation of the WHO Chemicals
Road Map and health sector engagement in the Strategic Approach to
International Chemicals Management policy framework ($42,119); and
 The WHO’s development of guidance documents, tools and best practices to
protect human health from extreme heat ($100,000).
o Purpose/objective
 The objective is to improve domestic and global capacity to identify, assess and
protect human health from the harmful effects of exposures to chemicals and to
climate change impacts.
o Expected results
 Better protection ofCanadians from chemical exposures and from impacts
related to extreme weather events.
 Improved environmental health management outcomes, both domestically and
internationally.
 Increased collaboration between Canada and leading global health actors.
 Strengthened existing relationships with key partners such as the WHO, the
OECD and UNEP.
o Voted: (267,119)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Department of Industry to support a scientific
assessment of gene-editing
o Total: ($750,000)
o SPB/PMRA
o Keymessages
 Gene-edited Organisms for Pest Control
 Advances in gene editing tools and technologies have made the process of
changing an organism’s genome more efficient, opening up a range of potential
applications. One such application is in pest control.
 By editing genomes of organisms (e.g., mosquitos), and introducing them to
wild populations, it is now possible to control insect-borne disease and invasive
species, or reverse insecticide resistance in pests. However, the full implications
of using thesemethods remains uncertain.
 The Council of Canadian Academies (CCA) will provide an assessment of the
scientific, bioethical, and regulatory challenges associated with the use of gene-
edited organisms and technologies for pest control.
o purpose/objective
 Theobjective of the CCA assessment is to leverage the knowledge of a panel of
independent experts in order to gather current information and prepare a
comprehensive, objective report addressing the following charge question:
 What are the scientific, bioethical, and regulatory challenges regarding the use
of gene-edited organisms and technologies (e.g., CRISPR/Cas9) for pest control?
o expected results
 The CCA report will provide an overview of the field, discuss current and future
applications and challenges, and offer insights that will be used to inform the
development of policy and regulatory responses by Health Canada’s PMRA.
 A comprehensive review of the novel hazards and risks associated with gene-
edited organisms for pest control will further the scientific and ethical
discussion on what regulators will need to consider when determining if
products of this technology can be used safely and in a way that is beneficial to
Canadians, while respecting international obligations.
 The outcome will allow the PMRA to better formulate the approach and
guidance when providing government responses on how it intends to meet the
challenges in regulating research and the eventual products from this
technology.
o voted: (750,0000)
o statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to the Department of Indigenous Services to drive culturally
sensitive and Indigenous-led data collection to better understand how Indigenous communities
experience COVID-19
o Total: ($2,355,000)
o Taskforce
o Key messages
 The Safe Restart Agreement included $4.28B for testing, contact tracing and
data management.
 $194 million was committed to support PTs and Indigenous Organizations to
improve health data management.
 Health Canada, in collaboration with Indigenous Services Canada, has been
engaging with Indigenous Organizations (IOs) to support activities to address
long-standing gaps in First Nations/Inuit/Metis public health data.
o Purpose/objective
 Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) has multi-year agreements with many
Indigenous organizations (IOs) including the Chiefs of Ontario (COO).
 Through the pandemic, ISC has been collaborating with COO on data related
projects. These projects align with the objectives set out in the Safe Restart
Contribution Program Terms and Conditions.
 Given that ISC already had a multi-year agree with COO and that the funding
was for projects that build on initiatives funded through the existing agreement
between ISC and COO, a decision was made to transfer the funding to ISC.
o Expected results
 Enhance modelling capacity (access to expertise and tools) to reflect First-
Nations specific COVID-19 data.
 Enhance capacity to conduct deeper descriptive analysis of First Nation COVID-
19 data.
 Design of a process for gathering lessons learned and collect, share and
disseminate those lessons across jurisdictions.
o Voted: (2,355,000)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to Statistics Canada to support data management for the Safe
Restart Agreement
o Total: ($3,175,000)
o Taskforce:
 The COVID-19 pandemic highlighted numerous information gaps withinand
across Canada’s health systems.
 The federal government provided $3 billion directly to provinces and territories,
with $1.28 billion was held back to cover unanticipated provincial and territorial
requirements and federal program expenses for testing,contact tracing and
data management, from which the $7M for Statistics Canada is being drawn.
o Key messages
 In 2020-21, Health Canada identified $10.175 million of Safe Restart Agreement
funding for Statistics Canada (STC) to undertake work to improve the
understanding of the unintended consequences of public health measures and
close COVID-19 data gaps.
 $7M was transferred to STC in 2020-21 Supplementary Estimates (C), and the
balance of $3.175M will be transferred to STC in 2021-22 Supplementary
Estimates (C).
 STC will use the funding to complete the work launched in 202-21 on the
unintended consequences of public health measures, such as psychologic
harms, delays receiving medical treatment and increased risks of overdoses.
This information will also help close COVID-19 data gaps, including on race and
ethnicity, Indigeneity and health system impacts.
o Purpose/objective
 STC will support improved access to quality COVID-19 data and improve the
understanding of its impact on the population by:
 Enhancing the quality and completeness of COVID-19 information for various
segments of the populations such as visible minorities, immigrants, seniors,
Indigenous people and other vulnerable populations.
 Working with First Nations, Indigenous and Metis peoples and organizations to
improve the information on COVID-19 in a culturally sensitive way.
 Improving information on health care worker communities (e.g., long-term care,
hospitals, primary care) via crowdsourcing and targeted surveys.
o Expected results
o Voted: (3,175,000)
o Statutory:-
- From the Department of Health to Public Health Agency of Canada for procurement of COVID-19
tests
o Total: ($267,500,000)
o Taskforce
o Key messages
 Since the onset of the pandemic PHAC has procured and distributed COVID-19
rapid tests to support current and expected PT needs. In spring 2021, PHAC’s
request to re-profile $444.0M from the Safe Restart Agreement (SRA) was
approved. These funds were depleted by late October 2021.
 Given the magnitude of the pandemic and the important role of screening in
breaking paths of transmission, continued procurement of rapid tests by the
GoC is necessary to support federal, provincial and territorial efforts.
 In November 2021, the Minister of Health sought and had approved the
repurposing and the transfer from the Critical Drug Reserve ($245.0M) and 2020
Fall Economic Statement (FES) ($22.5M) to Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) to fund the ongoing procurement and distribution of COVID-19 rapid
tests.
o Purpose/objective
 Following consultations with PTsin 2021, the design and the scope of the CDR
was revised to include up to a six month supply against projected demand from
PTs and pressures expected on federal direct distribution channels. This change,
coupled with final drug prices that were significantly lower than expected,
greatly reduced the overall anticipated costs of the CDR.
 Given the above, and upon review of its financial forecast, Health Canada
determined that it could repurpose $245.0M in funding from the CDR.
 In addition, upon re-profileapproval, $22.5M of the FES investment will be
repurposed and transferred to PHAC. This investment was intended to support
strategic ramping-up of testing and screening. Health Canada has already
established critical partnerships with the Canadian Chambers of Commerce and
Canadian Red Cross, whom are supporting workplace screening by deploying
tests on behalf of PTs, including distributing tests to child-care centres and
privately operated K-12 schools.
o Expected results
 By providing ongoing leadership andsupport through federal procurement of
COVID-19 tests, the Government of Canada is ensuring a consistent supply of
tests to provinces and territories, and workplaces.
 Federal procurement provides a level playing field from the equity perspective
and ensures that Canadian residents across all jurisdictions have access to care,
not just those living in provinces that have the buying power to compete in the
competitive global market.
o Voted: (267,500,000)
o Statutory:-
2021-22 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Public Health Agency of Canada
New Funding
- Funding for the procurement of Therapeutics ($1B)
o Funding to support emergency measures related to the pandemic ($500M)
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $1,500,000,000
o Key messages
 Funding to support the acquisition of new and emerging COVID-19 therapeutics,
including funding to exercise options under advanced purchase agreements, as
well as funding for secondary costs associated with storage, distribution and
deployment logistics.
 $500 million to support emergencymeasures related to the pandemic will go
towards a contingency to procure therapeutics.
o Purpose/objectives
 To provide Canadians with equitable access to safe and effective therapeutics
for the treatment of COVID-19; to save patients’ lives, reduce the severity of
COVID-19 infections and reduce hospitalizations alleviating burden on the
healthcare system.
o Expected results
 The Government of Canada will procure safe and effective COVID-19 treatments
for the equitable distribution to provinces and territories,as soon as they
become available and in need by provinces and territories (PTs).
 Currently all existing COVID-19 treatments require an intravenous infusion or
injection at hospitals or health care clinics. The availability of new antiviral
COVID-19 therapies will make outpatient treatment much easier and are
expected to be in high demand by healthcare practitioners and their patients.
o Voted: 1,500,000,000
o Statutory: 0
- Funding for the procurement of additional Rapid Tests
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C):$750,000,000
o Key messages
 Given the magnitude of the pandemic and the important role of screening in
breaking paths of transmission, continued procurement of rapid test by the
Government of Canada is necessary to support federal, provincial, and territorial
efforts, particularly to contain transmission by asymptomatic cases.
 With many parts of the country dealing with the fourth wave of COVID-19 and
attendant increases in the number of cases, hospitalization and deaths,
continued access to rapid testing isan essential layer of public health to curb
transmission and control outbreaks.
 Reopening plans and rising cases since August 2021 have led the provinces and
territories to introduce new programs, changes to screening protocols and new
vaccine mandates with testing programs that have depleted their test supply.
o Purpose/objectives
 This procurement is to secure enough tests to support increased demand for
COVID-19 rapid tests from PTs, as well as federally administered programs
o Expected results
 To support Covid-19 outbreak management, to reduce risk in long-term care,
and remote communities, and for screening to sustain economic and social
reopening in workplaces and schools.
o Voted: 750,000,000
o Statutory: 0
- Funding to Support the Mental Health of those MostAffected by the COVID-19 Pandemic
o Key messages
 Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $56,383,981
 Budget 2021 announced funding for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
to address the mental health impacts of the COVID-19 pandemic.
 This funding includes $100 million over three years for mental health promotion
and mental illness prevention for those most affected, and $50 million over two
years to address PTSD and trauma in frontline and essential workers and others
who are disproportionately affected.
 It also includes $3 million over two years to develop indicators to monitor the
impact of national mental health service standards and set up data collection
and data infrastructure for standards reporting.
 Purpose/objectives
 $56.2M funding to support theMental Health of those most affected by
the COVID-19 Pandemic.
o Expected results
 In addition to leading to a surge in demand for some mental health services and
supports, the pandemic has led to new and complex mental health challenges,
and has demanded newways of delivering programming and reaching
populations in need of support. This investment will help organizations meet
new demands, while fostering innovation and learning about promotion and
prevention in the pandemic and recovery context.
o Voted: 56,199,716
o Statutory: 184,265
- Proof of Vaccine Credentials
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $8,676,670
o Key messages
 Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canada (IRCC), the Public Health Agency
of Canada (PHAC) and the Canada Border Services Agency (CBSA) arejointly
seeking $31.77 million to cover expenses on the Canadian COVID-19 Proof of
Vaccination Credential (PVC) project to date and to cover the costs of sustaining
that project through the end of fiscal year 2021-22.
 PHAC is seeking $8.82 million to cover actual and expected costs during this
fiscal year for developing the Canadian PVC technical solution, oversight,
governance, communications and engagement.
o Purpose/objectives
 Through spring and early summer of 2021, the pace and relative level of take-up
of vaccinations in Canada, coupled with an evolving international context for
pandemic mitigation measures made it clear that a verifiable and interoperable
proof of COVID-19 vaccination would be expected as a way to help those
vaccinated in Canada to prove their vaccination history as they travelled
internationally.
 PVCs also provide an important tool to support broader vaccination mandates
which can mitigate the spread of a pandemic, as well as to support economic
reopening following pandemic-related closures of non-essential businesses and
services.
o Expected results
 The federal government’s role has been to negotiate consensus with provinces
and territories to work towards a common, standardized PVC. The federal
government supported provinces and territories in the issuance of the
standardized Canadian COVID-19 PVC, and is advocating for mutual acceptance
and verification of these proof of vaccination documents for international travel
purposes.
 The standardized, provincial/territorial-issued Canadian PVC is able to support a
safe reopening of the economy by providing those eligible with a secure way of
proving one’s vaccination status.
 This project has also established a potential model for increased provincial and
territorial collaboration
o Voted: 8,451,115
o Statutory: 225,555
- Investments in Diabetes Prevention and Awareness and Creation of a National Autism Strategy
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $3,821,476
o Key messages
 Autism:
 Budget 2021 announced $15.4 million over two years, starting in 2021-22,to
PHAC to work with partners to support the creation of a National Autism
Strategy, with $8.4 million coming from existing PHAC funds; resulting in $7
million in new funding.
 PHAC will invest $4.1 million to continue public consultations, enhance
Indigenous engagement, host a national conference to validate priorities and
support incremental investments in the Autism Spectrum Disorder (ASD)
Strategic Fund.
 PHAC will invest $2.2 million to enhance and complement existing autism
surveillance, modernize theunderlying infrastructure, improve knowledge
translation efforts, and provide additional capacity to analyze the resulting data.
 PHAC will invest $0.7 million to provide technical capacity to support the phased
development of data collection, data management and dissemination systems.
 Diabetes:
 Starting in 2021-22, PHAC will receive funding of $15 million over the next 5
years for the following: (1) $10 million for a new Diabetes Challenge Prize to
help surface novel approaches to diabetes prevention; and (2) $5 million for
investments in diabetes surveillance, prevention and a national framework for
diabetes.
o Purpose/objectives
 Autism:
 This initiative will lay the groundwork to support the health and wellbeing of
individuals with autism and their caregivers. Investments in this submission for
autism will position the Government of Canada to address current and
longstanding challenges that individuals with autism face, and advance the
overall response and recovery for the COVID-19 pandemic.
 Diabetes:
 Thisinitiative will build on the Government of Canada’s ongoing diabetes
initiatives and lessons learned to address key gaps in diabetes surveillance and
prevention and will provide opportunities to engage, collaborate and support
activities of key stakeholders, including provinces, territories and not-for-profit
organizations.
o Expected results
 Autism:
 Development and implementation of a National Autism Strategy: Create a
Secretariat to coordinate work on a national strategy, facilitate
Provincial/Territorial and Indigenous engagement, and support delivery of
incremental investments in the ASD Strategic Fund.
 National Autism Surveillance Program: Expand Canada’s national surveillance
program for autism to inform reporting on a National Autism Strategy, as wellas
the design and delivery of programs and services for Canadians.
o Voted: 3,538,790
o Statutory: 282,686
- Funding for Operation Afghan Safety
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $957,437
o Key messages
 Commencing in August of 2021, the Government of Canada will be assisting the
resettlement of Afghan refugees coming into Canada.
 Starting in 2021-2022 and extending into the following fiscal year, the Public
Health Agency of Canada will be seeking funding to implement health measures
to screen incoming Afghan refugees against COVID-19.
 PHAC is agreeing to leverage a nursing vendor contract (Adpearl) used in
Designated Quarantine Facilities, which has authority under the Quarantine Act,
for on-site nursing support services at IRCC sites. The scope of the servicesis to
include on-site nursing support, including basic primary care services directed by
MOH’s virtual physicians and specialists.
o Purpose/objectives
 To implement health measures for incoming Afghan refugees. Services to be
administered include on-site nursing support, including primary care services
directed by Ministry of Health virtual physicians and specialists.
o Expected results
 To successfully test and screen incoming Afghan refugees coming to Canada for
COVID-19.
o Voted: 842,793
o Statutory: 114,644
- Funding of the National Action Plan to End Gender based Violence
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $175,242
o Key messages
 The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is one of six funded government
departments participating in the Federal Strategy to Prevent and Address
Gender-Based Violence (Federal GBV Strategy), led by the Department of
Women and Gender Equality (WAGE).
 Budget 2021 announced funding to enhance the Federal Strategy and to
advance towards a National Action Plan to End GBV, including $50 million over
five years ($22.1 million in new funding and $27.9 million in existing funding) for
PHAC’s Preventing Family Violence and its Health Impacts investment, starting
in 2021.
 This enhancement of PHAC’s family violence investment will support the design,
delivery, and testing of health promotion interventions that promote safe
relationships and prevent family violence. The enhancement will include a
stronger emphasis on prevention and more targeted engagement with
populations that are disproportionately impacted by family violence.
o Purpose/objectives
 The overall aim of PHAC’s Preventing Family Violence and its Health Impacts
investment is to design and deliver public health interventions that promote
safe relationships and prevent family violence, including intimate partner
violence, child maltreatment, and elder abuse.
o Expected results
 Through contribution agreements and grants, this investment will support
innovative efforts to learn about
 what works to prevent and address family violence in diverse Canadian contexts
by:
 supporting the testing and adaptation of existing programs, and
 exploring models for broader uptake of evidence-based approaches.
 One or more communities of practice will support collective mobilization of
knowledge generated on
 effective approaches for preventing family violence. Funding recipients will also
directly generate and
 disseminate knowledge through tailored approaches that engage different
populations and communities.
 PHAC will support funded projects to achieve scale-up readiness conditions for
effective programs.
o Voted: 146,434
o Statutory: 28,808
- Reinvestment of royalties from intellectual property
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $57,283
o Key messages
 The Office of Intellectual Property Management & Business Developmentis
responsible for ensuring that all intellectual property created by the Public
Health Agency of Canada is prudently managed.
 PHAC collects licensing revenues and processes awards to inventors in a manner
that is consistent with federal policies and withSection 10 of the Public Servants
Invention Act.
 Proceeds collected in fiscal year 2020-2021 totalled $57,283. The majority of
this funding returns to the PHAC to reinvest in research and innovation; the
remaining 35% is shared among eight inventors (current and former public
servants).
o Purpose/objectives
 Pursuant to the 1993 decision of the Treasury Board respecting the retention of
royalties and fees from the licensing of Crown-owned intellectual property,
PHAC is authorized to receive, through Supplementary Estimates, an annual
appropriation equal to all such revenues that the PHAC had remitted to the
Consolidated Revenue Fund in the previous year.
o Expected results
 Payment to inventor awards and reinvestment in research and innovation.
o Voted: 57,283
o Statutory: 0
- Total new funding
o Voted: 2,319,236,131
o Statutory: 835,958
Reprofiles
- COVID-19 procurement and related costs
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 687,230,056
o Key messages
 Early evidence suggests Canada may require a regular supply of vaccine through
2024 to provide boosters and/or second generation vaccines against new
variants of concern. COVID-19 vaccines will also be required for unvaccinated
cohorts such as newly arrived immigrants and visiting workers, and children
under the age of 12, pending product authorization.
 To meet future needs for boosters and unvaccinated cohorts, Canada entered
an advanced purchase agreement with Pfizer in April 2021 for the supply of 35
million doses of COVID-19 vaccine in 2022 and 30 million doses in 2023
 Whenthe agreement was signed, the detailed delivery schedule was unknown
and funding was allocated by fiscal year (i.e. FY2022-23 and FY2023-24) rather
than calendar year.
 Since that time, Canada has worked with Pfizer to confirm delivery schedules
accordingto public health needs.
 This reprofile request will ensure that funding is available in the appropriate
fiscal year to support public health needs and pay for the vaccines at the time
they are required, beginning in January 2022 (FY2021-22).
o Purpose/objectives
 This request will ensure that funding is available in the correct fiscal year to
support deliveries of the Pfizer vaccine according to public health requirements.
o Expected results
 The Government of Canada will be able to continue to protect the population
against COVID-19 through timely access to vaccines. As variants of concern
spread globally, access to boosters and 2nd generation vaccines will allow
eligible individuals to build on the protection received through the initial
vaccination campaign.
 Investments in Canada’s vaccine portfolio will also allow Canada to meet its
commitment to global dose sharing.
o Voted: 687,230,056
o Statutory: 0
- National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS)
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 9,600,000
o Keymessages
 Medical counter measures (MCM) are vital to national security, as they are life-
saving pharmaceuticals such as vaccines, antibiotics, antivirals, antidotes, and
antitoxins, that prevent, mitigate, or treat the adverse health effects of a
chemical,biological and radiological and nuclear (CBRN) event.
 Through investments made in Budget 2020, PHAC received $25 million in 2020-
21 and $65.5 million ongoing to maintain and enhance the stockpile of MCMs in
the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS).
 Due to contracting and delivery delays, PHAC spent approximately 62% of the
$25 million budget in 2020-21.
 The 2021-22 budget of $65.5 million has been fully allocated as part of a multi-
year procurement plan.
o Purpose/objectives
 Reprofiling of $9.6M funding from 2020-21 to 2021-22 is required to meet
contractual obligations and meet policy objectives of increasing MCM
capabilities in the NESS.
o Expected results
 Reprofiled funds will advance progress towards the MCM stockpile targets and
to covercosts associated with acquisitions procured in 2020-21 but delivered in
2021-22.
o Voted: 9,600,000
o Statutory: 0
- Safe Restart
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $1,975,845
o Key messages
 Existing system and information gaps in the public health surveillance system
have impacted Canada’s ability to monitor and effectively respond to the
COVID-19 epidemic. Many of these gaps reflect systemic, long-standing
challenges affecting Canada’s health and public health data system beyond the
current epidemic, including: issues with timeliness of data for public health and
policy decision-making; completeness of data provided; granularity of the data
to monitor and understand the impact on sub populations; access to data for
rapid conversion of data to intelligence; standards in data reporting; and lack of
identifiers to facilitate data linkage.
 In the context of the COVID-19 pandemic, improvements are needed to:
 Ensure availability of timely and critical data to inform decision-making by
addressing, in the short-term,system and knowledge gaps that hinder our
ability to monitor and effectively respond to the COVID-19 epidemic;
 Enhance capacity and infrastructure to support effective pan-Canadian
exchange of critical data via a longer-term plan to transform and modernize
Canada’s health and public health data system.
 In doing so, Canada will be better prepared to identify, prevent, monitor and
respond to not only the current COVID-19 pandemic, but also future health and
public health issues, thus protecting the health ofCanadians and supporting the
economy.
o Purpose/objectives
 Under the Data Management Pillar of the SRA's 'Testing, Tracing and Data
Management's priority, the Public Health Agency of Canada received funding to
undertake respective activities to:
 Improve data on ‘unintended consequences’ of public health measures and the
wider health impacts of the pandemic;
 Improve data on health system impact;
 Expand data sources; and
 Improve critical health system infrastructure.
o Expected results
 The need for continued data on the wider health impacts of the pandemic,
particularly in the face of the pandemic's second wave and the associated
extended and enhanced public health measures, means that funds are still
required to carry out this work as originally intended. Forexample, by funding
an additional round of data collection through the Survey on COVID-19 and
Mental Health. Given that the funding allocated through the Safe Restart
Agreement was for only one year, PHACis seeking approval to reprofile from
the 2020-21 FY to the 2021-22 FY, to be able to continue to undertake the
activities planned to address the outstanding evidence gaps.
o Voted: 1,975,845
o Statutory: 0
- Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care Framework (IELCC)
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 1,916,198
o Key messages
 Through Budget 2016, the Government invested $11.9 billion in the Investing in
Canada Plan (IICP) to support improvements in public transit, green
infrastructure, and social infrastructure. Of this amount, the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) received $15.4 million to support capital
infrastructure investments in Aboriginal Head Start in Urban and Northern
Communities (AHSUNC) project sites.
 To date, 77 capital and quality improvement projects have been completed at
AHSUNC sites across Canada, with $1.9 million remaining for capital
improvements in the north. Given the remote and isolated nature of the
Nunavut communities, there have been significant challenges in identifying a
suitable project manager to lead the complex infrastructure projects. Over the
past 18 months, PHAC has explored a number of different options to complete
the work. These have included an investigation into whether Natural Resources
Canada’s innovative MODULARIS building structures could work. However, this
option proved not to be feasible, because acquisition of MODULARIS structures
is restricted to federal departments. Furthermore, PHAC cannot purchase
capital assets and then transfer them to recipients.
 PHAC then explored the possibility of leveraging the Government of Nunavut
(GN) tendering process. This option did not prove to be feasible as GN had other
ideas about where infrastructure investments are needed that do not
correspond with AHSUNC program objectives. PHAC also explored partnering
with ESDC tosupport infrastructure investments at AHSUNC sites in the north.
However, this option did not address the need to identify a recipient that would
be willing to oversee the project.
o Purpose/objectives
 Nunavut Tunngavik Inc. (NTI) has expressed a willingness to undertake the
infrastructure projects at the three remaining AHSUNC sites in the north. The
investments align with the highest needs identified by community leaders; with
the results of recent building assessments; and with the overall goals of theIICP
funding.
o Expected results
 NTI has been invited to submit a funding request for the $1.9M, including a
proposed budget and work plan. PHAC and NTI are in the process of finalizing a
contribution agreement.
 In order to support these important investments, we require the funds to be
reprofiled to fiscal year 2021/22.
o Voted: 1,916,198
o Statutory: 0
- Infectious Disease and Climate Change program
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 443,149
o Key messages:
 Budget 2017 provided funding for climate changeadaptation programs to
support the implementation of the Pan-Canadian Framework on Clean Growth
and Climate Change (PCF), including those of the health portfolio. The Public
Health Agency of Canada received a total of $42.8 million over 11 years (2017-
2028) for the Infectious Disease and Climate Change (IDCC) Program and the
establishment of grants and contributions fund (IDCC Fund).
 Launched in 2017, the Infectious Disease and Climate Change Fund (IDCCF)
focusses on climate-driven infectious diseases thatare zoonotic, food-borne
and/or water-borne. The Fund is a vehicle to advance action, raise awareness
and help Canadians better adapt and become more resilient to our changing
climate.
 The IDCCF also received $800,000 of dedicated funding to work with theMétis
Nation to address the health effects of climate change. Program officials have
been engaging with representatives of the Métis National Council and
Governing Members since August 2017 to set up bilateral funding agreements
to enable the transfer of funds.
o Purpose/objectives
 Various pandemic restrictions have caused significant delays for many Infectious
Disease and Climate Change Fund (IDCCF) projects (e.g. recruiting, citizen
science, laboratory analysis, consultation and engagement, redirection of
project staff to COVID-19 response efforts), leading recipients to postpone many
activities originally planned for 2020-2021 fiscal year to 2021-2022 fiscal year.
 This reprofile request seeks to move surplus funds from 2020-2021 fiscal year
into 2021-2022 fiscal year for the IDCCF as well as the dedicated funding for the
Métis Nation. This reprofile will allow recipients to complete projects and
enable the program to increase capacity and deliver on the IDCC Program's
overall objectives. In addition, this will allow PHAC to deliver on the
government's commitment to the Métis Nation to support the advancement of
climate change and health activities through a distinctions-based approach.
o Expected results
 Due to the COVID-19 pandemic PHAC has lapsed a total of$443,149 of funds
related to the Infectious Disease and Climate Change Program in 2020-2021. Of
these lapsing funds, PHAC lapsed $200,902 in the delivery of the core program
(program funds) and $242,247 related to the dedicated funding and
commitment to the Métis Nation. Therefore a total of $443,149 is being
requested to reprofile into 2021-2022.
 This reprofile request is for the unspent funds from 2020-2021 to be reprofiled
into 2021-2022. This is required to allow for the continued funding of activities
and to provide recipients with additional time to successfully complete project
objectives.
o Voted: 443,149
o Statutory: 0
- Total reprofiles
o Voted: 701,165,248
o Statutory: 0
Transfers
- Transfer from the Department of Health for procurement of COVID-19 tests
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $267,500,000
o Key messages
 Many parts of the country are dealing with the fourth wave of COVID-19, which
has seen increased numbers of cases, hospitalizations and deaths, continued
emphasis on rapid testing as one of theessential public health tools remains
important to help curb transmission.
 This transfer of funding will facilitate the procurement of Covid-19 Rapid Self-
Testing kits in the response to urgent Requests for Assistance from provinces
and territories.
 RapidTesting will help curb the transmission during the fourth wave of Covid-
19.
 Combined with the $750 million of new funding, the Public Health Agency of
Canada is investing $1.01billion in Rapid Testing.
o Purpose/objectives
 This transfer of $267.5 million secures enough tests to support increased
demand from PTs, as well as federally-administered programs.
o Expected results
 Rapid Testing will help curb the transmission during the fourth wave of COVID-
19.
o Voted: 267,500,000
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Department of Indigenous Services to support activities to increase and
enhance testing capabilities for COVID-19 using existing platforms
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $21,340,475
o Key messages
 $21.340 million will be transferred from Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) to
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) through Supplementary Estimates C in
the following amounts:
 $4.965 million in capital to purchase an additional 75 GeneXpert rapid testing
devices for use in northern and isolated Indigenous communities. These devices
will be purchased by PHAC who has a contractual relationship with the supplier
through authorized use of procurement instruments put in place by Public
Services and Procurement Canada (PSPC).
 $16.375 million in O&M to purchase 2.5 million Rapid Antigen Detection Tests
(RADTs), which have become a critical component of the NRI strategy over the
past six months, enabling communities and organizations to develop
asymptomatic screening programs for serial testing of individuals. This has
become essential for ensuring some level of reopening of activities for
community populations.
 The devices are being provided to communities under loan agreements. Once
the COVID-19 surge subsides, under mutual agreement, the units may remain
within community health units for additional testing needs.
o Purpose/objectives
 To provide improved COVID-19 testing support for Northern Remote and
Isolated (NRI) Indigenous Communities. PHAC has been working since the
beginning of the pandemic to assist NRI communities withthe development of
extremely high quality, community led/community based testing (CBT) for
COVID-19. The procurement of additional Cepheid GeneXpert systems will
allow for the implementation of CBT in up to 75 additional communities,
complementing the network of approximately 200 instruments established
since the beginning of the pandemic. The procurement of RADTs for the NRI
initiative will be used for ongoing serial screening of asymptomatic individuals
to protect communities from outbreaks.
o Expected results
 PHAC facilitating the deployment of 75 additional GeneXpert (i.e., rapid testing)
devices and 2.5 million RADTs to northern, remote and isolated communities
o Voted: 21,340,475
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Department of Health to support activities related to chemicals management,
capacity building and climate change
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $267,119
o Key messages
 The transfer of $267,119 from Health Canada (HC) to PHAC’s International
Health Grants Program (IHGP) will be used to leverageinternational expertise
and support the work of international partners in the areas of chemicals
management, capacity building and climate change adaptation as follows:
 World Health Organization’s (WHO) implementation of the WHO chemicals road
map and health sector engagement in the Strategic Approach to International
Chemicals Management (SAICM) policy framework ($42,119);
 The United Nations Environment Programme’s (UNEP) development and
implementation of a capacity building strategy for the sound management of
chemicals and waste ($75,000).
 The Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development’s (OECD)
implementation of the Chemicals and Biotechnology Committee’s (CBC) Global
Outreach Strategy ($50,000); and
 The WHO’s Department of Environment, ClimateChange and Health’s
development of guidance documents, tools and best practices to protect human
health from extreme heat ($100,000).
o Purpose/objectives
 These initiatives will improve domestic and global capacity to identify, assess
and protect human health from the harmful effects of exposures to chemicals
and climate change impacts.
o Expected results
 The overarching expected result is better environmental health management
outcomes, both domestically and internationally, to better protect the health
and safety of Canadians through adaptation measures to reduce impacts related
to extreme weather events, and through actions to reduce chemical exposures.
 Increase Canada’s collaboration with leading global health actors and
strengthen existing relationships with key partners such as the WHO, OECD and
UNEP.
 Enhance the responsibility of stakeholders to better protect human health by
promoting and reinforcing commitments and multi-sectoral engagement.
o Voted: 267,119
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Department of Health to support the Organization for Economic Co-operation
and Development Health Committee
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 200,000
o Key messages
 The work of the OECD Health Committee supports the Government of Canada’s
health policies and programs.
 This work benefits Canada by providing internationally comparable data and
policy analysis to support improvements in the health system, and allows
Canadians to more easily measure the performance of Canada’s health system
against those of other OECD countries.
 Funding from Canada will position Canada as a more influential member of the
Health Committee so that more of Canada’s priorities are acted upon by the
OECD, including data and policy analysis to support the health system response
to COVID-19.
o Purpose/objectives
 A grant to the OECD Health Committee will support its work to foster
improvements in the performance of member countries’, and as appropriate,
non-member countries’ health systems, in the areas of financial sustainability
and efficiency of health and long-term care systems, and the provision of high-
quality health care to all.
 The Health Committee’s work is focused on the development of health data and
statistics as well as providing analyses on the financial sustainability, efficiency,
and quality of health and long-term care systems in member countries.
o Expected results
 The Government of Canada contributes to, and regularly uses, OECD reports to
assess Canada’s health care system achievements. The Health Committee’s data
and policy analysis supports Canada’s health priorities such as the health system
response to COVID-19 and Health Canada’s activities to improve the health care
system
 The funding to the Health Committee would also demonstrate Canada’s support
for the OECD’s work in health and promote Canada’s continued engagement on
global health issues related to health system strengthening and universal health
coverage.
o Voted: 200,000
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Department of Health to support the development of a database on ileal
amino acid digestibility of foods and diets
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 132,604
o Key messages
 Health Canada was allocated funds in Budget 2018to increase Canadian
participation and influence in Codex, including by exploring opportunities to
help address the increase in international scientific knowledge on issues of
significance to Canada and globally.
 An FAO Expert Consultation on Dietary Protein Quality Evaluation in Human
Nutrition recommended the development of a dataset of ileal amino acid
digestibility for human foods and diets to support the recommended method to
measure protein quality.
 The database will inform both domestic and international standards and enable
the assessment of protein quality of individual protein sources as well as mixed
diets commonly consumed by humans and support discussions around protein
quality of plant-based sources, supporting Canadian nutrition goals anddietary
guidance in Canada’s Food Guide.
o Purpose/objectives
 The FAO project will establish a robust global dataset of ileal amino acid
digestibility for human foods and diets that will inform scientific advice and the
development of both domestic and international standards.
o Expected results
 This work will improve the assessment of protein quality of individual protein
sources as well as mixed diets commonly consumed by humans and inform
research, policies and guidance related to protein quality of plant-based
sources. The database will provide reliable data which could in turn be used by
HC as it considers amending current regulations to accept results from new
method of protein quality evaluation.
o Voted: 132,604
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Departmentof Health to support Tobacco Control
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 125,000
o Key messages
 Domestic resource mobilisation for tobacco control programs is a longstanding
challenge at the national level especially in low-and middle-income countries,
further exacerbated as funding is prioritized for pandemic response efforts.
 The funding of $125,000 will allow the FCA to build the knowledge and skill set
of civil society organisations in the Americas to increase understanding of
domestic resource mobilization and to conduct research related to the ‘global
funding gap’ for tobacco control.
 The project directly supports Health Canada’s Tobacco Control Directorate’s
objective of strengthening intersectoral collaboration as well as global and
domestic effortsto control the tobacco epidemic.
o Purpose/objectives
 The main objective of the proposed project is to address the issue of a lack of
predictable, long-term funding for national tobacco control programmes in low-
and middle-income countries.
o Expected results
 The anticipated results of this project are that civil society organizations in
participating countries will have:
 Increased knowledge of opportunities for domestic resource mobilisation for
tobacco control in their respective countries;
 Stronger links established between tobacco control stakeholders and decision
makers in health and economic sectors of the government; and
 Increased understanding of tactics, tools, and strategies for budget advocacy for
tobacco control in the region of the Americas.
 The expected outcome by project end (after 1 year) is to have at least three civil
society organizations in the Americas region participate in an in-depth capacity
building program, and be equipped with investment case data and budget
studies for their respective countries.
o Voted: 125,000
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer from the Department of National Defence to support the Canadian Safety and Security
Program
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $ 60,000
o Key messages
 The Public Health Agency of Canada is developing models to evaluate protein-
protein interactions with a specific focus on virus glycoprotein-host receptor
protein interactions (emphasis on SARS CoV-2).
 Enhanced transmission of SARS CoV-2 variants is in part due to enhanced
capacity of the virus Spike protein to bind the human receptor Ace2:
implementation of this method will allow quantitative analysis of this
interaction to inform of potential high risk variants.
 The technology is not limited to SARS CoV-2 and will be used for assessing other
important interactions associated with virus pathogenesis.
o Purpose/objectives
 Purchase equipment that will allow analysis of new variants and their capacity
to enter cells.
o Expected results
 PHAC will:
 Implement a method for quantitatively assessing protein-protein interactions
initiating with the SARS CoV-2 coronavirus with the aim of identifying virus
variants with increased transmission capacity.
 Compare the results of this lab-based modelling system with theoretical
molecular dynamics models (also beingdeveloped at the NML) for rapid
identification of viral variants of concern.
 Incorporation of the method into a service that can be used for any
biochemistry kinetic analysis required by additional PHAC scientist.
o Voted: 60,000
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to Treasury Board Secretariat for the Financial Community Developmental Programs
and the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility initiative
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($8,333)
o Key messages
 In order for the Office of Comptroller General (OCG) to ensure that the
leadership development needs are being met as the financial management
community matures and the environment evolves, a costing model to support
enhanced and continuous program delivery was developed and approved at the
May 2021 CFO Talent Management Advisory Committee (TMAC).
 While TBS maintains the responsibility for the design and updates to programs,
additional funding will solidify capacity to deliver as costs increase and increase
data analytics to provide support to candidates andenhance the referral
process. It will also allow for TBS to lead the financial management community
on the IDEA initiative (Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility) which has
become a priority for the Public Service.
o Purpose/objectives
o Expected results
 Large Departments and Agencies (LDAs) contribute to fund the renewal and
delivery of the development programs. These development programs are
delivered by the OCG on behalf of the financial management community.
 LDAs also contribute to the additionalresource (FI-04) within OCG that will be
responsible for leading the implementation of IDEA strategic recruitment on
behalf of the financial management community as well as integration of
required changes to existing development programs.
o Voted : (8,333)
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the Health Research Training
Platform
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($25,000)
o Key messages:
 The Health Research Training Platform (HRTP) Pilot funding opportunity will
supportthe development of inter-disciplinary, inter-jurisdictional, and inter-
sectoral research training platforms that will attract a diverse cadre of high-
caliber trainees and early career researchers and equip them with the skills
required for academic and non-academic careers.
 CIHR and PHAC are partnering on the HRTP Pilot funding opportunity within the
research area of “Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness for
LGBTQ/2S Populations.”
 For the purpose of this funding opportunity, training of research areas in stigma
reduction and mental wellness will encompass upstream structural/social
factors as well as outcomes.
 PHAC intends to commit up to $600,000 to this project in fiscal years 2021-22 to
2027-28.
o Purpose/objectives
 Support the development ofstructured, openly accessible and sustainable
training and mentoring platforms that build capacity for co-designing
intervention research in stigma reduction and life course mental wellness for
LGBTQ/2S and gender-diverse populations.
 Support the development of skills that increase the likelihood of employability
and career prospects of researchers, trainees, healthcare professionals,
government employees, community-based organizations, and persons with
lived and living experience.
o Expected results
 The proposed training platform for the Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental
Wellness for LGBTQ/2S Populations pool will:
 Ensure equity and diversity in the content of the proposed training, including
areas of focus related to LGBTQ, Two-Spirit, Trans, gender-diverse, queer people
of colour, racialized, disabled, immigrant/refugee, and older adult populations
and communities;
 Promote and support training on a range of qualitative, quantitative, and
interdisciplinary mixed-methods research approaches, including
implementation science, outcome measurement and public health intervention
research competencies;
 Build capacity to appropriately address the intersections of Indigenous, Black,
Western, disabled, queer, gender-diverse and other identities and social
locations while acknowledging the impacts of classism, racism and culture;
 Promote training that takes an integrated life course perspective
o Voted: (25,000)
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to the Treasury Board Secretariat to support the Capacity Accelerator Project
o TotalSupplementary Estimates (C): ($30,000)
o Key messages
 This transfer will fund operational costs for an internal audit community
initiative called the Capacity Accelerator Project, managed by the Internal Audit
Sector within the Office of Comptroller General(OCG-IAS). The OCG-IAS is
responsible for implementing the Government’s renewed vision for internal
audits, which aims to provide timely and credible advice to management that is
tailored to the organization’s strategy, objectives, and tolerance for risk.This
funding is required to meet increased demand for internal audit services and to
continue developing a sustainable, diverse, and professional internal audit
community.
 Given the magnitude and rapid pace of implementation for Internal Audit
community initiatives, the OCG-IAS is seeking funding to offset salaries and
goods & services costs from July 2021 to March 2024. After this period, resource
requirements and funding sources will be re-assessed based on community
needs, lessons learned and the levelof maturity and capacity of individual
departmental IA functions at that time.
 The OCG-IAS is almost three years into the implementation of a renewed vision
for internal audit in the Government of Canada, which aims to reinforce the
function’s role as a credible and timely assurance provider that advises
management in light of the organization’s strategy, objectives and tolerance for
risk.
o Purpose/objectives
 The Office of Audit and Evaluation (OAE) is asked to financially contribute to
internal audit community services and initiatives to help develop and maintain
the OCG-IAS which in turn will provide OAE with support, guidance and best
practices.
o Expected results
 OCG-IAS is to provide the following services:
 Provide ongoing advice and support in the areasof learning, recruitment, and
retention.
 Oversee the development and implementation of a community diversity and
inclusion action plan.
 Lead the development of Interdepartmental Standardized Work Descriptions
and develop guidance and tools to support the conversion of AS positions to the
new CT-IAU occupational subgroup.
 Lead the implementation of and ongoing support for the IA Community Data
Strategy, including the establishment of an enterprise solution for TeamMate+.
 Proactively convene, engage, and support the community on emerging
horizontal issues and priorities.
 Make best practices and tools available to the community via established
platform
 Manage and fund IIA memberships for all eligible internal auditors.
o Voted: (30,000)
o Statutory : 0
- Transfer tothe Royal Mounted Police of Canada related to the provision of Law Enforcement
Record Checks
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($77,100)
o Key messages
 PHAC is responsible for the implementation of the Human Toxins and Pathogens
Act’s (HPTA) security clearance scheme, which is designed to ensure the health
and safety of Canadians by assessing and limiting the risk associated with the
use and handling of human pathogens and toxins. The act and regulations
require individuals with access to prescribed pathogens and toxins to undergo a
Security Clearance assessment and be approved by the Centre of Biosecurity.
 The HPTA Security Clearance requires, inter alia, a Law Enforcement Records
Check (LERC) which is conducted by the RCMP via a Service Level Agreement as
a fee-for-service.
o Purpose/objectives
o Security screening requirements are the key biosecurity element of the HPTA/R program
and regulatory framework that assesses whether individuals who have or will have
access to a prescribed list of high risk humanpathogens and toxins pose a risk to the
health and safety of the public by virtue of their access.
o Expected results
 On receiving a written request from PHAC, RCMP will undertake a LERC and
provide the results in accordance with applicable legislation and policy.
 RCMP will store information provided by PHAC in its records management
system, will query the law enforcement databanks to which it has access, will
conduct additional checks as necessary including open sources, local police or
other partners of the RCMP, and at its discretion will disclose to PHAC the
information located in its searches.
o Voted: (77,100)
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to Health Canada in support of the Innovation Solutions Canada Program
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($200,000)
o Key messages
 Health Canada’s Innovative Solutions Canada Program is a Government of
Canada initiative under which participating departments and agencies issue
challenges to Canadian businesses to develop solutions for operational or
sector-specific issues. Under the program, Health Canada provides $1.4 million
annually to fund the development of solutions.
 In FY 2021-22 and 2022-23, Health Canada will provision the program with an
additional $800,000 in funding over two years. Half of the additional funds
($400,000) will be transferred from the Public Health Agency of Canada
($200,000 in FY 2021-22 and $200,000 in FY 2022-23).
 This agreement has been negotiated through a Memorandum of Understanding.
o Purpose/objectives
 PHAC’s total transfer of $400K (Vote 1) willbe committed to fund two-fifths of
the Identification of Microbial Mixtures Phase II challenge. Health Canada
expects to sign the project’s contract and disburse the funding in December
2021. The project is scheduled to end on March 31, 2023.
o Expected results
 •The ISC Point of Care Diagnostics to combat Antimicrobial Resistance Challenge
will aim to:
 develop a detection or diagnostic tool(s) that will be able to accurately and
reliably identify and characterize antibiotic resistant bacteria and/or distinguish
between viral and bacterial infections very rapidly (within minutes to hours) at
the point-of-care;
 be affordable and accessible enough for implementation into standard practice
at Canadian hospitals and clinics (i.e. cost of the diagnostic will have tobe low
enough to encourage its use rather than send someone away with a
prescription for an antibiotic that is not needed); and
 be easy to use (e.g. requiring minimal training) and able to be maintained by
health care professionals.
o Voted: (200,000)
o Statutory : 0
- Transfer to the Department of Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs to support
Indigenous early learning and child care
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($278,400)
o Key messages
 Guided by the Indigenous Early Learning and Child Care (IELCC) Framework, the
IELCC Transformation Initiative supports the development of flexible and
responsive funding agreements for Indigenous-led regional bodies and their
recipients across federal government departments.
 The Nunatsiavut Government hasrequested its 2021-22 and 2022-23 AHSUNC
funding in the annual amount of $278,400 be included in its Fiscal Financing
Agreement (FFA) with CIRNAC, retroactive to April 1, 2021.
o Purpose/objectives
 To support 2021-2023 AHSUNC programming for the NunatsiavutGovernment
under a broader IELCC funding arrangement to be delivered through CIRNAC as
part of the IELCC Transformation Initiative
o Expected results
 A co-developed approach that aligns with the federal government’s
commitment to reconciliation and recognizes Inuit rights to be active and full
partners in the management of federal funding related to Inuit ELCC and
supports the Inuit IELCC Framework.
o Voted: (278,400)
o Statutory : 0
- Transfer to the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to providesupport to
departmental staff located at missions abroad
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($447,240)
o Key messages
 In spring 2021, the Office of International Affairs (OIA) established two Health
Counsellor positions to be deployed to the missions in Washington, D.C. and
Geneva on four-year assignments beginning August 1, 2021.
 Global Affairs Canada (GAC) is responsible for the administration of common
services in support of missions abroad and receives payment from client
departments.
o Purpose/objectives
 Health Counsellors are dedicated Health Portfolio resources focussed on
strengthening international engagements, building relationships, and
formulating strategic advice to advance Canada’s health priorities.
 In combination with the salary and operating costs paid directly by OIA, the
funds transferred through Supps C to GAC ensure Health Counsellors stationed
in Washington, D.C. and Geneva have the appropriate resources required to live
and carry out their duties abroad.
o Expected results
 Embedding health counsellors strategically in Canadian missions abroad will
serve to protect, advance and promote Canadian public health at home and
abroad and will support Canada’s broader foreign policy objectives.
 Enhanced information and intelligence would facilitateproactive decision
making, improve efficiency in identifying and responding to emerging
challenges, and strengthen horizontal policy files across the Health Portfolio.
 Regular collaboration with international counterparts will enhance Canada’s
ability tobuild strategic bilateral and multilateral alliances that increase
Canada’s global health diplomatic reach.
 Strengthening effectiveness and efficiency of the Health Portfolio’s engagement
at international meetings will better demonstrate Canada’s value add on
international issues, influence discussions taking place on the international
stage, and contribute to establishing Canada as a leader in global health.
o Voted: (447,240)
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to Canadian Institutes of Health Research to support the Applied Public Health Chairs
Program
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($700,000)
o Key messages
 PHAC and CIHR have co-managed the Applied Public Health Chairs (APHC) grant
program through Interdepartmental Letters of Agreement (ILAS) since 2006.
 The APHCprogram is sponsored by PHAC and CIHR’s Institute of Population and
Public Health and funded in partnership with other CIHR institutes and external
funders.
 The APHC program provides opportunities to mid-level researchers to address
topics with themes jointly identified by PHAC and CIHR that align with PHAC’s
investment specific to ministerial and CPHO priorities.
 Administration of the APHC (funding transferred to CIHR by PHAC), is through
CIHR’s processes and their terms and conditions for the grant program.
o Purpose/objectives
 Health Counsellors are dedicated Health Portfolio resources focussed on
strengthening international engagements, building relationships, and
formulating strategic advice to advance Canada’s health priorities.
 In combination with thesalary and operating costs paid directly by OIA, the
funds transferred through Supps C to GAC ensure Health Counsellors stationed
in Washington, D.C. and Geneva have the appropriate resources required to live
and carry out their duties abroad.
 Ongoing funding of the APHC will support academic scientific enterprise in
Canada by strengthening the ability of the research community to respond with
actionable evidence to emerging issues that could impact the health and well-
being of Canadians; and mentor the next generation of early career researchers
practitioners and policy makers from a range of disciplines and sectors.
o Expected results
 PHAC AND CIHR have developed a new approach for the current cohort of the
APHC recognizing the continued need to develop new capacity and knowledge
translation efforts for public health in Canada.
 The re-imagined APHC program will be:
 responsive to emerging applied public health priorities identified by federal,
provincial, territorial and local partners;
 adoptive to ensure that public health issues addressed have the right amount of
time and resources to generate actionable solutions; and
 integrated with policy and decision-making processes in Canada to maximize the
potential impact through applied interventions.
o Voted: (700,000)
o Statutory: 0
- Transfer to Innovation, Science and Economic Development Canada to support the Canadian
Genomics Network’s COVID-19 viral sequencing activities
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): ($1,000,000)
o Key messages
 ISED, via Genome Canada has been supporting capacity building and scale up of
genome sequencing across Canada in response to COVID-19. These funds will
shortly be depleted.
 Support for operational genome sequencing is being picked up by the PHAC
National Microbiology Laboratory (NML)under the Variants of Concern
Strategy, announced in February 2021.
 To ensure continuity of sequencing support for COVID-19 variant tracking and a
smooth transition from the ISED model to a different NML model, this Supp-B
transfer allows ISED support totaper while NML support ramps up.
o Purpose/objectives
 Continuity of COVID-19 sequencing support to provincial and territorial
laboratories and a smooth transition of laboratory funding models.
o Expected results
 Uninterrupted sequencing availability as ISED support through CanCOGeN winds
down and NML support ramps up between August 2021 and December 2021.
o Voted: (1,000,000)
o Statutory: 0
- Total transfers
o Voted: 286,859,125
o Statutory: 0
Internal Reallocations
- Internal reallocation of resources to support emergency infrastructure
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $0
o Key messages
 In continued efforts to respond to the COVID-19 national emergency the
National Emergency Strategic Stockpile (NESS) has secured various emergency
warehouses to store personal protective equipment (PPE).
 PSPC Real Estate Services (RES) acquired space through the Emergency
Contracting Policy.
 Various emergency warehouses were and are being retrofitted to meet current
demands for PPE storage such as gloves, gowns, and biomedical equipment.
o Purpose/objectives
 Conversion of $4.5M from Operating to Capital.
o Expected results
 By converting $4.5M from SPA operating to capital the NESS will have the
infrastructure and equipment required for the continued support to the
national COVID-19 pandemic response and thereafter.
 Capital costs include the acquisition of the following:
 Furniture, IT, Security and life safety systems;
 Fire Pump;
 Generator;
 Shelving/racking
 Forklift
 NESS Operations continues to beclosely involved in all fit-up aspects of this
initiative, acknowledging PSPC and HC’s roles as being responsible for carrying
out the detailed day-to-day management activities of this warehouse initiative.
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
- Internal reallocation of resources to support border testing
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $0
o Key messages
 As part of the Border and Quarantine funding asks, the Agency received a total
of $103.3 million in grants to support projects on border testing.
 Presently there is $11.4million in grant funding that is not committed to a
current grant agreement.
 The border testing has moved from a grant-funded initiative to a contract based
initiative.
o Purpose/objectives
 Conversion of $11.4M from Grants to Operating.
o Expected results
 Itis expected that in addition to an off-cycle budget request that the Agency has
prepared, converting unused grant funding to operating will help to offset the
increasing financial pressures of testing as travel volumes begin to increase.
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
- Internal reallocation of resources in support of the 2022 AIDS Conference
o Total Supplementary Estimates (C): $0
o Key messages
 The 24th International AIDS conference (AIDS 2022), hosted by the International
AIDS Society (IAS) will be held in Montréal from July 29 to August 2, 2022.
 PHAC has internally allocated $450,000 to support the conference; an additional
$4 million is being requested to enhance Canada’s support for the conference.
Pending approval, PHAC will provide $3 million to the International AIDS Society,
$700,000 to a community organization to develop a Canada Pavilion and
$793,000 for PHAC operational expenditures for an overall cost of $4.4 million.
 $990,000 in total Grants and Contributions (G&C) funding is required for fiscal
year 2021-2022, with $900,000 to the IAS for hosting the Conference, and
$90,000 to a community organization for running the Canada Pavilion at the
Conference. PHAC has internally allocated $595,000 in G&C funding for fiscal
year 2021-2022 for this Conference, with theremaining $395,000 to be
provided from this vote conversion.
 Transfer payments are planned to be paid under the terms and conditions for
promotion of population health.
 Once approved, PHAC will invite the IAS to submit a grant funding proposal and
launchan open and competitive solicitation process to select a community
organization to run the Canada Pavilion at the conference
o Purpose/objectives
 Conversion of $0.395M from Operating to Grants.
o Expected results
 Through existing commitments in the Governmentof Canada Action Plan on
Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections, this Conference is well
positioned to bring value to PHAC and other federal departments by working
together and with community based organizations to highlight Canada’s
commitment toindigenous truth and reconciliation and focus on stigma and
discrimination. Many departments are advancing these common priorities as
part of ministers’ mandates.
 The funding provided to the IAS will support the delivery of AIDS 2022 in
Canada, includingprogram management, logistics, IT, etc. The funding provided
to a community based organization that will run the Canada Pavilion will
support both a virtual and in-person Canada Pavilion in the AIDS 2022 exhibition
hall, which will include Canadian programming and resources, a space for
dialogue and networking and scholarships for approximately 100 people living
with HIV and key populations.
 This approach would allow Canada to showcase its achievements throughout
the conference programme, Canada Pavilion and side events, and to highlight
Canada as a leader in the field.
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
- Net internal reallocations
o Voted: 0
o Statutory: 0
COVID statutory
- Proof of Vaccination Fund for PTs
o PENDING
o Key messages:
 Proof of vaccination requirements help limittransmission of COVID-19 and thus
have a role to play in a comprehensive public health response to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic.
 As such, all provinces and territories have implemented proof of vaccination
requirements.
o Purpose/objectives:
 A standardizedCanadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential that can be
recognized across the country.
o Expected results:
 The Fund is to compensate provinces and territories for costs to implement the
associated COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential programs
o Voted:-
o Statutory: $300million
Canadian Food Inspection Agency 2021-22 Supplementary Estimates (C)
- Total supplementary estimates ‘c’
o Total: $20,556,401
o Key messages
 For Supplementary Estimates (C), CFIA has an increase of $20.56 million for the
following:
 $18.1 million in Voted Appropriations which includes $14 million in new
funding, $3.6M million in re-profiled funds from 2020-21, and $482K for
transfers from Other Government Departments.
 $2.45 million in statutory appropriations for the employee benefit plans.
o Purpose/objectives:-
o Expected results:-
o Voted: 18,106,148
o Statutory: 2,450,253
- Funding to maintain and further strengthen food safety measures
o Total: $15,362,746
o Key messages
 Funding for the renewal of sunset funding in the amount of $31.4M over two
years (2021-22 and 2022-23), to maintain and further strengthen food safety
measures.
o Purpose/objectives
 The measures supported by this funding maintain and strengthen Canada’s food
safety system by targeting inspection activities to high risk domestic and
imported food and food products, support work with countries wishing to send
food to Canada, and facilitate industry compliance with existing and future food
safety requirements across the food supply chain.
o Expected results
 Maintain and strengthen Canada’s food safety system
o Voted: 13,087,850
o Statutory: 2,274,896
- Funding to monitor, prevent, and control antimicrobial resistance (AMR) and support the
appropriate use of antimicrobials in Canada
o Total: $1,141,937
o Key messages
 Funding of $1.14Min 2021 to support ongoing interdepartmental efforts to
reduce the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand efforts to monitor
the emergence and spread of AMR in Canada.
o Purpose/objectives
 Funding will support the Health Minister’s 2019 Mandate letter recognizing the
importance of addressing AMR.
 Funding will help facilitating access to alternatives to antimicrobials to keep
food-producing animals healthy, including new in-feed products and vaccines.
Keeping animals healthy reduces the need to use antimicrobials
o Expected results
 Funding will help increase the approvals of feed and feed-related products for
use by Canadian animal producers to support the health of food animals.
o Voted: 966,580
o Statutory: 175,357
- Reprofile for Investing in CFIA (Budget 2020)
o Total: $3,569,274
o Key messages
 Reprofile of $3.6 million from 2020-21 to 2021-22 to accelerate the ramp-up of
activities within the Investing in CFIA programs.
o Purpose/objectives
 Address known gaps in the frontline programs and work identified under the
Investing in CFIA programs.
o Expected results
 The timeliness of changes to frontline programs is improved.
o Voted: 3,569,274
o Statutory:-
- Transfer from the Department of National Defence to various organizations to support the
Canadian Safety and Security Program.
o Total $1,060,000
o Key messages
 Transfer from Department of National Defence to CFIA in the amount of $1.1M
to support the Canadian Safety and Security Program (CSSP)
o Purpose/objections
 The CSSP provides science and technology solutions, support and advice for
responding to the Government of Canada's public safety and security policy
imperatives.
o Expected results
 The transfer of funds will enable the CFIA to enhance its science and technology
capabilities for public safety and security through strategic acquisition of
technologies.
o Voted: 1,060,000
o Statutory:-
- Transfer from Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to Canadian Food Inspection Agency to
provide support to departmental stafflocated at missions abroad
o Total: $80,777
o Key messages
 Transfer from Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development to CFIA in the amount of
$80.8K to return funding mainly related to the foreign service directive
allowance and mission locally employed staff reclassification.
o Purpose/objectives
 Support CFIA staff located in missions aboard.
o Expected results
 CFIA staff located in missions abroad are adequately supported
o Voted: 80,777
o Statutory:-
- Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to the Department of Health to develop risk
profiles for current and emerging foodborne pathogens and other food hazards.
o Total: ($600,000)
o Key messages:
 Transfer from CFIA to Department of Health in the amount of $0.6M to develop
risk profiles for current and emerging foodborne pathogens and other food
hazards
o Purpose/objectives
o Expected results
o Voted: (600,000)
o Statutory:-
- Transfer from Operating authority to Grant authority
o Total: $0
o Key messages
 Transfer of $100K from Operating authority to Grant authority to support
Innovative Solutions Canada (ISC) Program
o Purpose/objectives
 CFIA received grant authority up to $650,000 per year for a period of 4 years
(2018-19 to 2021-22) under ISC program Terms and Conditions along with 19
other Federal Organizations. This in-year transfer is necessary to fund the ISC
grant projects
o Expected results
 Small business innovations are supported through posting online challenges
 The development of innovative approaches to improve sector outcomes.
o Voted : (100,000) 100.000
o Statutory:-
- Transfer from Canadian Food Inspection Agency to the Treasury Board Secretariat for the pilot
of new assessment tools related to the Project Management Strategy.
o Total: $50,000
o Key messages
 Transfer from CFIA to the Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of$50K for
the pilot of new assessment tools related to the Project Management Strategy.
o Purpose/objectives
 This funding will be used to finalize new project management assessment tools;
standards of evidence; a scoring framework; and a suite of guidance and change
management products to support their adoption.
o Expected results
 The new Organizational Project Management Capacity Assessment tool and
Project Complexity and Risk Assessment tool will be completed and accessed to
potentially replace the existing tools.
o Voted: 50,000
o Statutory:-
- From Canadian Food Inspection Agency to the Treasury Board Secretariat for the Financial
Community Developmental Programs and the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility
initiative
o Total: $8,333
o Key messages
 Transfer from CFIA to the Treasury Board Secretariat in the amount of $8.3K for
the Financial Community Developmental Programs and the Inclusion, Diversity,
Equity and Accessibility initiative.
o Purpose/objectives
 To fund the development and recruitment programs that are delivered by the
OCG on behalf of the financial management community.
o Expected results
 Increased capacity for the Financial Community Developmental Programs and
the Inclusion, Diversity, Equity and Accessibility initiative.
o Voted: 8,333
o Statutory:-
Health Portfolio’s 2021-11 Supplementary Estimates (C)
Canadian Institutes of Health Research
- Funding to prevent diabetes and improve treatments (Budget 2021)
o Total: $3,992,303
o Key messages
 As announced in Budget 2021, additional investments are being made on
diabetes research, surveillance, and prevention to highlight the 100th
anniversary of the discovery of insulin.
 These important investments will lay the groundwork towards the development
of a national framework for diabetes.
 Throughthe Canadian Institutes of Health Research, the government will invest
a total of $20 million in diabetes research, $15 million of which will be matched
by JDRF Canada to support research on type 1 diabetes.
o Purpose/objectives
 CIHR will develop, launch,and deliver new competitive funding opportunities
and fund research projects relevant to both type 1 and type 2 diabetes
according to international standards of research excellence.
 The majority of the new investments will be made in type 1 diabetes in
partnership with JDRF Canada, who have committed to match $15M of CIHR
funding 1:1 to support new research.
 In addition, new investments will be made in type 2 diabetes focused on
optimizing prevention and treatment among youth and young adults,
particularly those disproportionately affected by diabetes.
o Expected results
 Will support the mobilization of the health research community in key areas of
strategic importance, with the potential for major impacts on health and
improved evidence-based decision-making through:
 Development of more precise approaches to treatment for diabetes
 Development of evidence-based prevention approaches generated through
research that are appropriate forchildren and young adults, in particular, for
ethnic groups that are disproportionately affected by diabetes.
 Building the evidence base to improve diabetes prevention and treatment
o Voted: 3,976,318
o Statutory: 15,985
- Funding to improve mental health supports and services (COVID-19) (Budget 2021)
o Total: $2,237,677
o Key messages
 Important investments were announced in Budget 2021 to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and
territories, health organizations andkey stakeholders.
 An important component of this work is a $4.5 million investment over two
years to support mental health research that will inform the development of
these service standards to support Canadians.
o Purpose/objectives
 The focus of this funding is to develop national mental health, and substance
use service standards through two catalyst grant funding opportunities.
o Expected results
 Research will contribute to the evidence base to inform the development of the
standards, which are expected to positively impact the mental health of
Canadians and reduce problematic substance use by supporting the delivery of
accessible and high-quality mental health and substance use services
consistently and equitably.
o Voted: 2,212,082
o Statutory: 25,595
- Funding to support Pediatric Cancer Research (Budget 2021)
o Total: $279,231
o Key messages
 Cancer remains a leading cause of disease-related death in Canadian children,
and targeted research is needed to help save lives and improve the service
these brave childrenand families receive.
 That is why Budget 2021 committed a total of $30M over two years to the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research to fund pediatric cancer research that
can lead to better outcomes and healthier lives for these young patients.
o Purpose/objectives
 With this funding, CIHR will:
 Support excellent investigator-initiated research in pediatric cancer; and
 Create a Pediatric Cancer Consortium to synergize efforts and drive research
results forward which includes training the next generation of researchers.
o Expected results
 Will support the mobilization of health research related to pediatric cancer, with
the potential for major impacts on the health and wellbeing of pediatric cancer
patients and their families through improved evidence-based decision-making.
o Voted: 225,711
o Statutory: 53,520
- Applied Public Health Chairs Program
o Total: $700,000
o Key messages
 The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
and the Public Health Agency of Canada, is proud to launch the renewed applied
public health chair program, a total investment of $8.1 million over six years.
 This program provides mid-career researchers with an opportunity to
collaborate with decision makers to support evidence-informed decision-making
that improves health and health equity.
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of this program to fund mid-career applied public health
researchers in Canada who will undertake applied research programs that tackle
pressing public health challenges and who will work withdecision makers to
help support evidence-informed decisions that improve health and health
equity.
o Expected results
 Support high quality programs of population health intervention research that
contribute to new knowledge to improve health and health equity across the
life course.
 Stimulate the application of innovative theories, methods and approaches in
research
 Catalyze interdisciplinary and inter-sectoral collaborations between researchers
and knowledge users
 Support and strengthen the ability of theresearch community to respond with
actionable evidence to emerging or re-emerging public health concerns
 Mentor the current and next generation of population and public health
researchers.
o Voted: 700,000
o Statutory:-
- Administration and operations of the Secretariat on Responsible Conduct of Research
o Total: $585,000
o Key messages
 This important investment supports the federal research granting agencies’ role
in the promotion of the responsible conduct of research in the institutions that
administer federalfunding for research.
o Purpose/objectives
 For the administrative and financial support for the SRCR, which provides
substantive and administrative support for the Panel on Research Ethics and the
Panel on Responsible Conduct of Research (RCR), as well as tothe Agencies with
respect to the RCR Framework and the Tri-council Policy Statement.
o Expected results
 The federal granting agencies deliver on the promotion of responsible conduct
of research
o Voted: 585,000
o Statutory:-
- Advancement of policies that promote science and evidence-based decision making
o Total: $94,300
o Key messages
 This transfer from Health Canada, a total of $0.5 million over 3 years, enables
the generation of advice on complex science issues and championing science for
researchers, supportsspecific flagship science initiatives, and participation in
the Network of Departmental Science Advisors.
o Purpose/objectives
 To support generating advice on complex science issues, championing science
for researchers, support specific flagship science initiatives and participate in
the Network of Departmental Science Advisors.
o Expected results
 The generation of advice on complex issues and participation in the Network of
Departmental Science Advisors.
o Voted : 94,300
o Statutory:-
- Tri-agency grants management solution initiative
o Total: $80,232
o Key messages
 The Tri-Agency Grants Management solution initiative will modernize the grants
management system for the federal granting agencies to better support
applicants, administrators and reviewers during the grants management
lifecycle of the agencies.
 This transfer will adjust the amount through Supplementary Estimates B as a
result of an updated forecasted provided by the Natural Sciences and
Engineering Research Council
o Purpose/objectives
 The three Agencieshave embarked on an initiative to modernize their grants
management system to better support applicants, administrators and reviewers
during the grants management lifecycle.
o Expected results
 Upon completion, a more harmonized and integrated approach will provide the
research community and agency staff with a more efficient and user-friendly
experience.
o Voted: 80,232
o Statutory:-
- Evaluation of harm reduction approaches to address the opioid crisis
o Total: $75,000
o Key messages
 The intersection of the COVID-19pandemic and the opioid crisis has been a
significant challenge.
 As a result, the objective of the Safer Supply Pilot Project is to address harm
reduction approaches to the opioid crisis and to better understand its
compounding intersection with the COVID-19 pandemic
 This transfer from Health Canada amounts to $0.9M over 4 years to include an
additional six Safer Supply Pilot Projects to continue supporting Canadians who
use opioids.
o Purpose/objectives
 The goal is to address harm reduction approaches to the opioid crisis and to
better understand its compounding intersection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
 This program is composed of two key components, both representing critical
evaluation needs that have been heightened by the COVID-19 pandemic: Safer
Supplyand Supervised Consumption Sites Evaluation.
 The goal of the supplemental funding is to expand the Evaluation to include an
additional six Safer Supply Pilot Projects and provide an independent evaluation
of the Safer Supply Pilot Projects.
o Expected results
 Generation of evidence to inform best practices for the operation of safer
supply interventions and supervised consumption sites.
 Address pressing evidence needs of decision makers and knowledge users in the
area of harm reduction interventions, takinginto consideration the impact of
the COVID-19 pandemic and the local context.
 Advance evidence-based practices through knowledge dissemination activities.
o Voted: 75,000
o Statutory:-
- Joint Programming Initiative More Years, Better Lives
o Total: $72,758
o Key messages
 The “More Years Better Lives” Joint Programming Initiative is the collaboration
of 17 countries working on a programmed approach to enhance coordination
and collaboration between national and international research on demographic
change and the shifting ofthe population’s age structure.
 This year’s transnational call for proposals looks at discussing "Equality and
Wellbeing across Generations."
 The Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council and the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research are providingan investment of $0.4M, enough to
fund 2 grants over three years.
o Purpose/objectives
 The 2020 Joint Programming Initiative More Years Better Lives launched a
transnational call for proposals discussing "Equality and Wellbeing across
Generations."
 The aimof the call is to enable multi-national scientific collaboration on income
and wealth, caring responsibilities and social and political participation.
o Expected results
 Results from these projects aim to improve our understanding of how
demographic changeis altering the implicit contract between generations and
how policy can ensure that change reduces inequality instead of increasing it.
o Voted: 72,758
o Statutory:-
- Health Research Training Platform
o Total: $25,000
o Key messages
 The Health Research Training Platform is to support the development of inter-
disciplinary, inter-jurisdictional, and inter-sectoral research training platforms.
 The platform is designed to attract a diverse cadre of high-caliber trainees and
early career researchers and equip them withthe skills required for academic
and non-academic careers.
 CIHR and PHAC’s contribution is a grant total of $28.3 million, enough to fund 12
grants over 7 years.
o Purpose/objectives
 The Health Research Training Platform (HRTP) is to support the developmentof
inter-disciplinary, inter-jurisdictional, and inter-sectoral research training
platforms that will attract a diverse cadre of high-caliber trainees and early
career researchers and equip them with the skills required for academic and
non-academic careers.
 CIHR and PHAC are partnering on the HRTP funding opportunity within the
research area of “Stigma Reduction and Life Course Mental Wellness for
LGBTQ/2S Populations.”
o Expected results
 Through the funded platforms, trainees and early career researcherswill receive
comprehensive training from academic, non-academic, and knowledge-user
mentors from a variety of disciplines, ultimately providing trainees with a broad-
based foundation that can serve as a springboard to independent careers within
and outsideof academia.
o Voted: 25,000
o Statutory:-
- Internal reallocation of resources from the Grants for Research Projects and Personnel Support
program to the Institute Support Grants program
o Total: $982,500
o Key messages
 Institutes bring together all partners inthe research process–the people who
fund research, those who carry it out and those who use its results–to share
ideas and focus on what Canadians need: good health and the means to prevent
disease and fight it when it happens. Each institute supportsa broad spectrum
of research in its topic areas and, in consultation with its stakeholders, sets
priorities for research in those areas.
 Institute Support Grants are awarded by CIHR to the Institutes and managed by
their Host Institutions to establish andsustain Institute events and activities.
 This transfer is to support five of CIHR's 13 Institutes in providing scientific
leadership to address health research priorities within their institutes.
o Purpose/objectives
 Institute Support Grants (ISGs) are awarded by CIHR to the Institutes and
managed by their Host Institutions to establish and sustain Institute events and
activities. ISGs are awarded as “grant funds” and are not subject to Treasury
Board “operating funds” policies, but rather must comply with the Treasury
Board Terms and Conditions of the Institute Support Grant Program. In addition,
the Institutes and their Host Institution are asked to manage the ISGs in
accordance with their respective Institute Agreement, Host Institution policies
and this ISG Manual.
o Expected results
 Ensure the continued capacity for CIHR’s institutes to undertake activities
pertaining to their individual mandates and priorities.
o Voted:-
o Statutory:-
- Internal reallocation of resources from the College and Community Innovation Program
($600,000) to the Grants for Research Projects and Personnel Support program
o Key messages
 The College Community Innovation Program is a program of Canada’s three
federal granting agencies, which is administered by NSERC, that enables
Canadian colleges to work with local companies to transform research into
economic activity.
 The CCI program supports applied, collaborative research partnerships that
facilitate commercialization, increase economic prosperity, and create quality
jobs.
 An internal reallocation of $600,000 from the Grants for Research Projects and
Personnel Support program to the College and Community Innovation (CCI)
Program ensures that sufficient funds are available for upcoming competition
results.
o Purpose/objectives
 The CCI Program is a program of Canada’s three federal granting agencies,
which is administered by NSERC, that enables Canadian colleges to work with
local companies to transform research into economic activity.
 It supports applied, collaborative research partnershipsthat facilitate
commercialization, increase economic prosperity, and create quality jobs.
o Expected results
 Increase innovation at the community and/or regional level by enabling
Canadian colleges to increase their capacity to work with local companies,
particularly small and medium-sized enterprises.
 Support for applied research and collaborations that facilitate
commercialization, as well as technology transfer, adaptation and adoption of
new technologies.
o Voted:-
o Statutory:-
- Encourage vaccine confidence in Canada
o Total: ($750,000)
o Key messages
 This is part of a $2.25 million investment is to support activities that promote
vaccine confidence in Canada, helping Canadians make evidence-based
decisions and leading to improved public opinion and understanding of
vaccines.
 These funds will supporta range of knowledge mobilization activities needed to
effectively mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and minimize its direct and
indirect impacts on individuals and communities.
o Purpose/objectives
 The purpose of the program is to support activities that promote vaccine
confidence in Canada, helping Canadians make evidence-based decisions and
leading to improved public opinion and understanding of vaccines.
 A range of knowledge mobilization activities are needed to effectively mitigate
the rapid spreadof COVID-19 and minimize its direct and indirect impacts on
individuals and communities.
o Expected results
 Continued support to provide Canadians with information to make evidence-
based decisions and leading to improved public opinion and understanding of
vaccines.
o Voted : (750,000)
o Statutory:-
- Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative
o Total: ($845,000)
o Key messages
 Budget 2021 provided $12 million over three years, to SSHRC to fund research
into systemic barriers facing diverse groups.
 This research will help inform actions to address social disparities related to
race, gender and other forms of diversity.
 CIHR subsequently partnered on this initiative and is committing $3.6M over 3
years.
o Purpose/objectives
 The goal of the Race, Gender and Diversity Initiative is to support community-
based and community-led research partnerships with postsecondary institutions
that are grounded in the lived experience of underrepresented or
disadvantaged groups and that analyze the causes and persistence of systemic
racismand discrimination.
o Expected results
 Support partnership research and related activities to meet the needs of
organizations working toward removing barriers and disparities for women; First
Nations, Inuit and Métis Peoples; Black, Asian and other racialized peoples;
people living with disabilities (both visible and invisible); LGBTQ2+ people;
religious minorities; and others marginalized on the basis of their ethnicity and
other identity factors.
o Voted: (845,000)
o Statutory:-
- Women’s health and economic well-being for a post-COVID-19 recovery
o Total: ($5,600,000)
o Key messages
 Women have faced the brunt of the impacts of COVID-19 such as layoffs and
loss of livelihoods, working at the frontlines of the pandemic response and
disproportionately shouldered theburden of additional caregiving.
 The objective of the program is to support actionable research on how women’s
health and their work (paid or unpaid) intersect and interact in the context of
preparing, responding to and recovery from a major health emergency such as
COVID-19.
 The transfer from CIHR amounts to $18M over 4 years.
o Purpose/objectives
 The objective of the program is to support actionable research on how women’s
health and their work (paid or unpaid) intersect and interact in the context of
preparing, responding to and recovery from a major health emergency such as
COVID-19.
 Specifically, the program will support population and public health research that
addresses UN Research Roadmap for the COVID-19 Recovery’s Priority 3.5:
“How have recent economic changes disproportionately affected women and
women’s health, and how can COVID-19 recovery strategies be inclusive, gender
transformative and health promoting for women?”.
o Expected results
 Action-oriented, gender-transformative research projects will contribute to the
evidence base to understand the relationships between women’s work and
health before, during and after COVID-19.
o Voted: (5,600,000)
o Statutory:-
COVID ALERT APP
ISSUE
• COVID Alert App continues to be maintainedby Health Canada and uses strong measures to
protect the privacy and confidentiality of data.
KEY FACTS
• On July 31, 2020, the Prime Minister announced that COVID Alert, a voluntary national exposure
notification app, was available for download. The appuses Bluetooth and mobile technology to notify
users that they have been in close contact with someone who later tested positive for COVID-19.
• Health Canada continues to maintain the COVID Alert App and updates provincial dashboards on
a monthly basis and on an ad-hoc basis as requested.
• Since spring 2021, there have been no further investments in promotion or software
development.
• The government is committed to protecting the privacy of Canadians, while taking appropriate
steps to reduce the spreadof COVID-19.
• Recent evaluations found the app’s impact on the pandemic was affected by low uptake.
Provinces and Territories (PTs) signaled they would not invest further in one-time keys (OTK) delivery as
their resources have shifted to vaccinations, rapid testing, and vaccine passports.
• As of March 1, 2022, more than 6.9 million (6,911,618) users downloaded the app, and more
than 59K (59,061) one-time keys were claimed in order to inform others of a possible exposure.
• No change pertaining to one-time key distribution process was reported. Reduced access to
polymerase chain reaction (PCR) diagnostic tests however has an impact on the volume of one-time keys
distributed by provinces and territories.
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID Alert app is part of a suite of tools and guidance developed by the Government of
Canada to help slow the spread of COVID-19.
• Since its launch, more than 6.9 million Canadians have downloaded the app and more than 59K
users who tested positive for COVID-19 have notified others of a possible exposure.
• The COVID Alert app has undergone a privacy assessment in line with the Office of the Privacy
Commissioner’s (OPC) Framework for the Government of Canada to Assess Privacy-Impactful Initiatives
in Response to COVID-19. The OPC wasconsulted on the app and published their review of the app on
their website.
• The Privacy Commissioner of Canada indicated that he supports the use of COVID Alert.
• The COVID Alert app does not disclose the identity of users, nor is location data or personally
identifiable information collected.
IF PRESSED
• The approach chosen was an exposure notification app as opposed to contact tracing as it
allows users to be notified of a possible exposure without using personally identifiable data or location
tracking.
• The app uses Bluetooth technology, does not record users’ locations and does not collect
identifiable information.
• The app has undergone a thorough privacy assessment, and all data provided to the app is
securely stored and protected.
BACKGROUND
On June 18, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced a national exposure notification app. On July
31, 2020, the Prime Minister of Canada announced that the app, called COVID Alert, is available for
download by all Canadians.
The app, originally developed by the Government of Ontario, helps Canadians and public health officials
identify and isolate the spread of the virus more quickly. Use of the app is voluntary. If someone tests
positive (using a polymerase chain reaction (PCR) test) for COVID-19, a health care provider will give that
person a one-timekey that that person can enter into the app. One-time keys are not distributed for
positive rapid tests results. Other users who have downloaded the app and come in close contact with
that person are then notified, through the app, that they may have beenexposed to the virus. The app
provides users with information on steps they can take to keep themselves and others safe. Health
Canada worked with the provinces and territories to customize public health information based on their
jurisdictions context.
COVID Alert is a collaboration between Health Canada, the Canadian Digital Service, Innovation, Science
and Economic Development Canada, and the Ontario Digital Service. It builds upon an exposure
notification solution developed by Shopify volunteers in coordination with the non-profit Linux
Foundation Public Health. It is also the work of a team of developers from across the country. The app
underwent a security review by BlackBerry and the Canadian Centre for Cyber Security. It incorporates
Bluetooth technology provided by Apple and Google to log instances where users have come into close
contact without collecting personally identifiable information or tracking a user location. The Office of
the Privacy Commissioner has been engaged on the app and the Commissioner has indicated they
support the use of the app by Canadians.
While the app is national in scope, provincial and territorial health authorities are responsible for
providing the one-time keys to users who test positive for COVID-19. The one-time keys can then be
entered into the app to notify users of a possible exposure. Eight provinces and one territory have
onboarded and are able to issue one-time keys:
• Ontario on July 31, 2020;
• Newfoundland and Labrador on September 3, 2020;
• Saskatchewan and New Brunswick on September 18, 2020;
• Manitoba on October 1, 2020;
• Quebec on October 5, 2020;
• Prince Edward Island on October 8, 2020;
• Nova Scotia on October 15, 2020; and,
• Northwest Territories on November 26, 2020..
ADVERSE REACTIONS
Issue
Safety is a central consideration for any health product, including vaccines. Canada’s rigorous regulatory
system assesses vaccines for safety, efficacy and quality before they are authorized. However, no health
product is completely risk-free.
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Key Facts
• A robust vaccine safety surveillance system is essential for protecting the health and safetyof
Canadians, ensuring public confidence in the safety of the COVID-19 vaccines and supporting Canada-
wide immunization efforts.
• The Government of Canada continues to work closely with partners to monitor vaccine safety.
Key Messages
• The safety and effectiveness of vaccines used in Canada is a top priority for this government.
• Canada’s monitoring systems for adverse events following immunization rapidly detects possible
safety issues and investigates them thoroughly.
• Like any medication, vaccinescan cause side effects and reactions, also known as adverse
events. The benefits of vaccines authorized in Canada continue to outweigh their risks.
• As part of the Government’s continued commitment to openness and transparency, Health
Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada provide Canadians with weekly updates on reported
adverse events following immunization (AEFI) onCanada.ca.
Background
Adverse events following immunization (AEFI)
An adverse event may occur after a person has been vaccinated. The majority of adverse events are
expected mild reactions (e.g., pain, redness, swelling at the injection site, muscle soreness, mild
headache), although serious and rare events can occur (e.g., allergic reaction). However, as the World
Health Organization states: “The fact that a vaccine was administered within a reasonable time period of
the occurrence of an event does not automatically suggest that the vaccine caused or contributed to the
event”.
Post-market COVID-19 vaccine safety monitoring
Post-market vaccine surveillance is required to monitor and understand how vaccines behave in the
entire population and their real-world impact. Vaccine safety surveillance is critical for rapidly detecting
and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of the vaccine continue to outweigh the risks
and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s immunization programs.
Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a collaboration between
provincesand territories (P/T), the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC), Health Canada, and vaccine
manufacturers. Manufacturers are required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the
national regulatory authority, as well as submit regular summaries of global safety information. Health
Canada reviews these reports and takes appropriate regulatory actions should new safety issues be
identified. In addition, PHAC receives and reviews reports of adverse events following immunization
from P/Ts throughthe Canadian Adverse Events Following Immunization Surveillance System (CAEFISS).
This system has been enhanced to support the rollout of COVID-19 vaccines, to expedite the timeliness
and sharing of information with partners, and public reporting of adverse events.
To improve vaccine safety surveillance further, the Government of Canada provides funding to: the
Immunization Monitoring Program ACTive (IMPACT) network, a paediatric, hospital-based network that
reports adverse events to PHAC; and to the Canadian Vaccine Safety (CANVAS) Network, a national web-
based platform that collects information about health events occurring after COVID-19 vaccinations, and
that provides weekly reports to PHAC and P/T health authorities.
It is notable that, as of late February 2022, more than 32 million people have received at least one dose
of a COVID-19 vaccine in Canada, with side effects reported for 0.039% of all doses administered, of
which 0.010% were classified as serious side effects (i.e. requiring hospitalization, life threatening,
and/or resulting in persistent or significant disability/incapacity or death).
PHAC and Health Canada continue to closely monitor the following safety signals:
• Thrombosis with thrombocytopenia syndrome following vaccination withthe viral vector
vaccine AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccine. Health Canada has updated the product
monograph to include information about these very rare events of blood clots associated with low levels
of platelets following immunization.
• Guillain-Barré Syndrome (GBS) in Canada following vaccination with the viral vector vaccine
AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD COVID-19 vaccination. Data in Canada indicate a higher number of
reports than would normally be expected in the general population. Health Canada has updated the
AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD product monograph to include information on GBS.
• Myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the lining
around the heart) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines. Data in Canada indicate a higher
number of reports in younger people (i.e. less than 40 years of age) than would normally be expected in
this age group in the general population. Health Canada updated the product monographs for both
Moderna Spikevax and Pfizer-BioTech Comirnaty COVID-19 vaccines to include information around
these risks.
OAG Audit Report on the Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General tabled the Audit of Enforcement of Quarantine and COVID-19 Testing
Orders report on December 9, 2021.
Key Facts
• The Audit of Enforcement ofQuarantine and COVID-19 Testing Orders, which covered the
period from July 1, 2020 to June 30, 2021, focused on whether the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) improved its administration of mandatory quarantine orders to limit the introduction of the
COVID-19 virus and its variants in Canada.
• It also focused on whether PHAC implemented and enforced additional border measures
introduced in early 2021 (such as COVID-19 testing for travellers entering Canada and quarantine of air
travellers at government-authorized hotels pending the results of their on-arrival COVID-19 tests.)
• This audit follows the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures which was tabled on March 25, 2021.
Key Messages
• Protecting the health and safety of Canadians is the Government of Canada’s top priority.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada accepts the two recommendations from the Office of the
Auditor General from this audit. Work is already underway to address them.
• The Agency will continue to consider findings and recommendations from this audit report—
along with other audits, evaluations and further lessons learned from the response to COVID-19—to
inform planning and better position Canada to respond to future global health events.
• The Agency’s approach to border measures, like its guidance and advice, has evolved during the
pandemic and will continue to be informed by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology and
expert opinion, which can change as new information becomes available. We have seen this most
recently in the changing border measures we have introduced to respond to the evidence around the
Omicron variant of concern.
If pressed
• The Agency is working on improving its automated tracking and data quality so it can better
follow up with travellers who are subject to border measures, and is implementing GBA+ considerations
to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and future programs on diverse and vulnerable
groups.
Background
Since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has directed the
implementation of border restrictions and border control measures to help prevent travellers from
spreading the virus that causes COVID-19 in Canada.
On March 25, 2020, the first series of emergency orders imposing a nationwide mandatory quarantine
under the Quarantine Act came into effect.
This audit follows up on some of the findings of the Audit of Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and
Border Control Measures, which covered theperiod from January 1, 2020 to June 30, 2020, and which
was tabled on March 25, 2021.
The objective of this audit was to determine whether PHAC implemented testing and quarantine
requirements for incoming travellers to limit the introduction and spreadof the COVID‑19 virus and its
variants in Canada.
The Office of the Auditor General made two recommendations to the Agency:
• That the Agency improve its enforcement of emergency orders imposed to limit the spread of
COVID-19 by:
• improving its automatedtracking and data quality so it can better follow up with travellers who
are subject to border measures
• implementing GBA+ considerations to mitigate any potential adverse impacts of existing and
future programs on diverse and vulnerable groups.
• That the Agency should:
• better use information on the outcomes of its referral for follow-up, to assess whether its
enforcement approach is working to limit the introduction of COVID-19 and its variants.
• Improve its capability to achieve a consistent enforcement approach to border measures
nationwide, including exploring other tools that could be used in all Canadian jurisdictions.
Work is already underway to address these recommendations.
The agency plans to implement the following actions to address the recommendations from this audit:
• It will review its IT systems and broad requirements to improve data and address issues related
to the consistency and quality of data used for matching test results to traveller records.
• It will improve and streamline methods for assessing data quality internally.
• It will identify requirements for an automated tracking process as border measures evolve.
• It will continue to provide specialized training on gender and diversity considerations to
frontline staff at the border and at designated quarantine facilities, including training on bias (launched
in September 2021), security awareness and de escalation.
• It will update its GBA+ analysis and incorporate results in the implementation of future border
measures.
• It will continue to engage with law enforcement partners, with a particular focus on seeking
information regarding referral outcomes for priority cases and utilize this information in its risk-based
approach to compliance and enforcement.
• It will assess additional mechanisms to enforce the Quarantine Act more consistently nationally.
• It will continue to engage with its provincial and territorial counterparts to ensure maximum
collaboration in following up with travellers, particularly those who have testedpositive or are in
quarantine.
VACCINATION–GENERAL
Issue
Routine immunization programs remain one of the most effective measures to protect Canadians
against vaccine-preventable diseases (VPDs), such as measles, mumps and tetanus. VPDs are a public
health concern because some have no treatment and they can cause severe illness, disability or death.
Vaccines have reduced the rates of many once-common VPDs in Canada; however, these diseases still
exist in other countries and can spread through international travel.
As provinces and territories continue to lift public health measures and as travel increases, the risk of
VPDs may also increase. Monitoring routine vaccination coverage and ensuring that Canadians are up to
date with their routine vaccinations will be important in preventing further spread of VPDs and
outbreaks, and in ensuring that the pandemic does not leave a long-lasting immunization gap in any
Canadian communities.
Key Facts
• In Canada, immunization is a shared responsibility among the federal, provincial and territorial
(FPT) governments. The provinces and territories (PTs) design, plan and deliver immunization programs.
The federal government leads the regulatory approval ofvaccines and supports PT vaccine
administration across multiple functions, including coordinating the bulk purchasing of vaccines for
jurisdictions, conducting national vaccine surveillance, and facilitating FPT engagement on immunization
policies and programs.
Key Messages
• Routine immunization programs prevent illness, save lives and are critical in maintaining the
health of Canadians.
• When enough people are vaccinated, we protect ourselves and those around us. Children,
immunocompromised individuals, the elderly, and those who do not have up-to-date vaccinations are at
greater risk of contracting vaccine preventable diseases.
• When outbreaks occur, vaccine preventable diseases may have a profound impact on public
health programs, clinical servicesand health systems, which are already operating beyond capacity due
to the ongoing response to COVID-19.
• The federal government is working with the provinces, territories and health professional
partners to promote, strengthen and catch-up routine immunization programs that have been disrupted
due to the pandemic to ensure Canadians are fully protected.
If pressed
• The Government of Canada is committed to supporting routine immunization, as a vital means
of preventing disease, disability, and death, and reducing pressure on healthcare systems.
Background
Immunization is a shared responsibility among federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) governments.
Health Canada leads the regulatory approval of vaccines. This involves rigorous scientific review and
testing to assess the quality, safety, and efficacy of vaccines before they are approved for use. Once a
vaccine is authorized, Health Canada conducts post-market surveillance to monitor vaccine safety,
detect and respond to possible adverse events.
The provinces and territories (PTs) administer vaccines within their jurisdictions, which includes all policy
and program decision-making, design and implementation required to determine which public programs
to offer, which vaccines to buy, where to administer vaccines, and priority populations and eligibility
criteria for vaccination.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) supports PTs in delivering their immunization programs by:
leading FPT engagement and coordination; bulk purchasing vaccines for all jurisdictions; issuing
guidance on the use of vaccines; conducting vaccine confidence research, policy, and programming;
maintaining vaccine coverage, effectiveness and safety surveillance; facilitating immunization research;
enhancing domestic manufacturing capacity; and supporting the delivery of the Vaccine Injury Support
Program (VISP).
FPT Engagement
To support FPT engagement on immunization policies and programs, the Canadian Immunization
Committee (CIC) is a key national forum that brings together PT representatives and federal
departments responsible for immunization programming, including Health Canada, Indigenous Services
Canada, and Correctional Service Canada, among others. Under the direction of the Communicable and
Infectious DiseasesSteering Committee of the Pan-Canadian Public Health Network Council, the CIC
provides a platform to implement the objectives of the National Immunization Strategy, foster FPT
collaboration, engage with non-governmental stakeholders, and discuss and provide strategic
operational and technical advice and best practices on issues related to vaccination in the interest of
coordinating and improving immunization policies and programs in Canada.
Vaccine Supply and Assurance
PHAC works with PT partners and Public Services Procurement Canada (PSPC) to lead vaccine supply
management. This includes routine immunization and influenza vaccine procurement and maintaining a
national state of readiness by securing pandemic influenza vaccine preparedness contracts. Through the
Bulk Procurement Program, PHAC works with PSPC to lead and advise on vaccine acquisition and
allocation for FPT programs. The team coordinates jurisdictional needs, seeks to enhance security of
supply, and manages challenges and disruptions that could impact immunization program delivery.
Vaccine Confidence
The World Health Organization (WHO) identified vaccine hesitancy as one of the top ten risks to global
health in 2019, threatening to reverse the progress that has been made in addressing VPDs. Vaccine
hesitancy is complex and can be more common in certainpopulations, including marginalized or
underserved communities and groups that have historically experienced systemic racism. PHAC acts as
the focal point for vaccine confidence policy, research and behavioural analysis to inform development
of evidence-based awareness and outreach campaigns and tools and training to support healthcare
providers communicate credible information about vaccine effectiveness and safety to Canadians. As a
core part of vaccine confidence efforts, the Immunization Partnership Fund (IPF) is a grants and
contributions program that supports public health actors and communities to increase vaccine
acceptance and uptake. It supports local, regional and national organizations and PTs develop evidence-
based approaches designed to improve vaccination coverage rates and combat mis-and dis-information.
Supporting trusted representatives from within communities is proven to be an effective way to deliver
programming and communicate information about vaccines.
Vaccine Surveillance
High levels of vaccination coverage for VPDs are required to help ensure the ongoing health and safety
of Canadians, particularly children, immunocompromised (weakened immune system) individuals, and
the elderly. PHAC monitors vaccine coverage and effectiveness and leads surveillance of national vaccine
coverage for the general population as well as vulnerable populations. Updated vaccination coverage
goals and VPD reduction targets were agreed to by PTs in 2017, in line with current evidence. Coverage
goals rangefrom 80-95% depending on the age group and the VPD. The Childhood National
Immunization Coverage Survey (2019) showed that while vaccination coverage in Canada is good,
Canada is not reaching national coverage goals. Further, due to the ongoing pandemic, adecrease in
vaccination coverage is being reported by PTs due to the closure of some primary care offices as well as
healthcare workers being mobilized to respond to COVID-19. The Government of Canada is monitoring
the situation closely.
After a vaccineis authorized for use in Canada, post-market safety surveillance is conducted to monitor
and understand how vaccines behave in the entire population and their real-world impact. This is critical
for rapidly detecting and responding to safety issues, ensuring that the benefits of a vaccine continue to
outweigh the risks, and supporting vaccine uptake by building public confidence in Canada’s
immunization programs. Canada has a well-established vaccine safety surveillance system that is a
collaboration between PTs, PHAC, Health Canada, and vaccine manufacturers. Manufacturers are
required to report serious adverse events to Health Canada as the national regulatory authority, as well
as submit regular summaries of global safety information. Health Canada reviews these reports and
takes appropriate regulatory actions should new safety issues be identified. In addition, PHAC receives
and reviews reports of adverse events following immunization from PTs through the Canadian Adverse
Events Following Immunization Surveillance System.
Immunization Research
Emerging, real-world research is a critical component of immunization program evidence-informed
decision-making. PHAC works with the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to support public
health research. The Canadian Immunization Research Network (CIRN) is an example of this; a multi-
disciplinary network that addresses diverse immunization research requirements in Canada on topics
related to vaccine safety, immunogenicity and effectiveness, vaccine hesitancy, and immunization
program implementation and evaluation. Knowledge translation activities are also supported by PHAC
to promote the communication of key research findings to decision-makers, academia and relevant
stakeholders.
Biomanufacturing
Recognizing the importance of a resilient and innovative biomanufacturing and life sciences sector, in
July 2021, the Ministers of Innovation, Science and Industry (ISI) and Health launched, and share joint
accountability for the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy). The Health Portfolio is
working with the Department of Innovation, Science and Economic Development (ISED) to advance the
Strategy, which outlines a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic capacity to rapidly develop
andproduce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for future
pandemics or other health emergencies.
Recognizing the evolving technology and the advantages of leveraging newer, more rapidly adaptable
vaccine platforms, the Government of Canada entered into a non-binding Memorandum of
Understanding with Moderna in July 2021. Negotiations are underway with the company towards the
establishment of a domestic manufacturing facility for mRNA vaccines which will contribute to pandemic
vaccine readiness.
VACCINE INJURY SUPPORT PROGRAM
Issue
The Government of Canada has established a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury Support Program
(VISP). The program ensures that all people in Canada who haveexperienced a serious and permanent
injury as a result of receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada, on or after
December 8, 2020, have access to fair and timely financial support. The new VISP brings Canada in line
with a growing number of countries that have such programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
Key Facts
• A total of $75 million in funding has been earmarked for the first five years of the program.
• The actual overall cost of the program will be dependenton the volume of claims and
compensation awarded over time. To date, $32.3 million over 5 years is allocated to RCGT Consulting
Inc. for administration and claim payments. Funding will also be provided to the government of Quebec
for the continued deliveryof its provincial vaccine injury compensation program.
• Remaining funds will be made available to adapt to the demand for financial support.
Key Messages
• Health Canada authorizes vaccines for use in Canada on the basis of their demonstrated safety
andeffectiveness at protecting against severe illness, hospitalization and death. Health Canada and the
Public Health Agency of Canada continue to consider that the benefits of vaccination with a vaccine
approved in Canada outweigh the potential risks.
• TheGovernment of Canada is committed to ensuring that Canadians who support public health
by being vaccinated are supported should they experience a serious and permanent injury as a result of
vaccination.
• The pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine Injury SupportProgram (VISP) was launched on June 1, 2021,
and is being administered independently by RCGT Consulting, which oversees all aspects of claims
intake, assessment, and reporting. The program ensures people in Canada who experience a serious and
permanent injury after receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or
after December 8, 2020, have access to fair and timely financial support.
• The province of Quebec is continuing to administer its existing provincial program for people
vaccinated in Quebec. Individuals vaccinated in all other provinces and territories are eligible under the
pan-Canadian program.
If pressedon timelines to process a claim
• As the independent third-party administrator of the VISP, RCGT Consultingoversees all aspects
of claims intake and assessment.
• Timelines for a determination of eligibility and support will depend on the nature and
complexity of the claim. To receive compensation through the VISP, a causal relationship between the
injury and the vaccination must be objectively determined.
• The causality assessment process requires the third-party administrator to retrieve all relevant
medical records from the province or territory or from the medical institution where the patient
received care. This process can take several months.
• Payments for those who have a serious and permanent injury from a vaccine will be retroactive
to the date of the injury.
If pressed on number of claims received
• The program is administered independently by RCGT Consulting. Periodic public reporting began
on December 15, 2021, and program statistics are publicly available on their website.
• As of their last reporting, 400 claims have been received by RCGT and fewer than 5 claims have
been approved. Due to privacy reasons, RCGT cannot disclose specific figures at this time due to an
insufficient number of cases.
• It is expected that RCGT will update program statistics on a bi-annual basis, occurring around
December 1 and June 1 of every year, with the possibility for earlier updates, as needed.
If pressed on timing of program launch
• The need for a vaccine injury support program was identified as a gap in Canada’s immunization
system and recognized as an area of importance by the Government of Canada, the provinces and
territories.
• The pandemic underscored the need to remedy this gap, especially as Canada was preparing to
launch the national COVID-19 vaccination campaign.
• The new program brings Canada in line with a growing number of countries that have such
programs in place, including all G7 counterparts.
If pressed on the type of support available
• Eligible individuals may receive income replacement indemnities; injury indemnities; death
benefits; coverage for funeral expenses; and reimbursement of eligible costs, such as otherwise
uncovered medical expenses.
• Individuals who have experienced serious and permanent injury are eligible for support under
this program, consistent with Quebec’s vaccine injury compensation program.
Background
On December10, 2020, the Prime Minister announced the creation of a pan-Canadian no-fault Vaccine
Injury Support Program (VISP). The program launched on June 1, 2021, and provides financial support to
people in Canada in the rare event that they experience a seriousand permanent injury as a result of
receiving a Health Canada authorized vaccine, administered in Canada on or after December 8, 2020.
The program will also provide death benefits and support for funeral expenses in the rare case of death
as a result of having received a Health Canada authorized vaccine.
Provinces and territories were given the option to create their own vaccine injury support programs
with federal funding. All, except Quebec, chose to participate in the national program. Quebec will
receive federal funding to continue the delivery of its existing program. In order to ensure equity across
the country, the parameters of the pan-Canadian VISP have been modelled on Quebec’s successful
regime, to the extent possible.
An open solicitation process took place in February 2021 to identify a third-party administrator for the
VISP. PHAC received four proposals. A six-member Review Committee comprised of experts from inside
and outside government in the areas of privacy, compensation programs, procurement, and medical
expertise was established to review these proposals. After a comprehensive review, RCGT Consulting
Inc. was selected and is administering the VISP independently from PHAC.
UPDATE ON mRNA VACCINE SUPPLY
Issue
What is the Public Health Agency of Canada doing to ensure there is sufficient mRNA vaccine supply to
complete current booster and pediatric campaigns for Canadians and to respond to COVID-19 variants
of concern?
Key Facts
• Canada’s vaccine acquisition strategy has evolved based on demand and scientific guidance and
will provide robust and flexible supply to meet a variety of potential needs over the coming years.
• Canada has sufficient supply of mRNA to meet the demand for 2022.
• Canada has agreements with Moderna and Pfizer for a combined supply of up to 100 million
mRNA doses for 2022 (55 million firm doses, plus 45 million doses in options) and up to 95 million mRNA
doses in 2023 (50 million firm doses, plus 45 million doses in options) with options to extend into 2024.
• In addition to providing booster vaccine doses, the agreements provide flexibility to procure
new second-generation COVID-19 vaccine formulations, such as those to protect against mutations or
variants of concern, and vaccines developed for younger populations, if they become available.
Key Messages
• Canada is well-positioned to meet the needs of Canadians with ample vaccine supply in 2022
and beyond.
• In 2020, Canada established advance purchase agreements with sevenmanufacturers to ensure
access to the best possible vaccine supply. This strategy has served Canada well in terms of access to
significant supply of Pfizer and Moderna mRNA vaccine.
• With the combination of vaccines already on-soil and upcoming deliveries, Canada has sufficient
supply to ensure all eligible Canadians are protected for primary series, boosters, and pediatrics.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient firm mRNA doses to meet all
potential domestic needs until the end of 2023, including extra options in both 2022 and 2023, and an
optional year in 2024.
• In 2022 alone, up to 100 million doses of mRNA vaccine will be available to us.
• We have built flexibility into these agreements to ensure that we can access new products and
formulations, which positions us well to act quickly to implement pediatrics, boosters and respond with
variant-specific formulations if they become available.
• Canada also expects three new non-mRNA vaccines to become available in 2022 (Novavax,
Medicago, and Sanofi) providing millions of additional doses.
If pressed on the growing demand for vaccines in the face of variants of concerns like Omicron
• With the combination of doses already on-soil and upcoming deliveries, Canada has sufficient
supply to ensure all eligible Canadians are protected for primary series, boosters, and pediatrics.
• In the face of Omicron, Canada was able to on-board sufficient supply of both pediatrics and
boosters for the provinces and territories to expedite simultaneous vaccine campaigns.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and Health Canada continue to work closely with provinces
and territories and Indigenous partners on challenges they are facing in their COVID-19 responses,
including vaccine rollout.
Ifpressed on access to variant specific formulations of vaccines
• We continue to closely monitor progress made by vaccine manufacturers as they investigate the
effectiveness of their vaccines against Omicron and move forward to develop potential Omicron-specific
formulations.
• Current agreements already provide access to new formulations, including variant specific
formulations that may be developed by vaccine manufacturers in the future.
• Future decision-making will be tied to scientific evidence and product availability while
leveraging our existing agreements, where possible.
If pressed on pediatric vaccine supply
• The Government of Canada and Pfizer agreed to accelerate the delivery of 5.8M doses of
pediatric vaccine in December 2021 and January 2022to provide first and second doses to all eligible
children in Canada aged 5 to 11 years old.
• All provinces and territories have now received their shipments and begun administering the
vaccines to children.
• Current contracts will also ensure accessto pediatric vaccines for the youngest children (6
months–4 years) if they become available.
If pressed on supply to provide a 3rd dose booster to all eligible Canadians and possibly a 4th dose
• Canada has sufficient mRNA doses on soil for all eligibleCanadians who want a 3rd dose.
• It is too soon to know if a 4th dose will be required broadly in 2022. We are just beginning to
receive data on the impact and durability of the 3rd/booster doses, which the Public Health Agency of
Canada and provinces andterritories will continue to monitor closely and advise accordingly.
• Canada’s contracts with Pfizer and Moderna provide for sufficient doses of mRNA to provide 4th
doses in 2022, should they be required.
If pressed on boostersupply for the 12-17 age group
• At this time, Health Canada has not received a submission or clinical trial data from a vaccine
manufacturer for a COVID-19 booster shot for people under 18 years of age.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization
continue to review the latest evidence on COVID-19 vaccines, including data on booster doses in
different populations and age groups.
• If required, Canada’s contracts provide sufficient doses of mRNA to provide boosters for
Canadians aged 12to 17 in 2022.
If pressed on supply of non-mRNA vaccine
• The Government of Canada has worked with provinces and territories and manufacturers to
ensure non-mRNA options are available for those who cannot or will not take an mRNA vaccine.
• Canada hascurrently 168,000 doses of Janssen and 28,000 doses of AstraZeneca in storage.
• Novavax and Medicago have received regulatory approval and will begin to deliver doses in the
coming months.
If pressed on Canadian manufacturing supply
• While our agreements have provided access to an abundance of supply, Canada has also
developed a Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy to address, in part, the security of future
vaccine supply.
• Three of Canada's existing suppliers, Novavax, Medicago, and Moderna, have also expressed
interest in expanding or developing domestic production capacity.
Background
Canada has agreements with Moderna and Pfizer as follows (these numbers have been announced
publicly):
Year Pfizer firm (option) Moderna firm (option) Totalfirm mRNA (options)
2022 35M (30M option) 20M (15M option) 55M (45M options)
2023 30M (30M option) 20M (15M option) 50M (45M options)
2024 (60M option) (35M option) (95M options)
• The agreements provide flexibility to procure newsecond-generation COVID-19 vaccine
adaptations, such as those to protect against mutations or variants of concern, and vaccines developed
for younger populations.
• APAs with Novavax, Medicago and Sanofi are also expected to provide millions of additional
non-mRNA doses in 2022 if they become available.
COVID-19 PROOF OF VACCINATION SUPPORT TO PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES
Issue
Consistent with the December 14, 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update, the Government is proposing to
launch a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund to support provinces and territories for costs to implement
a COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program.
Key Facts
• In its 2021 election platform, the Liberal Party of Canada committed to “launch a COVID-19
Proof of Vaccination Fund to support provinces and territories who implement a requirement for proof
of vaccine credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public spaces”.
• On October 21, 2021, the Prime Minister stated that “there will be a standardized proof of
vaccination certificate (PVC) that as we said, we will be picking up the tab for at the federal level”.
• Many provincesand territories have begun eliminating certain vaccination requirements within
their jurisdictions. To date, all jurisdictions are continuing to issue the Canadian PVC. Federal vaccination
requirements (i.e., for domestic air and rail travel, for Government of Canada employees, and at
Canadian borders) remain in place. Most foreign countries also continue to require proof of vaccination
for entry by foreign travellers.
Key Messages
• Helping Canadians get safely back to the activities and interactions they value most is a priority
for the Government of Canada.
• As announced in the fall 2021 Economic and Fiscal Update, the Government is proposing to
launch a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund.
• The intent of the Fund is to support the costs provinces and territories incurred to implement a
COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential program, including costs to issue proof of vaccination
credentials to their residents, and to maintain these credentials as long as needed.
• The Government of Canada has been working closely with provinces and territories to support
the continued issuance of a standardized pan-Canadian COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential,
providing a secure way to prove one’s vaccination status.
• The standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination credential helps Canadians demonstrate their
vaccination status in a secure and reliable way when travelling internationally where most of our largest
foreign partners require it.
Background
To date, Immigration, Refugees and Citizenship Canadahas led the proof of vaccination credential
initiative for the Government of Canada with respect to international travel. The Public Health Agency of
Canada has contributed to the initiative by supporting proof of vaccination credential issuance by
provinces and territories, including the development of the standardized COVID-19 proof of vaccination
credential. Provinces and territories, and in some cases, Indigenous communities and organizations, are
the custodians of public health data–including personal health information of residents.
Canada has developed and published a “pan-Canadian specification” that allows provinces and
territories to ensure their proof of vaccination credentials are digitally verifiable, follow a common look-
and-feel, have the same data fields, and are generally recognizable as proof of vaccination credentials
issued in Canada. This increases the likelihood that the credentials will be accepted as legitimate proof
of vaccination across Canada and at international borders, ensuringCanadians and others vaccinated in
Canada can access non-essential business, public spaces, and can resume travel internationally.
Since the end of November 2021, all provinces and territories have been issuing proof of vaccination
credentials consistent with the pan-Canadian specification.
Proof of vaccination requirements
Proof of vaccination credentials have been used to support the implementation of vaccination
mandates, which aim to protect those that visit public settings and to control the transmission of COVID-
19. Scientific evidence shows that COVID-19 vaccines are highly effective at preventing hospitalization
and death, and also effective at preventing severe infection.
Many provinces and territories have begun eliminating certain vaccination requirements within their
jurisdictions. As of March 3, eight provinces and territories have rolled back broad vaccination
requirements (AB, MB, NB, NT, NS, ON, PE, and SK) and another four (BC, QC, NL, YT) have announced a
date when requirements will be lifted, NU did not introduce broad vaccination requirements but has
recently eased public health measures. Some provinces and territories have retained vaccination
requirements in specific settings (e.g., long-term care homes) and others are giving businesses the
option to continue asking for proof of vaccination at their discretion.
To date, all jurisdictions are continuing to issue the Canadian PVC. SK, MB, QC, NU, NT, and YT have
explicitly indicated they will continue to issue and maintain proof ofvaccination credentials for use by
residents as needed (e.g. for travel).
COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination Fund for provinces and territories
A 2021 Liberal Party of Canada (LPC) platform commitment proposed a COVID-19 Proof of Vaccination
Fund to support provinces and territories who implement a requirement for proof of vaccination
credentials in their jurisdiction for non-essential businesses and public spaces.
The LPC platform commitment was for a $1 billion fund; however, the Government is proposing atotal
fund amount of $300 million. The $300 million amount reflects the Government of Canada’s estimate of
what provinces and territories have spent to issue proof of vaccination credentials, as well as anticipated
costs to maintain the credential programsas long as needed going forward (e.g., as long as proof of
vaccination is required for international travel or to support domestic public health measures).
Additional details will follow regarding the apportionment of the fund across provinces and territories,
and expectations associated with the receipt of funds.
Indigenous engagement
In addition to collaboration with provinces and territories, the Government has engaged with
Indigenous communities and organizations to ensure proof of vaccination credentials meet the needs of
Indigenous Peoples. Since May 2021, a series of engagement sessions have been held with First Nations,
Inuit and Métis partners, including communities that are close to the U.S. border, and those involved in
frequent cross-border travel for cultural, work or familial purposes. Engagement will continue as
required.
The objectives of this engagement were to ensure that Indigenous partners are part of the conversation
at an early stage, to provide informational updates, and hear considerations and potential issues that
may arise for these partners. Concerns expressed included: issues of equity, cross-border movement
(including Canada-U.S.), accessibility, data sovereignty / vaccination reporting gaps, and international
recognition of Canada’s mixed-dose schedule and communications.
In order to ensure Indigenous community members can access the standardized COVID-19 proof of
vaccination credential, some Indigenous communities and organizations have done significant work to
incorporate data on Indigenous vaccinations into provincial and territorial vaccination systems. We will
encourage provinces and territories to collaborate with Indigenous communities to determine how this
funding can effectively support costs related to proof of vaccination credentials.
PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL SURGE CAPACITY
Issue
In fall 2020, the Government of Canada created the COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge Capacity initiative as
a means for provinces and territories to access critical services, equipment, and resources needed to
help manage outbreaks in their jurisdictions. Thesesupports are being offered for potential
deployments across Canada, including rural and remote locations as well as Indigenous communities.
Key Facts
• The Government of Canada has been actively engaged with provincial and territorial,
Indigenous, as well as municipal governments to support a collaborative whole-of-government approach
to monitor and to respond to COVID-19 surge capacity needs across Canada.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is ready to respond to provincial and territorial requests for
assistance for COVID-19.
• We continue to monitor evolving situations and work closely with our provincial, territorial and
federal partners to support COVID-19 outbreak management.
• Supports, such as public health experts in outbreak management, safe voluntary isolation sites,
personal protective equipment, medical equipment, testing and contact tracing assistance, health
human resources, and various immunization supports have been made available to provinces and
territories.
Background
Provinces and territories (PTs) are responsible for prioritizing requests from their local jurisdictions. The
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) serves asthe single window to coordinate PT requests under the
COVID-19 Federal Rapid Surge Capacity initiative. The Government of Canada triages requests based on
needs and the capacity available at the time of the request.
This initiative is complemented by theSafe Restart Agreements (announced on July 16, 2020), which
provide PTs with over $19 billion in federal investments to support:
• health care system capacity
• outbreak management, testing and contact tracing
• social services to support Canadians
TheFall 2020 Economic Statement committed a further $150 million to support the Canadian Red Cross
and other non-governmental organizations with enhancing their surge capacity workforce for Canada’s
COVID-19 response.
In fall 2020, the Government of Canada established the Safe Voluntary Isolation Sites Program
(approximately $100 million over 2 years) to complement the efforts of municipal and provincial and
territorial health partners to reduce COVID-19 community transmission by providing safe self-isolation
spaces for individuals living in crowded housing conditions.
In April 2021, the Government of Canada launched the Health Human Resources Assistance Program
(HHRAP) which provides funding to PTs in support of their deployment of resources to other
jurisdictions in need. The HHRAP is aligned with the intent and spirit of the Federal Provincial and
Territorial Operational Framework for Mutual Aid Requests (OFMAR). OFMAR was created in 2013 as a
mechanism that can be activated by PTs to identify and share healthcare professionals and health assets
inter-jurisdictionally during emergency events, with a facilitative role from PHAC.
Through these initiatives and others, surge support resources and mechanisms are made available to
PTs to augment existing services related to: rapid public health assessments, public health specialists
(e.g. epidemiologists, infection prevention and control support, outbreak management support), testing
equipment and supplies, laboratory services (e.g. test processing at surge sitelaboratories, laboratory
technician support), medical supplies (e.g. personal protective equipment such as masks, and
biomedical equipment such as ventilators), health human resources (such as nurses), therapeutics to
treat COVID-19 patients, safe voluntary isolation sites, and contact tracing. These supports are primarily
provided by PHAC.
Statistics Canada provides contact tracing support. Public Safety Canada administers the Humanitarian
Workforce Program (launched in 2021) and coordinates a variety offederal efforts through the
Government Operations Centre. Indigenous Services Canada oversees services and supports to
Indigenous communities. As a measure of last resort, the Canadian Armed Forces provides a variety of
surge supports to jurisdictions across Canada.
CURRENT ADVICE REGARDING ISOLATION AND QUARANTINE PERIODS
Issue
PHAC currently recommends an isolation period of 10 days and a quarantine period of 14 days for high-
risk contacts. Provinces and territories continue to adaptthese recommendations based on a risk
assessment to respond to the needs of their respective jurisdictions.
Key Facts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s guidance for public health authorities’ on the
management of COVID-19 cases and contacts in thecommunity was updated on December 24, 2021.
• The update reflects emerging evidence regarding vaccine effectiveness, provides further
clarification on considerations for risk of exposure, and clarifies and expands on enhanced case and
contact management strategies in the context of newly circulating variants of concern.
• The guidance uses an evidence-based approach to recommend isolation and quarantine periods
aimed at controlling the spread of COVID-19 in the population.
• Specifically, the guidance recommends an isolation period of at least 10 days for COVID-19 cases
from date of symptom onset or positive test and a quarantine period of 14 days for high-risk contacts of
cases from the date of last known exposure to the case.
• PHAC’s current case and contact management allows flexibility for jurisdiction-specific guidance
based on local context and needs, the current epidemiological situation, indicators of readiness,
evidence, and other factors.
• Canada continues to be guided by the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and
expert opinion. Guidance is subject to change as new information becomes available.
Key Messages
• The Public Health Agency of Canada recommends that individuals follow advice and directions
for isolation andquarantine from local/regional public health authorities in their jurisdiction.
• The Agency is engaged in regular discussions with provincial and territorial counterparts on this
issue and is actively monitoring and evaluating the international and domestic evidence on isolation and
quarantine requirements in the context of the Omicron variant.
• Provinces and territories will continue to assess their risk and respond to the needs of their
respective jurisdictions.
• With the decline of the Omicron wave, and as we transition away from the crisis phase, efforts
will be made to move towards a more sustainable approach to the long-term management of COVID-19.
• Our goal of minimizing serious illness and overall deaths, while minimizing societal disruption,
remains unchanged.
If pressed on the World Heath Organization’s (WHO) updated guidance on length of quarantine
• On February 17, 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) updated its guidance for contact
tracing and quarantine of contacts in the context ofhigh levels of circulation of COVID-19, particularly
the Omicron variant of concern.
• This is not a formal recommendation and is similar to previous WHO statements recommending
a risk-based pragmatic approach.
• WHO guidance is consistent with the PublicHealth Agency of Canada’s continued
recommendation of a 14-day quarantine period for high-risk contacts of cases.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) monitors scientific evidence with a view to keeping its
guidance up to date. In lightof the impact of Omicron and changes that have been made by
jurisdictions, PHAC continues to review emerging evidence and to consult with international
counterparts regarding the characteristics of the Omicron variant (e.g. transmission dynamics, vaccine
effectiveness, incubation period, disease severity).
PHAC’s current case and contact management allows flexibility for jurisdiction-specific guidance based
on local circumstances and capacities.
Provinces and territories continue to adapt these recommendations based on risk assessment and their
specific context, which may include the following considerations:
• The epidemiology of COVID-19 in their jurisdiction
• Vaccination coverage in the community
• Implications of and uncertainties around new variants of concern
• Sufficient health care and public health capacity
• Risk reduction measures for high-risk populations and settings, as necessary.
On February 17, 2022, the World Health Organization (WHO) updated its guidance for contact tracing
and quarantineof contacts in the context of high levels of circulation of SARS-CoV-2, and in particular
the Omicron variant of concern. This update does not reflect a formal recommendation from WHO, it is
not a shift and is similar to previous WHO statements recommending a risk-based pragmatic approach
and indicating that isolation and quarantine duration may be shortened to maintain operation of critical
services.
WHO continues to recommend a 14-day quarantine period for contacts, but acknowledges it may be
reduced when COVID-19 incidence is high. The WHO recommends that individuals released from
quarantine early continue to wear a ‘well-fitted medical mask’ and follow other public health measures
for up to 14 days. Vaccination status may be considered in reducing the quarantine period within 90
days of full series/booster.
POST COVID-19 CONDITION
Issue
The typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness is two to six weeks. However, some patients have
described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring forweeks or months after acute illness.
Key Facts
• Most COVID-19 cases recover from their illness within two to six weeks. However, some people,
including those with milder illness, may experience symptoms for weeks or months after their initial
diagnosis. These longer-term symptoms are often referred to as “post COVID-19 condition”, “long
COVID” and “post-acute sequelae of SARS-CoV-2 infection”. The condition can affect both adults and
children. Affected individuals are commonly referred to as COVID-19 long-haulers.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that some of the Canadians who contracted COVID-19 are facing a
long recovery. While our understanding of the long-term health effects of COVID-19 is building, there is
still much that is unknown aboutpost COVID-19 condition.
• The Government of Canada is actively working with national and international experts to build
the evidence base on post COVID-19 condition to support Canadians experiencing longer-term effects.
• Increasing our understanding of COVID-19, including its longer-term effects, is key to addressing
and recovering from the pandemic. To that end, since March 2020, the Government of Canada has
invested more than $250 million in critical areas of COVID-19 research.
• The Government of Canada is investing an additional $119 million in COVID-19 research,
including funding further studies to better understand post COVID-19 condition.
If pressed on the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition in Canada
• There are currently insufficient data available to determine the percentage of people
experiencing post COVID-19 condition in the Canadian population.
• The World Health Organization estimates that 10-20% of people who had a COVID-19 infection
will later experience one or several symptoms past 12 weeks after their initial diagnosis and/or after
their symptoms first appeared. Based on the global evidence reviewed by the Public Health Agency of
Canada, that proportion could be as high as 50%.
• The studies reviewed by the Agency so far predate thelast wave of infections associated with
the Omicron variant. There is currently no data available linking infections with the Omicron variant with
longer-term effects and post COVID-19 condition.
• Studies that follow COVID-19 patients over time, from their initial diagnosis, are underway in
Canada. These studies will provide high quality evidence upon which to make decisions.
• The Government of Canada will continue to work with the provinces, territories and other
domestic and international partners tomonitor and better understand the long-term effects of COVID-
19.
Background
The typical duration of acute COVID-19 illness is two to six weeks. However, some patients have
described debilitating symptoms persisting or recurring for weeks or months afteracute illness. The
World Health Organization (WHO) has developed the first version of a clinical case definition of post
COVID-19 condition in adults, which reads as follows:
“Post COVID-19 condition occurs in individuals with a history of probable or confirmed SARS CoV-2
infection, usually 3 months from the onset of COVID-19 with symptoms and that last for at least 2
months and cannot be explained by an alternative diagnosis. Common symptoms include fatigue,
shortness of breath, cognitive dysfunction but also others and generally have an impact on everyday
functioning. Symptoms may be new onset following initial recovery from an acute COVID-19 episode or
persist from the initial illness. Symptoms may also fluctuate or relapse over time.”
We know that postCOVID-19 condition can also affect children. The WHO is in the process of developing
a separate clinical case definition for children, which they expect to complete in the coming months.
The range of symptoms reported is broad–they can vary from mild tosevere, fluctuate in intensity and
can sometimes disappear and reappear. Post COVID-19 condition can affect both adults and children,
regardless of the severity of their initial COVID-19 symptoms in the acute stage, although studies in
adults have reportedthat those who were hospitalized or needed intensive care during recovery are at
increased risk of experiencing longer-term effects
The World Health Organization estimates that 10-20% of people who had a COVID-19 infection will later
experience one or several of these symptoms past 12 weeks after their initial diagnosis and/or after
their symptoms first appeared. Based on the global evidence reviewed by PHAC, that proportion in
adults could be as high as 50%.
It is anticipated that post COVID-19 condition will have a long-term impact on public health in Canada.
The Government of Canada is actively monitoring the latest research and information related to the
long-term effects and symptoms of COVID-19, as well as engaging with academic experts and policy
makers from across the country, and internationally, to help inform public health action.
National Surveillance and Research
Since March 2020, the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) has invested approximately $250
million in more than 400 COVID-19 research projects. These projects span everything from diagnostics
and potential treatments to public health responses and communication strategies.
The CIHR will support additional research related to variants and other COVID-19 priorities through an
ongoing competition that will invest up to $119 million more in COVID-19 research. This includes
funding prospective studies that will help increase our understanding of the long-term outcomes of
COVID-19. These studies include the Canadian COVID 19 Prospective Cohort Study (CANCOV), which will
provide a comprehensive evaluation of early to 1-year outcomes in 2,000 patients with COVID-19
infection and their family caregivers. This study will be conducted in Quebec, Ontario, Alberta and
British Columbia.
At the international level, CIHR is a member of the Global Research Collaboration for Infectious Disease
Preparedness, an alliance of research funding organizations on a global scale that facilitates rapid and
effective research responses to support new, urgent scientific priorities related to COVID-19.
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is maintaining a living systematic review of worldwide
studies on the prevalence of post COVID-19 condition, including the prevalence of the various symptoms
and sequelae, and the proportion of individuals reporting difficulties in being able to carry out usual
activities. The latest prevalence estimate of post COVID-19 condition among people diagnosed with
COVID-19 is around 50%. Many of the included studies had a smallsample size and were assessed as
having a high risk of bias. PHAC will continue to update this systematic review to capture results from
high-quality studies currently underway. The studies reviewed by PHAC so far predate the last wave of
infections associated with the Omicron variant. There are currently no data available linking infections
with the Omicron variant with longer-term effects and post COVID-19 condition.
Post COVID-19 condition can also affect children. However, the prevalence of this condition in children is
not yet well-established, with high variability in estimates being observed from only a small number of
studies. These estimates will become more precise as more studies are conducted and new evidence
emerges. PHAC continues to monitorthe latest scientific literature on post COVID-19 condition in
children. PHAC is also working with the Canadian Paediatric Society to assess options to study post
COVID-19 condition among children in Canada.’
PHAC and Statistics Canada are currently developing a population-based survey on post COVID-19
condition, scheduled to be launched in April 2022. This survey will address a key evidence gap, as we
currently do not know the percentage of the Canadian population experiencing post COVID-19
condition. PHACis also working on the development and implementation of other public health
surveillance activities with partners such as Statistics Canada, academic and professional organizations
and the provinces and territories. PHAC is also reviewing the evidence from countries that have
implemented large population-based studies with data collection related to Post COVID-19 condition. A
recent population-based survey conducted in the UK reported a prevalence of Post COVID-19 condition
between 3.0-11.7%. The study was conducted among a sample of over 20,000 study participants 2 years
old and over, residing in private households who tested positive for COVID-19. Some potential reasons
for a higher prevalence rate observed in the PHAC systematic review compared to the prevalence
estimates from the UK population-based survey may include:
• The majority of the population included in the PHAC review were adults, for which preliminary
evidence has shown to have a higher prevalence of long term effects due to COVID-19 compared to
children.
• The UK survey was conducted in individuals in private households; whereas in the PHAC review,
studies did not exclude based on dwelling type;
• Because the UK study did not provide information on study participant characteristics, such as
whether they were hospitalized for acute COVID-19 infection, it is possible that the UK study included
fewer participants who required hospitalization for their initial COVID-19 infection, unlike in the PHAC
review where the majority of participants werehospitalized; and
• The UK prevalence estimates, though based on a very large sample, only included participants
from the UK. The PHAC review included participants from multiple countries, across various continents.
Additional research is also being undertaken to gain a better understanding of possible risk factors
associated with post COVID-19 condition and possible interventions to prevent the condition.
Currently, more evidence is needed to determine whether people who are vaccinated are less likely to
develop post COVID-19 condition. Preliminary research findings suggest COVID-19 vaccination may
decrease the risk of developing post COVID-19 condition. In those who already have post COVID-19
condition or post-acute sequelae (PAS), receiving a COVID-19vaccination is not associated with an
increase in adverse events and some people may experience remission of their PAS or post COVID-19
condition symptoms. However, there is low confidence in these findings as the evidence is limited by the
number of studies, the lack of peer review, and the risk of bias in the retrospective studies. These
findings could change in the future as the evidence from additional studies becomes available.
PHAC is undertaking systematic reviews on risk factors and prevention strategies in collaboration with
the Alberta Research Centre for Health Evidence, Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health
and subject matter experts, and in partnership with Canadians living with post COVID-19 condition. The
initial findings will be available in early 2022 and these systematic reviews will be updated regularly to
capture new data being published.
A living systematic review on post COVID-19 condition care models is also being conducted by the
University of Sherbrooke, through fundingfrom CIHR. This systematic review aims to identify the best-
available global evidence about care models, including pathways, and structured clinics.
The evidence from worldwide and Canadian studies will help to determine the burden and urgency of
this public health priority, as well as what mitigation measures are needed to support the recovery of
those experiencing post COVID-19 condition. It will also help with anticipating and planning for longer-
term burdens on healthcare systems, patients and theirfamilies, and society at large.
Support for Canadians with Post COVID-19 condition
It is clear that some of the symptoms reported by those with post COVID-19 condition affect their ability
to work. Based on limited evidence from reviews conducted by PHACand National Institute for Health
and Care Excellence, between 9%-22% of individuals were not working 3 months or more after acute
COVID infection. Additionally, between 10%-46% of individuals reported working reduced hours
approximately 7 months after acute infection. Note that our certainty on these findings is low.
Canadians suffering from post COVID-19 condition who are unable to work because of their symptoms
may be eligible for support through Employment and Skills Development Canada’s Employment
Insurance program and the Canada Pension Plan Disability benefits.
The provinces and territories are responsible for the management and delivery of health care services
for their residents, including rehabilitation and treatment services for people withpost COVID-19
condition. There are a number of public and private clinics that provide care to individuals with post
COVID-19 condition across Canada, with a clear focus on interdisciplinary care.
PHAC is also engaging with national and international experts involved in clinical and health services
research studies in order to inform public health decision-making and the development of evidence-
based clinical guidelines. PHAC is also regularly updating the web content on Post COVID-19 condition
available onCanada.ca.
NACI RECOMMENDATIONS ON THE USE OF COVID-19 VACCINES
Issue
NACI may make recommendations that are broader or narrower than the conditions of use approved by
Health Canada (known as ‘off-label’ recommendations). As regulator, Health Canada rigorously
evaluates safety and efficacy data from clinical trials before authorizing vaccines, but does not dictate
practice of medicine or make recommendations on how the vaccines should be used for public health
impact.
Key Facts
• The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) is an external body of experts that
provides recommendations to the Public Health Agency of Canada on the use of authorized COVID-19
vaccines to support provinces and territories in planning COVID-19 vaccine programsin Canada.
Key Messages
• Canada’s National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) updates its recommendations
on COVID-19 vaccines based on the latest scientific evidence and their expert opinions.
• COVID-19 vaccines authorized for use in Canada have been essential in saving lives and
protecting the health of Canadians.
• In addition to high vaccination coverage, public health measures, like wearing a well-fitting
mask, hand hygiene and physical distancing, continue to be essential to reduce and control transmission
of the virus, especially variants.
If pressed on the use of the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age
• NACI recommends that a complete series of the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine
should be offered to children 5 to 11 years of age who do not have contraindications to the vaccine,
with a dosing interval of at least 8 weeks between the first and second dose.
• NACI recommends an interval of at least 8 weeks between doses due to emerging evidence in
adults that suggests longer intervals between the first and second dose of a primary series results in a
stronger immune response and higher vaccine effectiveness that is expected to last longer. For mRNA
COVID-19 vaccines, this interval mayalso be associated with a lower risk of myocarditis and/or
pericarditis in adolescents and young adults.
• NACI recommends that children 5 to 11 years of age who are moderately to severely
immunocompromised should be offered a 3-dose primary vaccine series with the pediatric Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks between each dose.
• It is essential that children and their caregivers are supported and respected during the decision-
making process so they are able to make an informed decision about COVID-19 vaccination.
If pressed on myocarditis and pericarditis in adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age
• The benefits of receiving an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine continue to outweigh any potential risks,
including the rare risk of experiencing myocarditis and/or pericarditis after vaccination. COVID-19 can
cause severe illness, hospitalization and death, as well assevere health complications, including
myocarditis and pericarditis.
• Rare cases of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of
the heart lining) following vaccination with mRNA COVID-19 vaccines have been reported in Canada and
internationally.
• Most cases have occurred in males 12 to 29 years of age and after the second dose of an mRNA
COVID-19 vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly.
• NACI continues to strongly recommend that adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age
receive a complete series of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. NACI now recommends the preferred use of
the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine in adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age to further
reduce the already rare risk of myocarditis/pericarditis following mRNA vaccination.
If pressed on guidance on booster doses
• Some groups of people are at higher risk of severe illness and of waning protection offered by
COVID-19 vaccines. NACI therefore also strongly recommendsa booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine should be offered at least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to adults 50 years
of age and older; long-term care residents and seniors living in other congregate settings; people who
received twodoses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose of the Janssen
vaccine; adults in or from First Nations, Inuit or Métis communities; and all frontline healthcare workers
who have direct in-person contact with patients.
• NACI recommends that a booster dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be
offered to adults 18 to 49 years of age at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19 vaccine
series.
• NACI recommended that Novavax Nuvaxovid may be offered to adults who are notable or are
not willing to receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, either as part or all of a primary series or as a booster
dose.
• People who are pregnant and breastfeeding and adults who are moderately to severely
immunocompromised who have received a three-dose primary series are included in those who may
receive a booster dose.
• Booster vaccine programs in Indigenous communities should be determined by Indigenous
leaders and communities with health care and public health partners.
• NACI has made an off-label recommendation that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
may be offered at least 6 months after completion of a primary series to adolescents 12 to 17 years of
age who are at increased risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes due to underlying medical conditions or
other risk factors, such as living conditions or belonging to racialized or marginalized communities who
are disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
• The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine is preferred as a booster for adolescents and young
adults 12 to 29 years of age to further reduce the rare risk of myocarditis/pericarditis.
Background
To date, NACI has published recommendations on the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty, Moderna
Spikevax, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria, Johnson & Johnson, and Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccines, as
well as guidance on subjects such as extended dose intervals, the interchangeability of vaccines, co-
administration of COVID-19 vaccine with other vaccines, additional doses for immunocompromised
individuals and the use of booster doses.
NACI continues to closely monitor the evolving evidence on COVID-19 and COVID-19 vaccines and
updates recommendations as needed.
Recommendations on the use of the Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine
On February 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of the Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine
for adults 18 years of age and older. This is the first recombinant protein subunit COVID-19 vaccine
authorized for use in Canada.
NACI continues to preferentially recommend the use of mRNACOVID-19 vaccine (Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty, Moderna Spikevax) for most people due to the excellent protection they provide against
severe illness and hospitalization and their well-known safety profiles.
However, the Novavax Nuvaxovid vaccine is a new option for people who have been unable or unwilling
to receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. NACI recommends that a complete primary series of the Novavax
Nuvaxovid vaccine may be offered to people 18 years of age and older who are not able or not willing to
receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. NACI also now recommends that the Novavax Nuvaxovid vaccine
may be offered as a booster dose at least 6 months after completion of a primary vaccine series to
adults who are not able or willing to receive an mRNA vaccine fora booster. This is considered off-label
advice as Novavax Nuvaxovid is not authorized for use as a booster.
NACI will continue to monitor the emerging evidence on the Novavax Nuvaxovid vaccine and update
guidance as needed.
Pfizer-BioNTechvaccine in children 5 to 11 years of age
On January 25, 2022, NACI strengthened its recommendation for the use of the pediatric Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (10 mcg) in children 5 to 11 years of age after careful consideration of
additional reassuring safety data from real-world use of the vaccine.
NACI now recommends that a complete series of the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (10
mcg) should be offered to children 5 to 11 years of age who do not have contraindications to the
vaccine,with a dosing interval of at least 8 weeks between the first and second dose. The pediatric
formulation of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine is 10 mcg compared to the 30 mcg formulation
authorized for adolescents and adults over 12 years of age.
Whenauthorizing a vaccine, Health Canada reviews clinical trial data submitted by the manufacturer.
When developing their recommendations, NACI reviews clinical trial data and data from real-world use
of the vaccine. NACI recommends an interval of at least 8weeks due to emerging evidence in adults that
suggests that compared to shorter intervals, longer intervals between the first and second dose of a
primary series result in a stronger immune response, higher vaccine effectiveness that is expected to
last longer, and may be associated with a lower risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis in adolescents and
young adults.
As of January 25, 2022, NACI now recommends that children 5 to 11 years of age who are moderately to
severely immunocompromised should be offered a 3-dose primary vaccine series with the pediatric
Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (10 mcg) with an interval of 4 to 8 weeks between each dose.
As a precaution, children who experience myocarditis and/or pericarditis after a first dose of the vaccine
should wait to get a second dose until more information is available. Children who have a history of
myocarditis unrelated to COVID-19 vaccination should consult their clinical care team for individual
considerations and recommendations. If they are no longer under active care for myocarditis, they may
receive the vaccine. Caregivers should be advised to seek medical attention for children if they develop
symptoms including chest pain, shortness of breath, or palpitations following receipt of a COVID-19
vaccine.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine
(10 mcg) at least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precaution to help to determine if a
side effect that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may be
circumstances when a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given at the same
time–a healthcare provider can help with this decision.
Children with previous COVID-19 infection may be offered two doses of the vaccine once symptoms of
acute illness have resolved and the child is no longer considered infectious, based on current criteria.
Children with a history of MIS-C may be vaccinated once they have recovered or once it has been more
than 90 days since diagnosis, whichever is longer.
Children who receive the pediatric formulation of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (10 mcg) for
their first dose who turn 12 by the time of their second dose may receive the adolescent/adult
formulation of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg) to complete their primary series. If a
child who has turned 12 by the time of their second dose receives the pediatric formulation (10 mcg),
their series should still be considered valid and complete.
Health Canada, the Public Health Agency of Canada and NACI will continue to monitor the safety and
effectiveness of the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (10 mcg) in children 5 to 11 years of
age.
The use of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines in adolescents and young adults 12 to 29 years of age
Rare cases of myocarditis (inflammation of the heart muscle) and pericarditis (inflammation of the heart
lining) following vaccination with COVID-19 mRNA vaccines have been reported in Canada and
internationally.Most cases have occurred in males 12 to 29 years of age after a second dose of an mRNA
vaccine. Most cases have been mild and resolved quickly.
New Canadian and international data suggest the risk of myocarditis following vaccination with a COVID-
19 mRNAvaccine is lower with the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg) compared to the
Moderna Spikevax vaccine (100 mcg), particularly after a second dose in males 12 to 29 years of age.
Based on new evidence, and in order to further minimize the rare risk of adolescents and young adults
experiencing myocarditis and/or pericarditis after receiving a COVID-19 mRNA vaccine, NACI now
recommends the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg) is preferred for use in adolescents and
young adults 12 to 29 years of age.
Based on clinical judgement, the Moderna Spikevax vaccine (100 mcg) may be considered for
adolescents and adults 12 to 29 years of age who are moderately to severely immunocompromised
given new evidence that the Moderna Spikevaxvaccine (100 mcg) may have a slightly higher vaccine
effectiveness and may provide longer protection against infection and severe COVID-19 outcomes
compared to the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg).
Informed consent should include a discussionabout the rare risk of myocarditis and/or pericarditis
following immunization with an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. Individuals should be advised of the symptoms
of myocarditis/pericarditis and to seek immediate medical attention should symptoms develop.
In most circumstances, and as a precautionary measure until more information is available, further
doses of mRNA COVID-19 vaccines should be deferred among people who experienced myocarditis
(with or without pericarditis) within 6 weeks of receiving a previous dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
Some people who experienced myocarditis with or without pericarditis after a first dose of an mRNA
COVID-19 vaccine may choose to receive another dose of vaccine after discussing the risks and benefits
with their healthcareprovider. If another dose of vaccine is offered, they should be offered the Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg) due to the lower reported rate of myocarditis and/or pericarditis
following the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine (30 mcg) compared to the Moderna Spikevax vaccine
(100 mcg).
Individuals who have a history of myocarditis unrelated to mRNA COVID-19 vaccination should consult
their clinical team for individual considerations and recommendations. People previously diagnosed
with myocarditisbut who are no longer being followed by a medical professional for heart issues should
receive the vaccine.
Additional dose of COVID-19 vaccine in moderately to severely immunocompromised individuals
following a primary series
Evidence to date shows thatsome people who are immunocompromised have a lower immune
response to COVID-19 vaccines compared to the general population. Recent studies show that some
people who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who did not respond to or who had a
reduced immune response after two doses of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine can have an increased
immune response after a third dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
NACI recommends that people in the authorized age group who are moderately to severely
immunocompromised should receive an additional dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
following their primary series. People who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who have
not yet been vaccinated should receive three doses of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccineas their
primary series. This recommendation now includes children 5 to 11 years of age who are moderately to
severely immunocompromised (they should receive the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine [10
mcg]). An additional dose, or a 3-dose primaryseries, provides another opportunity for these individuals
to develop a better immune response.
Even after an additional dose, people who are immunocompromised may have reduced protection;
therefore, it is recommended that they continue to follow personal public health measures and that
their close contacts, including household contacts and healthcare workers, receive a primary COVID-19
vaccine series to help to protect them.
Guidance on booster doses
A complete COVID-19 vaccine series continues to provide good protection against serious illness for
most people. Over time, some people may be less protected against serious illness, such as older adults.
Recent evidence suggests vaccine effectiveness against infection with SARS-CoV-2, the virus that causes
COVID-19, is decreasing over time following completion of the primary series. Vaccine effectiveness
against infection for the Omicron variant of concern is also quite low a few months after the primary
series.
A booster dose could help improve protectionagainst infection that may have decreased over time.
Clinical trial data show that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine produces a robust immune
response and has a favourable safety profile comparable to the second dose of the primary series. Real-
world data suggest that a booster dose of mRNA COVID-19 vaccine provides very good short-term
effectiveness against SARS-CoV-2 infection. Long-term effectiveness of booster doses will continue to be
monitored.
After reviewing the recent evidence and the evolving COVID-19 pandemic in the Canadian context
(including the emergence of Omicron), NACI strongly recommends a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19
vaccine should be offered at least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to:
• adults 50 yearsof age and older;
• long-term care residents and seniors living in other congregate settings;
• people who received two doses of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccine or one dose
of the Janssen vaccine;
• adults in or from First Nations, Inuit and Métis communities; and
• all frontline healthcare workers who have direct in-person contact with patients.
Booster vaccine programs in Indigenous communities should be determined by Indigenous leaders and
communities with health care and publichealth partners.
NACI also recommends that a booster dose of an authorized mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be offered to
adults 18 to 49 years of age at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19 vaccine series
with consideration of jurisdictional and individual risks.
Adults who are moderately to severely immunocompromised who have received a three-dose primary
series and pregnant and breastfeeding adults are included in those who may receive a booster dose.
NACI also now recommends that a recombinant subunit protein vaccine (Novavax Nuvaxovid) may be
offered at least 6 months after completion of a primary COVID-19 vaccine series to adults who are not
able or willing to receive an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine. This is considered off-label advice as Novavax
Nuvaxovid is not authorized for use as a booster.
If offering the Moderna Spikevax vaccine as a booster (which normally is 50 mcg per dose), the 100 mcg
dose may be preferred for adults who are moderately to severely immunocompromised, as well as
adultsliving in long-term care for seniors or other congregate living settings that provide care for seniors
based on the discretion of healthcare providers.
As of January 28, 2022, NACI recommends that a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine may be
offeredat least 6 months after the completion of a primary series to adolescents 12 to 17 years of age
who are at higher risk of severe COVID-19 outcomes due to underlying medical conditions or living
conditions, or who belong to racialized or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by
COVID-19. This is an off-label recommendation as booster doses are currently only authorized for use in
people 18 years of age and over in Canada.
For people 12 to 29 years of age who are receiving a booster dose of an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine, the
use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty booster dose (30 mcg) may be preferred over the use of the
Moderna Spikevax booster dose (50 mcg) due to lower reported rates of myocarditis and pericarditis
with the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine. A booster dose should be provided at least 6 months after
the completion of a primary vaccine series.
The difference between a booster dose and an additional dose for people who are
immunocompromised
An initial vaccine series is considered tobe the number of vaccine doses needed to develop a strong
initial immune response. The general population, including older adults, develops a robust immune
response to COVID-19 vaccines. In Canada, a primary vaccine series is two doses of the Pfizer-BioNTech
Comirnaty, Moderna Spikevax and AstraZeneca Vaxzevria/COVISHIELD vaccines (or any combination
thereof) or one dose of the Janssen vaccine.
People who are immunocompromised may have a reduced immune response to COVID-19 vaccines. In
this case, an additional dose provides another opportunity for these individuals to develop a better
initial immune response.
A booster dose is used to boost the immune system when protection from a primary vaccine series
begins to wane over time.
COVID-19 vaccination following SARS-COV-2 infection
NACI continues to recommend that COVID-19 vaccines should be offered to individuals with previous
SARS-CoV-2 infection without contraindications to the vaccine. While infection alone provides some
protection, vaccination after infection is important to provide the best long-term protection from
infection including from current and future variants. Longer intervals between infection and a COVID-19
vaccine dose may help to ensure durable immune responses after vaccination and longer-lasting
protection against Omicron and future variants.
At this time, NACI suggests that individuals who experienced SARS-CoV-2 infection before starting or
completing their primary COVID-19 vaccine series may receive their next dose 8 weeks after symptoms
started or after testing positive (if no symptoms were experienced).
Individuals who are recommended to receive a booster dose and who experienced SARS-CoV-2 infection
after completing their primary series may receive a booster dose 3 months after symptoms started or
after testing positive (if no symptoms were experienced) and provided it is at least 6 months after
completing a primary series.
Co-administration of COVID-19 vaccines with other vaccines
For adults and adolescents over 12 years of age, NACI now recommends that currently authorized
COVID-19 vaccines may be given at the same time as, or at any time before or after, other vaccines.
After reviewing the evolving evidence on COVID-19 vaccines and considering the extensive data and
experience ofgiving other routine vaccines at the same time or within days of each other, NACI has
determined that a precautionary approach is no longer necessary. No specific safety concerns have been
identified when routine vaccines are given at the same time or within days of each other.
Allowing COVID-19 vaccines to be given at the same time as or within days of other routine vaccines will
help facilitate influenza vaccine programs in the fall and winter months and will make it easier for
individuals to receive other routine vaccines they may have missed due to the pandemic.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the pediatric Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine
(10 mcg) at least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precaution to help to determine if a
side effect that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may be
circumstances when a dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given at the same
time–a healthcare provider can help with this decision.
Vaccine Interchangeability
NACI continues to recommend that the same mRNA COVID-19 vaccine administered for the first dose in
a primary series be offered for the second dose. If the same mRNA COVID-19 vaccine is not readily
available, or the vaccine administered for the first dose is unknown, another mRNA COVID-19 vaccine
can be considered interchangeable and should be offered to complete the vaccine series.
An mRNA COVID-19 vaccine is preferred as the second dose for individuals who received a first dose of
the AstraZeneca/COVISHIELD vaccine. Results from German studies suggest a potentially better immune
response, including against variants of concern, when a first dose of the AstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine
is followed by a second dose of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty vaccine compared to two doses of the
AstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine. Evidence continues to suggest a mixed vaccine schedule has a good
safety profile. Receiving an mRNA COVID-19 vaccine as a second dose also mitigates the potential risk of
Vaccine-induced Immune Thrombosis Thrombocytopenia (VITT) associated with viral vector vaccines.
Publication of the COVID-19 vaccine chapter in the Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG)
The Canadian Immunization Guide (CIG) is an online resource for vaccineadministrators in Canada,
including health professionals and vaccine program decision-makers. It includes recommendations and
statements from expert advisory committees, including NACI and Canada’s Committee to Advise on
Tropical Medicine and Travel.
Throughout the pandemic, NACI recommendations on the use of COVID-19 vaccines have been
published on the NACI website. These recommendations have now been included in the CIG in a new
COVID-19 vaccine chapter. Future NACI guidance on the use of COVID-19 vaccines will continue to be
published on the NACI website as short statements or rapid responses and will be incorporated into the
CIG as quickly as possible. The integration of NACI advice and statements into the CIG is standard
practice, as the CIG is designed to be used as a reference for national vaccine guidance by frontline
health care providers.
REVIEW OF THE PANDEMIC RESPONSE
Issue
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada conducted a performance audit focused on whether the
Public Health Agency of Canada was prepared to respond to a pandemic.
Key Facts
• The Auditor General tabled this audit report to Parliament and publicly released it on March 25,
2021. In response, PHAC prepared a Management Response and Action Plan.
Key Messages
• There are many lessons we have learned from COVID-19, in Canada and around the world.
• The Government of Canada’s response to COVID-19 evolvedthroughout the pandemic based on
the latest available scientific evidence, epidemiology, and expert opinion.
• We will strengthen our pandemic preparedness in Canada, building on the lessons learned.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will incorporatelearnings from the pandemic into its plans
and test them as appropriate. The provinces and territories will be critical in this work.
If pressed on the Auditor General’s report on PHAC’s preparedness
• The Auditor General recognized that the Public HealthAgency of Canada rapidly mobilized,
adapted and responded to the evolving COVID-19 situation, and worked persistently to help Canadians
and respond to their needs.
• Areas for improvement were identified to help us become better prepared for future health
events, including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration of border and quarantine measures.
• Work is already underway to respond to the recommendations from this audit:
o The Public Health Agency of Canada is working with provincial and territorial partners to build
on the information sharing, management and technology improvements already underway.
o The Agency has also restructured its border and travel health program to better respond to the
changing pandemic and increase its focus on compliance.
• Regarding early warning processes, the Agency will work to make further improvements to the
Global PublicHealth Intelligence Network, or GPHIN.
Background
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is responsible for preparing for a wide variety of potential
health emergencies, including but not limited to pandemics. The Office of the Auditor General (OAG)
identified several key elements of preparedness for improvement including:
o updating and testing emergency plans;
o addressing existing issues in public health surveillance information sharing;
o monitoring and early warning processes; and
o administration of border and quarantine measures.
On emergency plans, recognizing that existing plans provided a framework to guide the current
response and that improvements are always possible, PHAC will incorporate learnings from the current
pandemic into its plans and future exercises to test and validate these plans, in collaboration with
provincial and territorial colleagues and key stakeholders.
PHAC has similarly committed to updating and testing the Health Portfolio Strategic Emergency
Management Plan andHealth Portfolio Emergency Response Plan within two years after the end of the
pandemic, to enhance preparedness to respond to future public health threats and emergencies. In
updating and testing these plans, PHAC will work with provincial and territorial partners to reflect
shared responsibilities for public health emergencies.
With respect to public health surveillance, monitoring and early warning processes, PHAC is taking
similar steps to respond to OAG recommendations and others. Specifically, the OAG report
recommended PHAC appropriately utilize its GPHIN monitoring capabilities to detect and provide early
warning of potential public health threats, and in particular, clarify decision making for issuing alerts.
PHAC has committed to a number of actions to address the recommendations for further improvements
to GPHIN, taking into account both the OAG audit report and the recommendations from the
Independent Review of GPHIN which include improving and streamlining the decision-making process
for the issuance of GPHIN alerts and other GPHIN products and processes.
ACCESS TO COVID-19 VACCINES FOR CHILDREN
ISSUE
• Vaccine use in children under 12 years of age.
KEY FACTS
• Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnatyis authorised in younger children, ages 5-11. Health Canada has also
received a submission for the use of a COVID 19 vaccine in this younger age group from Moderna.
• The positive results in Pfizer’s clinical trials involves approximately 4,600 children ages 5 to 11
years of age in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The
90.7% efficacy was established in 1,968 vaccine recipients, and vaccine safety was evaluated in 3,300
vaccine recipients.
KEY MESSAGES
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® in
children aged 5 to 11.
• Health Canada is also reviewing a submission from Moderna for its Spikevax® vaccine for
younger age groups (6 to 11 years).
• As with all COVID-19 submissions, the Department is prioritizing the review while maintaining
our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S REVIEW PROCESS
• In order to expand the use of an authorized COVID-19 vaccine to younger children, the
manufacturer must provide evidence of safety, efficacy and quality to Health Canada for review.
• Timing for the completion of a Health Canada review depends on many factors, including but
not limited to, the need for additional data, discussions with the sponsor, and requirements for updates
to safety information. A decision will only be made once all of the required information has been
submitted by the manufacturer and thoroughly evaluated by Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON SAFETY OF VACCINESIN CHILDREN
• The safety of vaccines for children is of the utmost priority for Health Canada. The Department
will not compromise on the evidence standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• The Department conducted a detailed review of the safety data from clinical trials of Comirnaty
to support the authorization of the vaccine in adults, adolescents and children 5 years of age and older.
The Department will similarly conduct a detailed review of the safety data available from Moderna to
determine the vaccine’s safety in younger age groups.
• The risks and benefits are evaluated for each age group in the context of COVID disease. This
requires consideration of vaccine side effects and benefits.
• During clinical trials, dose-finding studies were conductedto determine the correct dose for
vaccine effectiveness in children aged 6 months to less than 12 years. This resulted in the identification
of a lower dose for children, while still maintaining effectiveness.
• The Department continuously monitors the safety of the vaccines after approval in Canada and
internationally, and takes immediate action should any safety concerns arise.
IF PRESSED ON AVAILABILITY OF OTHER VACCINES
• Studies with the Comirnaty vaccine are ongoing in children under 5 years of age,and other
manufacturers are also testing their vaccines in children of various age groups. Health Canada expects to
receive data for review in the coming months.
BACKGROUND
The risk of severe illness due to COVID-19 might be lower in children than in adults but this does not
mean that there is no risk:
• Children can still contract COVID-19 and get very sick.
• In Canada, more than 4,000 children (ages 0-19) have been hospitalized with COVID-19, 422
have been admitted to the ICU and 33 have died (as ofFebruary 25, 2022.
• In Canada, there have been 355,737 COVID cases in children aged 0-11 years (as of February 25,
2022).
• Some children go on to develop a Multi Inflammatory Syndrome and become severely affected.
Although rare, this is not an insignificant risk.
• Emerging data suggest that children that survive COVID-19 despite of the severity, are at risk of
developing what is now called “long COVID”. This condition is yet poorly understood but it has been
observed in a percentage of adults and children that survive COVID-19.
• In addition, children like adults, can still spread the virus to others. In order to best protect
themselves and the whole community, adolescents and children who are eligible should be vaccinated if
there are no contraindications.
PFIZER Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Comirnaty
• On May 5, 2021 Health Canada approved the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty®vaccine in
adolescents aged 12-15.This information was also submitted to the US FDA and the European Medicines
Agency. The expanded indication for 12-15 years old was approved by the US FDA on May 10, 2021 and
by the EMA on May 28, 2021.
• Pfizer has completed their clinical trials involving up to 4,600 children ages 5 to 11 years of age
in the United States, Finland, Poland, and Spain from more than 90 clinical trial sites. The trials evaluated
the Pfizer-BioNTech vaccine on a two-dose schedule (approximately 21 days apart).
• On November 19, 2021, Pfizer's pediatric vaccine (ages 5 to 11) was approved by Health Canada
and the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) released their guidelines also
recommending the use in this age group.
• On October 26, 2021, the US FDA’s Vaccines and Related Biological Products Advisory
Committee voted to agree thatthe overall benefits of the vaccine outweigh the risks for children 5-11
years of age. Many committee members stressed that this was based on considerations of access and
personal choice and should not be considered a recommendation to mandate vaccines inthis age group.
Active safety monitoring for rare, but potentially serious, adverse events such asmyocarditis will be
important.
• On October 29, 2021 the U.S. FDA authorized the emergency use of the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-
19 Vaccine for the prevention ofCOVID-19 to include children 5 through 11 years of age.
• On November 5, 2021, the US CDC’s Advisory Committee on Immunization Practices (ACIP)
issued an Interim Recommendation for Use of Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 Vaccine in Children Aged 5-11
Years.
• Inthe United States, as of March 2, 2022 more than 9 million children between the ages of 5
and 11 have received their first dose of Pfizer’s vaccine, and no safety issues have been identified. The
safety profile of children 5 to 11 is generally comparable to what was observed for the 12 to 15 year
olds.
MODERNA Adolescent and Pediatric COVID-19 Vaccine Spikevax
• On August 27, 2021, Health Canada approved the use of the Moderna COVID 19 Vaccine in
adolescents aged 12 to 17.
• On November 16, 2021,Moderna filed their pediatric dossier for ages 6 to 11 years and the
submission is currently under review.
Other Vaccines
• Clinical trials for the Janssen and AstraZeneca vaccines in children were paused in Spring 2021
due to concerns with blood clots reported with the use of these vaccines in adults. The Janssen &
AstraZeneca trials have restarted; Janssen has plans to continue recruitment of younger pediatric
patients.
• Other manufacturers such as Novavax have also launched clinical trials to test their vaccine in
adolescents.
Boosters for Adolescents
• On February 23rd, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19
booster for people 16 to 17 years of age. On January 28, 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) releasedguidance from the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) on the off-
label use of booster COVID-19 vaccine doses in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age who are at high risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes due underlying medical conditions or living conditions, or who belong to
racialized or marginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
ACCESS TO VACCINES FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Six COVID-19 vaccines are currently authorized by Health Canada and others are under review.
KEY FACTS
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and
the Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
• Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
KEY MESSAGES
• The availability of safe and effective COVID-19 vaccines is of the utmost priority. Health Canada
has now authorized COVID-19 vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, Moderna, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Novavax
and Medicago.
• In addition, there are two other vaccines currently under review by Health Canada from Sanofi
and Vaccigen (Covaxin).
• On November 19, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty
COVID-19 vaccine for children ages 5 to 11. Moderna has a submission under review for approval of a
pediatric indication (6 to 11 years) for their vaccine.
• In November 2021, Health Canada also authorized the use of a booster shot of the Pfizer-
BioNTech Comirnaty and Moderna Spikevax COVID-19 vaccines. On February 23rd, 2022, Health Canada
received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19 booster for people 16 to 17 years of age. Public Health
advice should be followed regarding who would benefit from a booster shot. Submissions have been
received from AstraZeneca and Janssen for approval of booster shot of their vaccine.
• On February 17, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of the Novavax NuvaxovidCOVID-19
vaccine in adults 18 years of age and older.
• On February 24, 2022, Health Canada authorized the use of Medicago's Covifenz COVID-19
vaccine in adults 18 to 64 years of age. This is the first authorized COVID-19 vaccine developed by a
Canadian-based company, and the first that uses a plant-based protein technology.
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to review vaccines as quickly as possible, while
maintaining our rigorous standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada is also working closely with other major regulators who are reviewing the same
vaccines. These partnerships allow us to share scientific evidence and streamline review processes,
while still making independent decisions for Canadians.
• Health Canada will continue to review safety data submitted by the manufacturer and adverse
event reports received in the Canada Vigilance Database. In addition, Health Canada will continue to
work closely with the Public Health Agency of Canada, Provinces and Territories, and international
regulators to monitor the safety of the vaccine. The Department will take appropriate action in a timely
manner if new safety concerns are identified and will ensure that relevant information is available to all
Canadians.
• All vaccines in use in Canada are closely monitored through Canada’s vaccine safety monitoring
system.
IF PRESSED ON OMICRON …
• Health Canada issued regulatory letters to manufacturers of authorized COVID-19 vaccines and
to those under review, requesting plans to evaluate and address the impact of the omicron variant on
their product and include any proposed studies, timelines for completion and risk minimization
measures. Canadians will be informed in a timely manner of any new key information about the impact
of omicron on vaccine effectiveness.
• Health Canada is working with manufacturers and international regulatory partners, including
WHO, to assess the potential impact of the omicron variant on approved test kits, vaccines and
treatments.
• As evidence emerges, Health Canada will take action and inform Canadians if there are changes
to the safety or effectiveness of COVID-19 health products in Canada because of the omicron variant.
• If new vaccines or treatments are needed to address the omicron variant, Health Canada will
prioritize the reviews to make these products available as soon as possible while maintaining high
standards for safety, efficacy and quality.
IF PRESSED ON BOOSTER DOSE SUBMISSIONS …
• People who have received a complete vaccine series,including older adults, have good
protection against severe disease and death. This includes protection from variants of concern currently
circulating in Canada. However, a third dose would ensure further protection.
• The National Advisory Committee onImmunization (NACI) strongly recommends that Canadians
over the age of 50 and other vulnerable populations receive a third dose of an mRNA vaccine. Canadians
aged 18 to 49 can also receive a third dose at least six months after they have received their second.
• On February 23rd, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19
booster for individuals 16 to 17 years of age.. On January 28, 2022, the Public Health Agency of Canada
(PHAC) released guidance from the National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) on the off-
label use of booster COVID-19 vaccine doses in adolescents 12 to 17 years of age who are at high risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes due underlying medical conditions or living conditions, or who belong to
racialized ormarginalized communities disproportionately affected by COVID-19.
IF PRESSED ON THE TIMING OF APPROVALS FOR VACCINES UNDER REVIEW …
• The vaccines are being reviewed as rolling submissions under the Food and Drug Regulations
which allows companies to submit evidence on safety, effectiveness and quality to Health Canada as it
becomes available. The Food and Drug Regulations were amended in March 2021 to provide the same
flexibilities as under the Interim Order that was used for the initial authorizations.
• Each manufacturer files a detailed plan that lays out the timing and content of the subsequent
data and information submissions to Health Canada to support the rolling reviews.
• Health Canada has also hired additional scientists and has established dedicated review teams
for COVID-19 vaccines, in order to ensure consistency in their review. These teams have been working
around the clock to expedite reviews.
• Timing for the completion of the rolling submissions depends on the outcomes of the
companies’ongoing clinical trials and the review of the data submitted to Health Canada, as well as the
finalization of their manufacturing sites and processes for Canadian supply.
IF PRESSED ON INTERIM ORDER/AMENDED REGULATIONS …
• Health Canada put in place temporary Interim Orders to facilitate expedited access to COVID-19
drugs and vaccines.
• Regulatory changes were made on March 18, 2021 to permanently transition measures from the
Interim Order to the Food and Drug Regulations, to ensure that vaccines and drugs authorized under the
Interim Order can continue to be sold and that new COVID-19 products can be reviewed and authorized
using similar flexibilities.
• Companies that had a vaccine or drug authorized under the Interim Order were required to
make a submission to Health Canada to receive authorization under the Food and Drug Regulations.
• To-date, the vaccines from Pfizer-BioNTech, AstraZeneca, Janssen, Moderna, Novavax and
Medicago have been authorized under the new Regulations.
• Vaccines not yet authorized for sale in Canada, such as those from Sanofi and Vaccigen, are also
being reviewed under the new Regulations.
BACKGROUND
Expediting processes to make vaccines available
Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with other departments and the
Vaccine Task Force to develop and implement Canada's vaccine strategy.
In September 2020, Health Canada issued an Interim Order to expedite the review of drugs and vaccines
by allowing companies to submit safetyand efficacy data assoon as they become available.
Health Canada only authorizes a vaccine if it is supported by very robust scientific data and evidence
showing that the benefits of the vaccine clearly outweigh any potential risks.
Since the Interim Order was temporary (valid for 1 year, expired on September 16, 2021), in March 2021
Health Canada introduced amendments to the Food and Drugs Regulations (Regulations) to provide a
mechanism for COVID-19 products to gain permanent legal status and allow thevaccines to continue to
be sold in Canada. Companies were required to file a submission to Health Canada under the amended
Regulations. The Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® and Moderna Spikevax®, AstraZeneca Vaxzevria® and
Janssen vaccines were authorizedunder the modified Regulations
Summary of approved vaccines, status of ongoing reviews and international comparisons
Original vaccine approvals
Health Canada authorized the Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty® vaccine under the Interim Order on
December 9, 2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Moderna Spikevax® vaccine under the Interim Order on December 23,
2020, and authorized it under the Regulations on September 16, 2021.
Health Canada authorized theAstraZeneca Vaxzevria vaccine under the Interim Order on Feb 26, 2021,
and authorized it under the Regulations on November 19, 2021. Health Canada worked closely with the
European Medicines Agency on the initial review. Health Canada authorized the Janssen vaccine on
March 5, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Janssen vaccine on March 5, 2021 under the Interim Order, and
authorized it under the Regulations on November 23, 2021.
Health Canada authorized the Novavax Nuvaxovid COVID-19 vaccine on February17, 2022 under the
Regulations.
Health Canada authorized the Medicago Covifenz COVID-19 vaccine on February 24, 2022 under the
Regulations.
Pediatric and Adolescent approvals
Health Canada authorized the use of the Pfizer vaccine in children aged 5-11 onNovember 19, 2021 and
aged 12-15 on May 5, 2021. Moderna vaccine was approved for children (12-17 years old) on August 27,
2021. (Please see separate QP on COVID-19 vaccines for children).
Boosters
On November 9, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use ofthe Pfizer-BioNTech Comirnaty COVID-19
vaccine as a booster shot. On November 12, 2021, Health Canada authorized the use of the Moderna
Spikevax vaccine as a booster shot.
On February 23rd, 2022, Health Canada received a submission from Pfizer for a COVID-19 booster for
people 16 to 17 years of age. Health Canada has also received submissions from AstraZeneca and
Janssen for booster shot of their vaccines. Assessment is on-going.
Ongoing reviews of other vaccines
Vaccine submissions from Sanofi and Vaccigen (vaccine Covaxin) are under review. Timelines for
decisions depend on the submission of outstanding data from the companies, discussions with the
sponsors, and completion of Health Canada’s review.
COVID-19 TEST KITS
ISSUE
• Throughout the pandemic, Health Canada has ensured that testing devices authorized for sale in
Canada meet safety, effectiveness and quality requirements.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada authorizes tests based on the data provided by the manufacturer. The
manufacturer must provide sufficient data to support the intended use and claims being made, including
the sensitivity established for the specific test.
• Provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery and administration of health care
services. Decisions on the use of medical devices, including “off-label use” of authorized testing devices,
rests with provincial and territorial governments.
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada has one of the most highly regarded regulatory frameworks for medical devices
in the world.
• Since the start of the pandemic, Health Canada put in place rapid, innovative and agile measures
to ensure prompt access to medical devices to respond to the needs of Canadians.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensuredthat the testing
devices available in Canada have been high performing and reliable.
• Working with our public health partners, we have identified the following testing technologies
as being of the highest priority for evaluation at this time:
o self-testing devices
o ‘multiplex’ devices that diagnose and differentiate between other respiratory viruses (e.g.,
Influenza A and B)
o point-of-care antigen or molecular testing devices that use nasal swab or saliva samples for use
in symptomatic and asymptomatic populations administered by trained operators (rather than health
care professionals)
• As of March 8, Health Canada has authorized 111 testing devices, including 11 self-tests and 30
tests that can be used in a point of care setting.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON THE EFFECTIVENESS OF COVID TESTS TO DETECT
VARIANTS …
• Based on the information available to date on variants, the authorized tests continue to be
effective.
• Health Canada is monitoring the potential impact of the new variants, including the recently
identified Omicron variant, on the effectiveness of test devices and will take action as necessary.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON HOME TESTING FOR COVID-19 …
• Applications for self-testing technologies are the highest priority for review at this time.
• As of March 8, Health Canada has authorized 11 self-tests.
• The Department continues to contact manufacturers of self-tests that have been authorized in
other jurisdictions to invite them to submit an application in Canada. As of March 8, 15 self-test
applications are under evaluation by Health Canada.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON THE USE OFRAPID TESTS FOR SELF-TESTING …
• For public health reasons, Health Canada is not prioritizing the enforcement of off-label sale and
advertising of authorized COVID-19 tests under certain conditions.
• Most rapid tests have been authorized for use by qualified laboratory personnel, health
professionals or trained individuals, however provinces and territories havethe authority to set
guidelines for "off-label" use to support their pandemic efforts.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON ASYMPTOMATIC TESTING FOR COVID-19…
• Since May 2021, Health Canada has authorized 20 tests to allow for testing in asymptomatic
populations.
IF PRESSED ON WHY TESTS ARE AUTHORIZED IN OTHERCOUNTRIES BUT NOT IN CANADA …
• Each jurisdiction has different rules and approval processes.
• Once tests are approved by international partners, we contact manufacturers to encourage
themto apply for authorization in Canada.
• Health Canada accepts submissions made to another jurisdiction and assesses that data
independently.
• Health Canada’s consistent approach throughout the pandemic has ensured that the testing
devices available for sale in Canada have been accurate and reliable.
• We have avoided some of the problems other countries have experienced, including recalling
lower-quality tests.
• Canada is one of the few countries with minimal post-market issues, including recalls.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S POSITION ON SALIVA TESTING FOR COVID-19…
• Health Canada has authorized a number of accurate and reliable COVID-19 test devices for use
with various samples.
• At this time, Health Canada has authorized the use of gargle andspit samples for use with the
authorized Cepheid Xpertxpress SARS-CoV-2 testing device
• Health Canada has also authorized the Norgen Biotek 2019-NCOV N Gene and Norgen Biotek
COVID-19 E/RDRP Genes, which both utilize saliva samples.
• Health Canada is prioritizing the review of applications for test kits that use saliva samples so
Canadians have access to new testing options.
BACKGROUND
Under the Interim Order, manufacturers can submit an abbreviated application to support the safety,
effectiveness andquality of their medical device. Fees associated with an application through the IO
pathway are waived.
Health Canada has received applications for three types of testing devices:
1. Nucleic acid-based tests (detection of the viral genetic material)
2. Antigen-based tests (detection of proteins on the surface of the virus)
3. Serological-based tests (detection of antibodies)
Since the beginning of the pandemic, Health Canada has worked closely with public health partners to
ensure that applications for COVID-19 testing devices are prioritized to meet urgent public health needs.
Health Canada is currently prioritizing self-testing devices, ‘multiplex’ devices that diagnose and
differentiate between other respiratory viruses (e.g., Influenza A and B) and tests that use less invasive
sample types such as nasal swab or saliva samples.
Health Canada authorizes tests based on the data provided by the manufacturer. The manufacturer
must provide sufficient data to support the intended use and claims being made,including the
sensitivity established for the specific test.
Health Canada regulates the sale of medical devices in Canada—not their use.
Provinces and territories are responsible for the delivery and administration of health care services.
Decisions on the use of medical devices, including “off-label use” of authorized testing devices, rests
with provincial and territorial governments. If a test is used in an off-label manner, the performance
characteristics (e.g. established sensitivity) of the devicecannot be assured.
Health Canada has set minimum standards for sensitivity that a COVID-19 antigen test must meet for an
authorization to be granted. Tests with sensitivity below this minimum threshold of 80% do not meet
the criteria outlined in the Interim Order, and will not be authorized. Sensitivity values below this level
produce too many false negative results.
To remain agile and allow flexibility, Health Canada will accept data to support serial testing protocols
for use in asymptomatic populations.
GLOBAL PUBLIC HEALTH INTELLIGENCE NETWORK (GPHIN)
Issue
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health announced an independent review of the Public Health Agency
of Canada’s Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN). The finalreport was published on July
12, 2021. In addition, the Auditor General’s Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border
Control Measures was released in March 2021, and includes a recommendation relating to GPHIN.
Key Facts
• GPHIN analystsconduct a daily review of more than 3,500 articles in nine languages (Arabic,
Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
• In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential
public health threat, GPHIN issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article
about a health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers.
• Such alerts do not include a riskassessment or recommendations for specific actions or
responses.
• The GPHIN Independent Review final report offered recommendations to prepare for future
health events and improve public health surveillance tools at PHAC. The report includes specific
recommendations to improve GPHIN operations and engagement with public health partners. It also
offers suggestions on how to integrate PHAC’s surveillance and risk assessment programs to better
position the Agency to identify and respond to future health events that could affect Canadians.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada’s top priority is the health and safety of Canadians, and we are
committed to improving Canada’s early warning system for potential emergencies, including pandemics.
• That is why, in2020, the government requested that an Independent Review Panel undertake a
review of the Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN).
• The Panel’s recommendations were publicly released in July 2021, and are being used to
support PHAC in determining how this global public health surveillance system can continue to best
serve Canadians and the international community.
If pressed for details on the final report
• The final report provides recommendations on the role and purpose of GPHIN, its organization
and flow of information, and technology considerations going forward.
• The recommendations relate to a range of topics, from international and domestic partnerships
to advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems, and the future of surveillance
tools.
• The Independent Panel confirmed that GPHIN was never shut down. GPHIN provided early
warning of COVID-19 to Canadian public health professionals, and continues to operate as Canada’s
event-based public health surveillance system.
Background
About GPHIN
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Global Public Health Intelligence Network (GPHIN) is an
open-source early-warning and situational awareness system for potential chemical, biological,
radiological and nuclear public health threats worldwide, including outbreaks of infectious disease.
GPHIN users include non-governmental public health agencies and organizations, as well as government
authorities who conduct public health surveillance. GPHIN’s products and services are freely available to
eligible users. GPHIN is an important contributor to the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Epidemic
Intelligence from Open Sources.
GPHIN consistsof two critical components:
• an Information Management Tool that uses machine learning and natural language processing
to automatically collect and filter data from multiple open sources; and
• a professional multidisciplinary team of analysts that reviews and refines the filtered data, and
also monitors additional open sources to scan for signals of potential public health threats.
Every day, the GPHIN system automatically collects about 7,000 articles, half of which are filtered out
before the GPHINanalysts conduct their daily review of the remaining 3,500 articles in nine languages
(Arabic, Farsi, English, French, Portuguese, Russian, Spanish, and simplified and traditional Chinese).
Articles are collected from open sources, and are validated and assessed for inclusion in reports,
including the GPHIN Daily Report. This report goes directly from GPHIN to Canadian public health
practitioners at the federal, provincial, territorial and regional levels, including senior management at
PHAC and other government departments.
In addition to the GPHIN Daily Report, if an article meets specific criteria related to a potential public
health threat, GPHIN issues what is known as an “Alert”–an email with a highlighted article about a
health event of potential interest that is sent to international and domestic subscribers. Such alerts do
not include a risk assessment or recommendations for specific actions or responses.
Independent Review of GPHIN
In the fall of 2020, the Minister of Health requested an independent review of GPHIN. This review
considered:
• the capabilities of the existing system;
• its role in detecting and informing PHAC’s response to COVID-19, and in global and domestic
public health surveillance;
• opportunities to improve the system; and
• the future of Canada’s global health surveillance system, including advice on the next generation
of intelligence systems and lessons learned from COVID-19, so that the Government of Canada is well
positioned to respond to future public health events.
The Panel members, Margaret Bloodworth (Panel Chair), Dr. Paul Gully, and Dr. Mylaine Breton, were
selected based on their collective expertise in public health, governance, health security, and
intelligence.
The final report was published online on July 12, 2021, and the 36 recommendations therein relate to:
• the role and purpose of GPHIN, including articulating its role and functions as part of PHAC's
public health surveillance activities, extending its partnerships and subscriber outreach, and regularly
evaluating its processes and products;
• organizational considerations and flow of information, including establishing a new Risk
Assessment Office at PHAC, linking GPHIN to PHAC's broader surveillance activities, and training and
recruiting GPHIN staff;and
• technology, such as incorporation of additional social media and other new sources of data,
platform improvements, and advice on the next generation of public health intelligence systems.
Auditor General Report on Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures
The Office of the Auditor General of Canada (OAG) tabled a report in Parliament on March 25, 2021
titled COVID-19 Pandemic: Report 8–Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control
Measures. This included an audit of PHAC’s and the Canada Border Services Agency’s pandemic
response. The report notes that GPHIN Alerts play a key role in early warning, and that overall, PHAC
quickly mobilized and adapted its response as the pandemic progressed.
With regard to GPHIN, the following recommendation was made: “The Public Health Agency of Canada
should appropriately utilize its Global Public Health Intelligence Network monitoring capabilities to
detect and provide early warning of potential public health threats and, in particular, clarify decision
making for issuing alerts.”
The OAG audit found that no alert was issued when news of an unknown pneumonia was first reported,
when the virus had spread outside of China, or when domestic cases were first suspected and
confirmed.GPHIN did include a signal about a “mystery pneumonia outbreak” in the Daily GPHIN report,
published before 8 am on December 31, 2019, and sent to Canadian partners including federal,
provincial, and territorial public health officials. GPHIN thus performed its key function of providing early
warning within Canada. By the evening of December 31, 2019, the significance of this event was clear in
the public health surveillance community. Because the information was being disseminated widely
through a numberof other mechanisms, and Canadian officials and international and domestic partners
were already aware (including through the GPHIN Daily Report), it was unnecessary to issue an alert to
further flag this event.
While the audit concluded it was problematic that PHAC did not issue an alert, it is clear that the lack of
issuing alert in no way impeded the actions and response of PHAC. The Interim report noted
“documents received by the Panel show that both PHAC’s former President and Chief Public Health
Officer (CPHO), took action upon receipt of the January 1 Special Report from GPHIN’s management
shortly after 9:00 am that day. The President shared information with the Minister of Health’s office, as
well as counterparts at the Privy Council Office (PCO),Global Affairs Canada (GAC) and Public Safety
Canada (PSC). The following day (January 2), the CPHO notified the Council of Chief Medical Officers of
Health (CCMOH), and PHAC alerted the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) Public Health Network
Communications Group and the Canadian Public Health Laboratory Network (CPHLN). The first meeting
of CCMOH related to this viral pneumonia outbreak took place on January 14.”
The OAG report also notes that the approval process for issuing alerts changed in 2018, after which the
number of alerts decreased significantly.
• PHAC officials confirmed this change was to ensure appropriate awareness of, and response to,
emerging issues, but GPHIN subscribers were not informed of this operational change in alert reporting.
• In recognition of the need for clear decision-making processes, a standard operating procedure
was put in place in fall 2020 regarding the issuance of GPHIN alerts.
In response to the Auditor General’s recommendation, and the recommendations from the GPHIN
Independent Review, PHAC will make further improvements to GPHIN, including the alert process.
ENDING COSMETIC TESTING ON ANIMALS IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Non-governmental organizations, members of Parliament and concernedCanadians have
pressed Health Canada to ban cosmetic animal testing. Since April 2021, the Department has received
approximately 69,000 correspondence items about banning cosmetic animal testing in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• The Minister of Health’s mandate letter published in December 2021 includes a commitment to
introduce legislation to end animal testing. As a first step, Health Canada is considering how legislative
requirements for cosmetics could be amended to end cosmetic testing on animals. As early as 2009, an
estimated 99% of cosmetic safety assessments in the European Union and United States did not rely on
animal testing. To date, 41 countries have enacted measures to prohibit cosmetic animal testing
(including all European Union countries, Australia,the United Kingdom, and South Korea).
• Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or
cosmetic ingredients; however, ingredients found in other products tested on animals may also be used
in cosmetics.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that Canadians are concerned about the well-being of animals and
supports the elimination of cosmetic animal testing.
• There have been significant advances in alternative testing methods that support reducing our
reliance on animal testing.
• Our Government has committed to introduce legislation to end animal testing, and will continue
to explore alternatives and take steps to reduce reliance on animal testing.
IF PRESSED
• Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or
cosmetic ingredients.
BACKGROUND
Non-governmental organizations, members of Parliament and concerned Canadianshave pressed
Health Canada to ban cosmetic animal testing. Health Canada supports the elimination of cosmetic
animal testing.
The European Union banned the sale of cosmetic products and ingredients that have been tested on
animals in March 2013.
In 2017, as part of a campaign by animal rights organizations, a Senate Public Bill (cruelty-free
cosmetics) was introduced in Canada to propose amendments to the Food and Drugs Act that would ban
cosmetic testing on animals. In June 2019, the Government of Canada announced its support for the bill,
provided that key amendments were made. With the dissolution of 42nd Parliament, the bill died on the
Order Paper.
There have been significant advances in alternative testing methods that support reducing our reliance
on animal testing. In April 2021, the Government re-affirmed its commitment to reduce reliance on
animal testing with the introduction of a bill proposing to strengthen the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999. The bill included an aspirational statement in the preamble to reduce, refine or
replace the use of animals in the testing and assessment of substances. The bill had been introduced at
first reading when the 43rd Parliament was dissolved on August 15, 2021 and died on the order paper.
OnFebruary 9, 2022, the Government introduced Bill S-5, Strengthening Environmental Protection for a
Healthier Canada Act. Bill S-5 would amend the preamble of the Canadian Environmental Protection Act,
1999 to recognize the need to reduce reliance on animaltesting when assessing the risks that chemical
substances may pose to human health and other species. This proposed amendment would encourage
the promotion, development, and timely use of alternative methods and strategies (e.g., computer-
based models, testing on cell cultures). This commitment is in line with international efforts to reduce,
refine or replace animal testing, and contributes to and capitalizes on advances in technology.
Since April 2021, the Department has received approximately 69,000 correspondence items about
banning cosmetic animal testing in Canada.
The Minister of Health’s December 2021 mandate letter included a commitment to introduce legislation
to end animal testing.
As a first step towards this commitment, Health Canada is considering how legislative requirements for
cosmetics could be amended to end cosmetic testing on animals.
Cosmetic Animal Testing
Increasing concern for animal welfare has driven consumer demand for cruelty-free cosmetics and a
global decline in cosmetic animal testing, with many alternatives either in use or in development.
To date, 41 countries have enacted measures to prohibit cosmetic animal testing (e.g., all European
Union countries, Australia, United Kingdom, and South Korea). In 2009, an estimated 99% of cosmetic
safety assessments in the European Union and United States did not rely on animal testing. In 2017,
Cosmetics Alliance Canada indicated that more than 99% of new cosmetics are developed without
testing on animals. Animal testing for the small remaining portion of cosmetic products is generally
linked to an ingredient also used in a product where animal testing is required (e.g., pharmaceuticals), or
for export to a foreign country (e.g., China).
Regulation of Cosmetic Products Under the Food and Drugs Act
The Food and Drugs Act and its Cosmetic Regulations set out the health and safety requirements for
cosmetics inCanada. Industry must ensure that products:
• are safe for their intended use; and
• meet mandatory labelling requirements (i.e., list of ingredients and directions for safe use).
Health Canada does not require animal testing to demonstrate the safety of cosmetics or cosmetic
ingredients; however, many ingredients found in other products tested on animals may also be used in
cosmetics (e.g., a preservative used in a topical drug may also be used in a cosmetic). Health Canada
continues to accept such safety data derived from animal testing, when submitted by companies.
Animal testing is required under other regulatory frameworks within Health Canada’s purview (e.g.,
drugs, natural health products, consumer chemicals), as well as for assessing the environmental and
human impacts of new chemicals entering Canadian commerce. While there have been significant
advancements in the development and implementation of non-animal testing methods, science has not
yet progressed to the point where alternative methodscan completely replace animal testing. There are
several complex health endpoints relating to cancer, reproductive toxicity, and the way the body
processes toxins that are lacking validated alternative methods to animal testing. The Department
continues tosupport the development and use of alternatives to animal testing through the
participation on national and international scientific committees.
STATUS OF DOMESTIC MANUFACTURING CAPACITY FOR MRNA VACCINE
ISSUE
• Canada is committedto securing sufficient supply of domestically produced therapeutics and
vaccines, mRNA and otherwise.
• Canada is implementing the Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy which aims to grow a
strong, competitive domestic life sciences sector, with cutting-edge biomanufacturing capabilities, and
to make sure Canada is prepared for pandemics and other health emergencies in the future.
KEY FACTS
• Canada announced the creation of the Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy on July 28,
2021 to re-build astrong and resilient domestic biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
- Investments in biomanufacturing capacity can reduce our reliance on imported products and
strengthen our domestic industrial capacity.
- The Government will work with provinces, territories, and other partners to deliver real results
for Canadians.
- The strategy will be supported by existing resources and Budget 2021 investments, including
support of $2.2 billion for the revitalization of Canada's biomanufacturing and life sciencesector.
- Health Portfolio explicit work includes:
- $250 million, over three years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to establish a new
Clinical Trial Fund (CTF).
- Advancing regulatory modernization efforts, including modernizedclinical trial regulations, a new
pathway for advanced therapeutic products, and agile regulations for the licensing of drugs and medical
devices (e.g., through rolling reviews, terms and conditions).
• This builds on the more than $1.2 billion in investments the government has made since the
beginning of the pandemic to advance industrial research and development in vaccines and
therapeutics, as well as to expand biomanufacturing capacity in Canada.
• On August 10, 2021, Canada announced that it enteredinto a non-binding Memorandum of
Understanding with Moderna to build an mRNA vaccine facility in Canada. Work to negotiate a
definitive agreement is currently underway.
KEY MESSAGES
• The government is working to position Canada to develop and produce safe and effective
vaccines and therapies that respond to COVID-19, future pandemics, and other health priorities.
• Canada is making investments to support promising technology areas across platforms from
mRNA, viral vectors, protein based and virus-like particle vaccines. We are also investing to establish
world-class end-to-end domestic biomanufacturing capacity–from research and development to fill and
finish.
• In July 2021, the government announced the Biomanufacturingand Life Sciences Strategy to
improve Canada's long-term pandemic resilience and promote the life-sciences sector.
• Budget 2021 provided $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant domestic
biomanufacturing and life sciences sector.
IF PRESSED ON THE DOMESTIC CAPACITY TO DEVELOP MRNA VACCINES …
• The COVID-19 pandemic reinforced the importance of domestic capacity to develop and
produce vaccines, and has highlighted significant breakthroughs in health science and technology.
• To date, mRNA vaccines have proven to be highly effective in preventing severe disease, and
they represent an alternative to conventional vaccines, particularly in relation to their potential for rapid
development and scaling of production.
• Canada is prioritizing mRNA technology for the important and innovative role it is anticipated to
play in future vaccine development and production.
• The Government of Canada is currently in negotiations with Moderna to explore the possibility
of building a domestic mRNA vaccineproduction facility, building on the non-binding MOU signed with
the company in August 2021. This will help position Canada as an mRNA centre of excellence and a
global mRNA research and development hub.
IF PRESSED ON INVESTMENTS …
• Canada is working tore-establish domestic capacity, across key vaccine platforms, including
mRNA, to be better prepared and to manage key supply and other risks (including those encountered
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic).
• This includes the National Research Council’s new Biologics Manufacturing Centre which has
partnered with Novavax to pursue options to produce its COVID-19 vaccine, pending regulatory
authorization.
• Canada has also taken steps to secure non-mRNA vaccine options with global leaders such as
GlaxoSmithKline to help make sure Canadians have enough vaccine to fight a flu pandemic in the next 10
years.
• In the fall of 2020, the government signed an agreement with Medicago to secure doses of their
COVID-19 vaccine candidate. This is the first domestically developed vaccine candidate the Government
of Canada has secured.
• Medicago, a biopharmaceutical company headquartered in Quebec, has received investments
through the Strategic Innovation Fund to develop a plant-based COVID-19 vaccine. Phase 3 data for the
plant-based vaccine is currently being reviewed by Health Canada.
BACKGROUND
Biomanufacturing and Life Science Strategy
At the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada took early and decisive action to
strengthen Canada's biomanufacturing capacity to protect Canadians, and to provide investment to
support domestic biomanufacturing capabilities. A key element is the implementation of the
Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy (the Strategy) announced in June 2021.
Ministers of Health and Innovation, Science, and Industry have joint accountability for the Strategy
which outlines actions to take a coordinated approach to grow Canada's domestic capacity to rapidly
develop and produce vaccines, therapeutics and other lifesaving medicines to improve readiness for
future pandemics or other health emergencies and sector growth. This included Budget 2021
investments of $2.2 B.
The five pillars of the Strategy are:
6) Coordinating Governance;
7) Strengthening Research Systems and the Talent Pipeline;
8) Growing Canada’s Life Sciences and Biomanufacturing Sector;
9) Operationalizing National Research Council’s Biologics Manufacturing Centre (BMC) and
Considering a National Centre; and,
10) Ensuring Best-in-Class Regulation & World-ClassClinical Trials Systems.
Increasing domestic capacity and building a robust life sciences sector will require dedicated efforts to
connect and mobilize federal investments and assets in collaboration with academia and industry to the
broader life sciencesecosystem.
The emergency regulatory measures put in place during COVID-19 aim to make the system more agile,
and enable prompt access within Canada to health products needed to diagnose, treat and slow the
spread of the virus without compromising safety,efficacy and quality. Going forward it will be important
to maintain this level of agility (especially during non-pandemic times) to ensure Canadians receive
access to needed health products.
Canadian Biomanufacturing Capacity Since 2020
In addition toBudget 2021 funding, the government has announced a number of investments to bolster
domestic production capacity through the Strategic Innovation Fund, Next Generation Manufacturing
Canada Supercluster, the National Research Council, Regional DevelopmentAgencies, and other
government partners, including in:
• National Research Council (NRC) (Montréal, QC)-$126 million to establish the new Biologics
Manufacturing Centre;
• Medicago (Quebec City, QC)-$173 million to develop a plant-based virus-like-particle vaccine
and for the construction of a Good Manufacturing Practice facility, alongside an APA for eventual
delivery of its vaccines;
• AbCellera (Vancouver, BC)-$175.6 million in government support of antibody discovery for
clinical testing and forthe construction of a GMP antibody production facility;
• Vaccine and Infectious Disease Organization (VIDO) (Saskatoon, SK)–$59.2M, over three years,
starting in 2021-22, to support the development of its vaccine candidates and expand its Saskatoon
facility;
• Precision Nanosystems (Vancouver, BC)-$25.1 million in government support to build a
biomanufacturing centre for production of RNA vaccines;
• KABS Laboratories (St-Hubert and Val des Sources, QC)-$54.25 million toward a biologics
productionfacility with a focus on antibody therapies and new fill-finish capabilities;
• Novocol (Cambridge, ON)-$32.7 million contribution for expanded fill-finish capacity;
• Providence Therapeutics and Northern RNA Inc.-$5 million through the Next Generation
Manufacturing Supercluster to expand their operations in Calgary to design and manufacture COVID-19
vaccines and build a pipeline of mRNA vaccines;
• Sanofi Pasteur (Toronto campus)–up to $415 million support towards building an end-to-end
influenza vaccine manufacturing facility; and,
• Resilience Biotechnologies (Mississauga, ON)-$199 million to increase manufacturing and
fill/finish capacity for a number of vaccines and therapeutics including mRNA technologies.
mRNA domestic vaccine development
In August 2021, the Government of Canada has announced a non-binding MOU with Moderna to build a
state-of-the-art mRNA vaccine production facility in Canada.
The MOU outlines how Moderna plans to establish a Canadian mRNA vaccine facility and work as a
valued partner in Canada’s life sciences ecosystem by creating jobs and collaborating on domestic
research and development.
Should an agreement be reached, the company will contribute to Canada’s Biomanufacturing and Life
Sciences Strategy by drawing on itsmRNA expertise and by enhancing existing Canadian strengths in
RNA research and nanomedicine technology development and help position Canada as an mRNA centre
of excellence and a global mRNA research and development hub.
Government investment in domesticmRNA solutions
The Strategic Innovation Fund has made a number of key investments in Canadian firms to increase
domestic RNA manufacturing capacity and know how. This includes:
• $199 million to Resilience Biotechnologies to increase its manufacturing and fill-finish capacity
for a number of vaccines and therapeutics, including mRNA.
o Once completed, the company’s Mississauga facility is expected to allow for the manufacturing
of approximately 112 million to 640 million doses of mRNA vaccines per year.
o In September 2021, Resilience and Moderna announced a multi-year agreement for the facility
to produce mRNA for the Moderna COVID-19 vaccine intended for worldwide distribution.
• $39.8 million investment to support BioVectra to build a state-of-the-art facility in Prince
Edward Island and reconfigure its facilities in Nova Scotia.
o The investment will make it possible for BioVectra to manufacture mRNA and plasmid DNA, a
key input used to manufacture mRNA vaccines, and add fill and finish capabilities, allowing the company
to provide an end-to-end manufacturing solution for its clients.
• $25.1 million to Precision NanoSystems Incorporated (PNI), in Vancouver, BC, to build a
biomanufacturing centre to produce RNA vaccines and future genetic medicines including therapeutics
for the prevention and treatment of rare diseases, cancer and other areas of unmet need.
The Next Generation Manufacturing Supercluster has also contributed $5 million in funding toward
Providence Therapeutics and partner Northern RNA of Calgary to establish mRNA vaccine manufacturing
capacity within Canada and build a raw material supply chain. The National Research Council’s Industrial
Research Assistance Program also contributed $4.7 million toward Providence Therapeutics Phase 1 trial
of its mRNA COVID-19 vaccine.
Canadian domestic vaccine development
In the fall of 2020, the government signed an agreement with Medicago to secure up to 76 million doses
of their COVID-19 vaccine candidate. This is the first domestically developedvaccine candidate the
Government of Canada has secured.
In October 2020, the government announced an investment of up to $173 million through the Strategic
Innovation Fund (SIF) in Quebec City-based Medicago to support Canada’s response to COVID-19 and
future preparedness
The project, valued at a total of $428 million, will advance Medicago’s virus-like particle vaccine,
developed on the company’s unique plant-based production platform, through clinical trials. It will also
establish a large-scale vaccine and antibody production facility to increase Canada’s domestic
biomanufacturing capacity.
On February 2, 2021, the Government of Canada announced a memorandum of understanding with
Novavax to pursue options to produce its COVID-19 vaccine at the Biologics Manufacturing Centre
(BMC) once both the vaccine candidate and the facility receive the required Health Canada
authorizations.
In March 2021, the National Research Centre and Novavax signed a collaboration agreement to enable
the technology transfer of the Novavax COVID-19 vaccine to begin. This technology transfer has been
under way since May.
PLASMA COLLECTION
ISSUE
• Many Canadians rely on plasma to treat life-threatening conditions. During the COVID-19 crisis,
global demand, prices,and shortages have increased. The federal government recognizes that increasing
domestic plasma sufficiency will help to provide security of supply. Budget 2021 provides Canadian
Blood Services funding for the construction of eight plasma collection sitesacross the country.
KEY FACTS
• At the end of 2020-21, Canadian Blood Services (CBS) was only able to supply 15% of the plasma
needed to make plasma-derived products used by Canadians outside of Québec. Québec operates its
blood system, through Héma-Québec, separately from the other Provinces and Territories (PTs) and has
already attained a greater percentage of domestic plasma supply at 22%. Prior to the pandemic, PTs,
except Québec, approved three new proof-of-concept sites–CBS opened these sites in 2020-21. CBS is
also on track to open two further sites to the public, in Orleans and Brampton, by spring 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes the value of domestic plasma collection for the security of Canada’s
supply of plasma-derived products.
• Close federal, provincial and territorial collaboration with the national blood and plasma agency
is essential to achieving meaningful results in this critical area for the health and safety of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 commits $20 million over threeyears beginning in 2021-22, which allows Canadian
Blood Services to build eight new dedicated plasma collection sites across Canada to achieve a greater
domestic supply.
BACKGROUND
Plasma-derived products (PDPs) are needed by thousands of Canadians totreat immune deficiencies,
rare blood disorders, and other conditions. PDPs are manufactured from plasma through multiple
processing steps. Most plasma products used worldwide are made from paid plasma donations and
collected by the commercial sector. As the federal regulator, Health Canada is responsible for
maintaining the safety of Canada’s blood supply and the plasma used in the production of drugs. Any
establishment that collects plasma must hold a HC authorization and license, as well as meet the strict
safety requirements under the Food and Drugs Act.
The need to enhance domestic plasma collection has been a long-standing issue given Canada’s
dependence on paid-donor plasma from the United States. In 2019-20, Canadian Blood Services (CBS)
was only able to supply 14% of the plasma needed to make PDPs used by Canadians outside of Québec.
By the end of 2020-21, three new proof-of-concept plasma collection sites, opened by CBS over that
year, raised this value to 15%. CBS is on track to open two more plasma donor centres to the public by
spring 2022 and is currently determining locations forsix further sites to be constructed over 2022-24;
together these sites are projected to increase domestic plasma sufficiency to 22% by 2027-28. Québec
operates its blood system, through Héma-Québec, separately from the other Provinces and Territories
(PTs) and has already attained that value of domestic plasma supply.
The $20M Budget 2021 investment in CBS provides opportunities for Canadians, including for
construction of site enhancements and necessary refurbishments, as well as high quality jobs staffing
the centres. The investment will also increase domestic plasma collection capacity and security of
critically important therapeutics for Canadians, and has the potential to help mitigate rising healthcare
costs for PTs within a decade.
CANADA HEALTH ACT–ABORTION SERVICES
ISSUE
• In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service–two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at
Clinic 554 in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act. This regulation also
poses concernsunder the comprehensiveness and accessibility criteria of the Canada Health Act.
Evidence indicates that some abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) are also charging patients to access insured
services.
KEY FACTS
• Not Applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services, regardless of where
the services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
BACKGROUND
In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. New Brunswick is the only province with a private
abortion clinic where the province doesnot provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion
services received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act and raise
concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. Deductions toNB’s Canada
Health Transfer occurred in March 2020, in the amount of $140,216 (for patient charges in 2018-2019)
and March 2021, in the amount of $64,850 (for patient charges in 2019-2020). The lack of coverage for
abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without
resolution.
On January 6, 2021, the Canadian Civil Liberties Association (CCLA) filed a statement of claim in the NB
courts, as part of a Charter challenge against NB’s restrictive regulation 84-20. The Association was
granted standing in the case by the NB Court of Queen’s bench on June 2, 2021. The group argues that
the regulation is inconsistent with and in violation of the Canada Health Act. The Association had
previously advised the province it would take legal action if the regulation was not amended to permit
coverage for abortion services received outside hospitals. The province filed their Statement of Defence
on July 2, 2021, which denied many of the CCLA’s allegations and indicated that Regulation 84-20 does
not violate the Canada Health Act. A trial date hasnot yet been established.
In December 2020, the NB Legislative Assembly passed a motion instructing the province’s two Regional
Health Authorities to determine if access to abortion services in NB satisfies the requirements of the
CHA and, if not, how the Act’s requirements could be met while respecting NB legislation (i.e., without
providing coverage for clinic abortions).
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge to access insured surgical
abortion services. While theOntario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related
to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion
clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has advised ON that patient
charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges
reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied against the province’s CHT
payment in March 2021.
Budget 2021, released in April 2021, acknowledged the need for greater access to sexual and
reproductive health care information and services across the country. It is also specified that the federal
government is committed to collaboration with the PTs to strengthen the health care system and ensure
access to a full suite of reproductive and health services in any upcoming Canada Health Transfer
discussions. The Budget proposed $45 million over three years to fund community-based organizations
that help makesexual and reproductive health care information and services more accessible for
vulnerable populations.
CANADA HEALTH ACT COMPLIANCE ISSUES
ISSUE
• Overview of federal action on key Canada Health Act compliance issues.
KEY FACTS
• Not Applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes its responsibility to defend the Canada Health Act seriously.
• The Canada Health Act ensures all Canadians have access to medically necessary health care
services based on their health need, not theirability or willingness to pay.
• Our universal healthcare system has supported Canadians throughout the pandemic and
provided the care to both prevent and treat COVID-19.
• This Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON PATIENT CHARGES FOR ABORTION SERVICESIN NEW BRUNSWICK AND ONTARIO …
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face patient charges when seeking these insured services regardless of
where the services are provided.
• The Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory deduction to federal
health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
BACKGROUND
Patient Charges for Abortion Services (NB and ON)
In New Brunswick (NB), Regulation 84-20 of the Medical Services Payment Act limits coverage of surgical
abortion servicesto approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the service–two in Moncton
and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at the private clinic in
Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. NB is the only province with a private abortion clinic
where the province does not provide coverage for services. Patient charges for abortion services
received in private clinics are considered user charges under the Canada Health Act (CHA), and raise
concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness criteria of the Act. In March 2020 and March
2021, deductions of $140,216 and $64,850 were levied against the province’s Canada Health Transfer
(CHT) payments in respect of patient charges for surgical abortion services. The lack of coverage for
abortions performed in private clinics has been discussed bilaterally with NB since 1995, without
resolution.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) are charging patients to access
insured surgical abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for
physicians' fees related to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in
the four private abortion clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has
advised ON that patient charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are considered user charges under the
CHA. Based on patient charges reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied
against the province’sCHT payment in March 2021. Health Canada and ON are working together to
ensure these barriers to access are eliminated.
Patient Charges for Cataract Services in Newfoundland and Labrador (NL)
Working collaboratively with Health Canada, NL developed and carried out a plan to eliminate patient
charges for insured cataract surgery provided by an enrolled physician at a private clinic. While NL has
faced ongoing deductions to its CHT payments in respect of these patient charges, including a deduction
of $4521.29 in March 2021, all deducted amounts have been reimbursed as the province has
successfully eliminated the charges.
Charter Challenge in British Columbia (BC)
On September 10, 2020, the Supreme Court of BC released its decision in Cambie Surgeries Corpv. BC
(Attorney General). The Court dismissed a constitutional challenge to provisions of BC’s Medicare
Protection Act, and upheld the province’s ban on patient charges and the purchase of private insurance
for publicly insured health care services. An appeal of the decision was heard by the BC Court of Appeal
in June 2021. A decision from the Court of Appeal is expected shortly.
Patient Charges for Surgical Services in BC
While the elimination of patient charges in BC has been hindered by an injunctionrelated to the Charter
challenge, the province has continued to work collaboratively with Health Canada to address these
charges. Since March 2018, BC’s CHT payments have been deducted $62,742,889 in respect of patient
charges at private surgical clinics.To date, Health Canada has reimbursed $40,528,957 of these
deductions in recognition of the province's efforts to eliminate these charges.
Diagnostic Services Policy:
The Diagnostic Services Policy, which came into effect on April 1, 2020, is aimed ateliminating patient
charges for medically necessary diagnostic services, such as MRI and CT scans. The policy confirms the
long-standing federal position that all medically necessary services, including diagnostic services, are
insured services, regardlessof the venue where the services are delivered. Seven provinces currently
allow patients to pay privately for diagnostic services and Saskatchewan actively encourages the
practice, through its 1-for-1 model.
Provinces and territories were given nearly twoyears’ notice that the Diagnostic Services Policy was
coming into effect, to give them time to align their health care systems with its requirements. Under the
Policy, provinces and territories will be expected to report on patient charges for medically necessary
diagnostic services in December 2022. Patient charges for these services will result in mandatory dollar-
for-dollar deductions from the Canada Health Transfer payments of the implicated province or territory
beginning in March 2023. Provinces andterritories have an opportunity to receive an immediate
reimbursement of any deduction if they eliminate these patient charges before March 2023.
CANCER
Issue
Cancer continues to be the leading cause of death in Canada. The Canadian Cancer Society in
conjunction with the Public Health Agency of Canada and Statistics Canada estimates that approximately
two in five Canadians will develop cancer in their lifetime and one in four will die of the disease.
Key Facts
• Four cancers-breast, lung, colorectal, and prostate-account for 46 percent of all cancers.
Canada continues to see an increase in the number of individuals diagnosed with cancer. This is
primarily due to the aging and growing population.
• Cancer also occurs in children, with children underthe age of four being almost twice as likely to
be newly diagnosed with cancer than children 5-14 years old.
• Approximately 1,000 children are diagnosed with some form of cancer every year. Close to 84
percent of children survive a cancer diagnosis after five years, and this survival rate is expected to
improve with new and better treatments.
Key Messages
• Our Government recognizes that cancer is a health issue that impacts nearly all Canadians,
either through a personal diagnosis or that of a loved one at some point over their lives.
• Our Government continues to fund the Canadian Partnership Against Cancer at close to $50
million annually. The Partnership is having an impact on the lives of Canadians through its work on
prevention, early detection, treatment and support for those living with cancer.
• We are also committed to supporting research in the fight against cancer. Through the Canadian
Institutes of Health Research, we invested more than $900 million over the last five years toward cancer
research and we recently announced an additional $30 million to fund targeted research for pediatric
cancers.
• Additionally, the federal government conducts ongoing cancer-focused surveillance and
research, and invests in community-based interventions that address the common risk factors for
chronic disease, such as physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use.
Background
The federal health portfolio undertakes a range of activities related to cancer, including those led by
Health Canada, the PublicHealth Agency of Canada, and the CanadianInstitutes for Health Research.
Canadian Partnership Against Cancer
The Canadian Partnership Against Cancer (CPAC) is a not-for-profit corporation that was created in 2006,
and fully funded by the Government of Canada to provide a pan-Canadian perspective to cancer control
and specifically to accelerate the implementation of the Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control (the
Strategy). The Strategy was built on the notion that enhanced cancer control could be achieved by
providing governments, non-government organizations and Canadians access to research, information
and decision-making tools in a coordinated fashion. Budget 2016 confirmed ongoing funding for CPAC
at $47.5 million per year.
In 2018 and 2019, CPAC invested significant effort, engaging with over 7,500 stakeholders to refresh the
Strategy so that it reflected the current cancer control and health system landscape. Released in June
2019, the refreshed strategy entitled Canadian Strategy for Cancer Control 2019-2029: Doing together
what cannot be done alone, was endorsed by the Conference of Federal/Provincial/Territorial (FPT)
Deputy Ministers of Health. It focuses on five priorities spanning the entire cancer journey: (1) decrease
the risk of people gettingcancer; (2) diagnose cancer faster, accurately and at an earlier stage; (3)
deliver high-quality care in a sustainable, world-class system; (4) eliminate barriers to people getting the
care they need; and (5) deliver information and supports for patients,families and caregivers.
Additionally, it focuses on three priorities specific to First Nations, Inuit and Métis: (1) culturally
appropriate care closer to home; (2) peoples-specific, self-determined cancer care; and, (3) First
Nations, Inuit, or Métis governed research and data systems.
Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC)
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund (HCCF) invests approximately $20 million annually to
support healthy living among Canadians who face health inequalities and are atgreater risk of
developing chronic diseases, including cancer, diabetes and cardiovascular disease. The HCCF supports
projects and leverages funding from partners across various sectors to address the common risk factors
(i.e., physical activity, healthy eating and tobacco use) for chronic disease while aiming to create physical
and social environments that are known to support better health among Canadians.
PHAC works with Health Canada to advance Canada’s Tobacco Strategy (Strategy) through the HCCF to
fund projects that focus on tobacco cessation and prevention with a particular emphasis on priority
populations that have significantly higher prevalence rates of tobacco use. The HCCF is investing $4.25
million annually to support tobacco cessation and prevention projects under the Strategy. Between
2016 and 2021, PHAC invested nearly $6 million in the “Walk/Run to Quit” initiative to support the
Canadian Cancer Society in partnership with the Running Room to help smokers quit by incorporating
physical activity into their daily lives.
PHAC analyzes national data to monitor trends in cancer incidence and mortality over time (e.g.,
Canadian Cancer Statistics). PHAC leads the Cancer in Young People in Canada Program surveillance
system and is a member of several CPAC advisory committees.
PHAC supports the Canadian Task Force on Preventive Health Care, an independent arms-length
organization, to develop guidelines for primary care practitioners in Canada. The Task Force has
produced evidence-based screening guidelines for breast, lung, cervical, colorectal and prostate cancers.
The guidelines support clinicians in identifying cancers early and reducing morbidity and mortality.
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR)
Between 2015-16 and 2019-20, CIHR invested approximately $927 million in cancer research, including
$218 million in 2019-2020 alone.
Examples of recent investments include:
• $4 million in January 2021 to fund innovative research to develop novel approaches to cancer
prevention and early detection using digital solutions;
• $2.5 million in March 2020 for the development of research support infrastructure to facilitate
multi-site studies for enhanced and expedited pediatric cancer research; and
• a joint commitment of $10 million with theCanadian Cancer Society in April 2019 to address
recently identified gaps in cancer survivorship research.
Budget 2021 committed $30 million dollars over two years to CIHR to fund targeted research into
pediatric cancer. With this new investment, CIHR hasrecently launched a research initiative on pediatric
cancer, leveraging its Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and through a
new funding opportunity, catalyze the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium. The Consortium will
advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform policy and practice
predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve lives of pediatric cancer
patients and their families and caregivers. Applications to the Consortium funding opportunity are open
and funding is expected to start in summer 2022. CIHR’s Institute of Cancer Research helped build the
Canadian Cancer Research Alliance, a coordinating voice for cancer research in Canada and supported by
CPAC.
PEDIATRIC CANCER
ISSUE
• Budget 2021 committed $30M over 2 years, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR) to address gaps in pediatric cancer research and ensure sustainable funding in this area.
KEY FACTS
• While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all newcancer cases in Canada, it was
estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government is committed to supporting the brave children and their families who are going
through the devastatingexperience of pediatric cancer.
• That is why we are committing $30 million dollars to the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
to fund targeted research into pediatric cancer.
• This funding will support promising research projects with the greatest potential for fighting
pediatric cancers, and will establish a foundation for coordinated research and knowledge mobilization
within this area in Canada through the creation ofaPediatric Cancer Consortium.
• These investments will help improve health systems and health outcomes for pediatric cancer
patients and their families.
BACKGROUND
Cancer is one of leading causes of disease-related deaths in Canadian children over theage of one
month. While childhood cancer accounts for less than 1% of all new cancer cases in Canada, it was
estimated that 1000 children and youth (aged 0-14 years) would be diagnosed with cancer in 2019. In
general, it is recognized that cancers in children act differently and are found in different organs than in
adults while tumors in children tend to grow and spread throughout the body more quickly. In
recognition of the significant impact that pediatric cancer has on both individuals and their families and
caregivers, additional support is needed to increase access to clinical trials, the development of a
pediatric cancer drug discovery program and increased funding for pediatric cancer research.
As Canada’s federal health funding agency, CIHR’s strong connections to the pediatric cancer research
and advocacy communities in Canada ideally position it to deliver on this important priority and enhance
pediatric cancer research from a national perspective. Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested
overone billion dollars ($1,008,817,314) in cancer research, including more than $49 million specifically
on pediatric cancer, while also building strong connections to the pediatric cancer research and
advocacy communities across Canada.
With this new investment, CIHR has launched a research initiative on pediatric cancer, leveraging its
Project Grant competition to support excellent research projects, and through a new funding
opportunity, will catalyze the creation of a Pediatric Cancer Consortium.
The Consortium will advance a shared vision to collaborate and produce research that can help inform
policy and practice predicated on better science, better access, and better coordination to improve lives
of pediatric cancer patients and their families and caregivers. An interconnected Consortium will bring
together the ecosystem of pediatric cancer research platforms, networks, research teams, policy makers
and people with lived/living experience, Indigenous communities and organizations, healthcare
providers and other entities.
The Consortium will work to establish core research platforms and projects that will advance priority
areas such as:
• Personalized genomic medicine;
• Cell-based therapies;
• Quality of life for pediatric oncology patients throughoutthe life course, including the
prevention of longer adverse effects (or late effects) of pediatric and adolescent cancer treatments;
• Research on equitable and rapid access to medicines.
It is important to note that support for priority-driven researchin pediatric cancer will not only allow
identifying innovative solutions to support pediatric cancer patients and their families but also create
positions for highly qualified personnel in universities and research institutions and act as a strong lever
to promote economic stimulation and growth.
The funding opportunity for the Consortium is accepting applications, and funding is expected to start in
Summer 2022.
LEGISLATIVE REVIEW OF THE CANNABIS ACT
ISSUE
• The Cannabis Act requires the Minister of Health to initiate a review of the Act’s administration
and operation starting three years after the Act came into force (i.e., after October 17, 2021). The
Minister is required to table a report on the review, including any findings or recommendations resulting
from it, in both Houses of Parliament no later than 18 months after the review begins.
KEY FACTS
• Not applicable
KEY MESSAGES
• The Cannabis Act established a new control framework for cannabis designedto better protect
public health and public safety, and minimize harms associated with cannabis use.
• The Act requires a legislative review to start three years after coming into force, and a report to
be tabled in both Houses of Parliament within 18 months after the review begins.
• Our Government is committed to putting into place a credible, evidence-driven process for the
legislative review, which will assess the progress made towards achieving the Act’s objectives.
IF PRESSED ON INCLUDING THE MEDICAL ACCESS REGIME IN THE REVIEW
• Health Canada is committed to actively monitoring and evaluating patients’ reasonable access
tocannabis for medical purposes.
• Health Canada acknowledges the significant stakeholder interest in the access to cannabis for
medical purposes framework and recognizes the opportunity that the legislative review presents to hear
the views and perspectives of these stakeholders.
BACKGROUND
• The Cannabis Act came into force on October 17, 2018, creating a strict legal framework for
controlling the production, distribution, sale and possession of cannabis across Canada. The Act aims to
keep cannabis out of the hands of youth and keep profits out of the pockets of criminals and organized
crime.
• Section 151.1 of the Cannabis Act requires that the Minister initiate a review of the Act and its
administration three years following the coming into force of the Act (i.e., after October 17, 2021), and
that a report of the review’s findings be tabled before both Houses of Parliament within 18 months of
the start of the review.
• The Cannabis Act further stipulates that the review must include an assessment of the impact of
the Cannabis Act on public health and, in particular, on: the health and consumption habits of young
persons in respect of cannabis use; Indigenous persons and communities; and, the cultivation of
cannabis plants in a dwelling-house.
• Over the past three years, the Minister of Health, with the support of the Minister of Public
Safety and Emergency Preparedness and the Minister of Justice, and together with provinces and
territories, as well as Indigenous leaders, have worked diligently to implement the cannabis legislative
framework.
• The Government of Canada has made progress toward the implementation of the cannabis
framework by putting in place measures aimed at protecting children and youth from accessing
cannabis; establishing a strictly regulated, legal supply chain for cannabis, and by making significant
investments in public education, awareness, research, monitoring and surveillance efforts.
• The review provides an initial and early opportunity to assess progress towards achieving the
objectives of the Act, and to help ensure that the legislation is meeting the needs and expectations of
Canadians through a credible, evidence-driven review process.
• Health Canada has been actively monitoring the perspectives of stakeholders, including
industry, public health experts, and thelaw enforcement community and is taking into account the
views and expectations of stakeholders as we prepare for the review. Particular emphasis has been
placed on early engagement with Indigenous communities and to helping ensure that the review
processreflects their interests and expectations.
MEDICAL ACCESS FRAMEWORK
ISSUE
• Successive court decisions have established the right of individuals to have reasonable access to
cannabis for medical purposes. The Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis
for medical purposes for individuals who have the supportof their health care practitioner.
KEY FACTS
• As of December 2021, there were more than 250,000 patients registered with federally licensed
sellers (Note: these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than
one licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
• As of December 2021, there were more than 47,000 individuals registered with Health Canada
for personal and designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to ensuring reasonable access to cannabis for medical purposes
for individuals who have the support of their health care practitioner.
• Health Canada is working to reduce the potential for abuse in partnership with the provincial
and territorial regulators of health care professionals, law enforcement and municipalities.
• The Government continues to actively monitor the medical access program and has committed
to evaluate the framework within 5 years of thecoming into force of the Cannabis Act.
IF PRESSED ON LIMITED NUMBER OF AUTHORIZED HEALTH PRODUCTS CONTAINING CANNABIS
• Authorized health products containing cannabis, such as Sativex, remain subject to appropriate
requirements of both the Cannabis Actand the Food and Drugs Act, and therefore require oversight by a
health care practitioner to ensure appropriate use.
• In November 2020, Health Canada established a Science Advisory Committee to provide the
government with independent scientific advice onsafety, efficacy, and quality standards for these
products.
• The advice from this committee will help inform a potential pathway for health products
containing cannabis that would not require physician oversight.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLAINTS REGARDING PERSONAL PRODUCTION WITHA HEALTH CANADA
AUTHORIZATION
• All persons authorized to produce cannabis for their own medical purposes must abide by all
federal, provincial/territorial and municipal laws and operate within the limits set out in their
registration.
• Under the Cannabis Regulations, Health Canada has the power to refuse to register or revoke a
registration to protect public health or public safety.
• Health Canada takes immediate action when there is strong evidence of non-compliance with
theregulations and proactively shares data with provincial and territorial medical regulatory authorities
to support their oversight.
IF PRESSED ON PERSONAL REGISTRATION CERTIFICATES GRANTED TO INDIVIDUALS SUBJECT TO
CRIMINAL INVESTIGATIONS
• Our Governmentremains committed to ensuring patients have access to cannabis for medical
purposes, while providing safeguards to reduce the risk of abuse of the system.
• Health Canada actively supports law enforcement by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a
day and seven days a week to assist with active investigations.
• When law enforcement has been taken against individuals, Health Canada reviews the
information to determine if compliance and enforcement actions are warranted, and registrations for
cannabis production could be revoked.
IF PRESSED ON THE CANADIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION’S POSITION THAT THE MEDICAL SYSTEM SHOULD
BE ABOLISHED
• Successive court decisions have established the right of individuals to have reasonable access to
cannabis for medical purposes.
• Health Canada has published a summary of the peer-reviewed scientific and medical literature
on the effects, risks and harms of cannabis for medical and non-medical purposes, which can help
Canadians and their health practitioners make informed decisions.
• Our Government continues to actively monitor the medical access program and has committed
to evaluate the framework within 5 years of the coming into force of the Cannabis Act.
BACKGROUND
Medical Regime
• Health Canada administers the medical access program under the Cannabis Act and the
Cannabis Regulations.
• As of December 2021, there were more than 250,000 patients registered with federally licensed
sellers (Note: these are not always unique individuals as individuals may be registered with more than
one licensed seller, provided an original medical document was used with each registration).
• As of December 2021, there were more than 47,000 individuals registered with Health Canada
for personal and designated production of cannabis for their own medical purposes.
• Licensed cannabis producers must pay a federal excise duty when they package cannabis
products, including those sold to patients for medical purposes. Federal policies related to excise duties
on cannabis fall under the purview of the Minister of Finance.
Authorizations for personal or designated production
• Canadians who have been authorized by their health care practitioner can access cannabis for
medical purposes by producing cannabis orby designating someone to produce it for them.
• Personal and designated production are subject to regulatory requirements, which are designed
to ensure that cannabis is consumed only with the approval and under the supervision of an authorized
health care practitioner.
• Health Canada reviews all applications for personal or designated production to ensure that the
regulatory requirements are met. Health Canada also confirms that the health care practitioner is
authorized by—and in good standing with—therelevant provincial or territorial regulatory health
authority, and that the medical document is an original that has not been altered or falsified.
• Once a registration certificate is issued, the personal or designated producer may not produce in
excess of the maximum limits outlined in a registration certificate, and may not sell cannabis to any
person. Selling cannabis without authorization is a criminal offence.
• A maximum of four registrations are permitted per production site. Only the individuals
authorized to produce cannabis for their own medical purposes, or the person designated to produce it
for them, can tend to the plants.
• Health Canada appreciates that, as in any regulatory framework, there will be instances where
individuals choose tooperate outside of the law. Health Canada supports law enforcement
representatives on a daily basis by providing a dedicated service 24 hours a day and seven days a week
to confirm, when necessary, that specific individuals are authorized to produce cannabis for medical
purposes.
• Health Canada has the ability to inspect a production site if it is not the registrant’s home to
ensure it is abiding by the terms set out in the individual’s registration certificate.
PSYCHEDELICS
ISSUE
• There is significant interest in the potential use of psychedelics, particularly psilocybin (“magic
mushrooms”) and MDMA, for the treatment of a variety of serious mental health conditions including
major depressive disorder, treatment-resistant depression, and post-traumatic stress disorder. At
present, there are no drugs containing psilocybin approved for sale in Canada or internationally.
Patients, practitioners and researchers are asking Health Canada to consider increasing access to
psychedelics sothey can explore their potential use as therapeutic products.
KEY FACTS
• In Canada, psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy is being tested in clinical trials to treat patients
with selected mental health disorders.
• Health Canada has authorized several clinical trials with psilocybin and we are encouraging
further research in this area.
• On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments were made to allow health care practitioners, on
behalf of patients, to request access to restricted drugs, including psilocybinand MDMA, through Health
Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP).
• Health Canada has also granted exemptions under subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and
Substances Act to patients with serious or life threatening illnesses, when conventional treatments have
failed, to allow them to possess psilocybin while undergoing psychotherapy as well as to a small
number of health care professionals for professional training purposes.
KEY MESSAGES
• We are deeply concerned about the burden of mental illness onCanadians, their families, and
their communities.
• While psychedelics like MDMA and psilocybin [sai·luh·sai·bn] have shown promise in clinical
trials for the treatment of some illnesses, further research is still needed.
• The Government of Canada encourages researchers to undertake clinical trials on the potential
therapeutic uses of these drugs to help build the evidence base and protect the best interests of
patients and individuals.
IF PRESSED ON PSILOCYBIN EXEMPTION REQUESTS FOR HEALTHCARE PROFESSIONALS …
• Health Canada is aware that psilocybin is being studied by researchers in Canada and
internationally.
• At this time, there are no approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin or MDMA in
Canada or elsewhere.
• Health Canada has undertaken further consultations and concluded that clinical trials are the
most appropriate mechanism for health care professionals who wish to improve their knowledge of
psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
• Clinical trials ensure that the interests of patientsare protected and that a product is
administered in accordance with national and international ethical, medical, and scientific standards.
IF PRESSED ON SECTION 56(1) EXEMPTIONS FOR PSILOCYBIN …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that many Canadians with terminal and chronic illness
are suffering.
• The safety and well-being of Canadians is the paramount concern. At this time, there are no
approved therapeutic products containing psilocybin in Canada or elsewhere.
• This means there is no product containing psilocybin that has been assessed for its safety,
efficacy and quality.
• Clinical trials remain the best method to advance our knowledge about products with a possible
medical benefit, such as psilocybin. Clinical trials protect patients by providing a framework so that a
potential treatment is administered in accordance with national and international ethical, medical and
scientific standards.
• For emergency treatment purposes or by exception, and on compassionate grounds, there are
pathways toaccess these substances.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program (SAP) permits health care practitioners to request
access to drugs that have shown promise in clinical trials, or been approved in other countries, but that
have not yet been approved for sale in Canada.
• By exception, and on compassionate grounds, patients can seek an exemption under subsection
56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances Act to possess and use psilocybin.
• Health Canada continues to prioritize exemption requests from terminally ill patients to treat
end-of-life psychological distress.
IF PRESED ON HOW EXEMPTIONS ARE REVIEWED…
• Each request for an exemption is carefully reviewed on a case-by-case basis, taking into account
all relevant considerations, includingevidence of potential benefits and risks or harms to Canadians.
• In the case of psilocybin, Health Canada’s review includes consideration of the individual’s
medical condition, whether conventional therapies and other regulatory pathways have been
considered, and the scientific evidence available to support the request.
• The Department continues to process requests for exemptions, while prioritizing requests from
patients who are terminally ill.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM AND ACCESS TO A “SECURE SUPPLY” OF PSILOCYBIN …
• Health Canada has not evaluated the efficacy and safety of psilocybin, nor has it approved its
sale for therapeutic use under the Food and Drug Regulations.
• As of January 5, 2022, health care practitioners can request access, on behalf of patients with
serious or life-threatening conditions, to restricted drugs such as psilocybin, through the Special Access
Program. All requests are assessed on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the patient’s
condition, availability of other treatment options, and available evidence of the safety and efficacy of
the drug.
BACKGROUND
Use of psychedelics for therapeutic purposes in Canada
Canadians are increasingly seeking novel approaches for the treatment of mental health issues. As such,
interest in the potential therapeutic use of psychedelics for the treatment of mental health disorders is
on the rise.
Psilocybin is one of the active ingredients in magic mushrooms, while MDMA is a synthetic compound
made in laboratories.There are many different kinds of psychedelics including LSD (acid), DMT
(ayahuasca), mescaline (peyote), etc. Many psychedelics are being studied as an adjunct therapy
alongside conventional psychotherapeutic techniques in clinical settings. This is alsoknown as
psychedelic-assisted psychotherapy.
Most psychedelics (also known as hallucinogens) are controlled as “restricted drugs” under the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act (CDSA). Restricted drugs generally have no approved therapeutic
uses and canonly be used for research or scientific purposes, including in authorized clinical trials. No
products containing psilocybin have been approved in the US, Canada, or internationally.
The United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has designated psilocybin as a “breakthrough-
therapy” for the treatment of treatment-resistant depression/Major Depressive Disorder. Similarly,
MDMA has received “breakthrough-therapy” designation for the treatment of PTSD by the FDA. A
“breakthrough-therapy” designation is a process designed to fast track the drug review and approval
process for drugs that are intended to treat a serious condition where preliminary clinical evidence
indicates that the drug may be a substantial improvement over existing therapeutic optionsfor a
particular medical condition.
Access to psilocybin
Psychedelics are subject to legal controls under the Food and Drugs Act and the CDSA. This means that
access to psilocybin and other psychedelic restricted drugs must be authorized by Health Canada. At this
time, there are three possible options for individuals to access restricted drugs, namely through
participation in an approved clinical trial, through the Special Access Program, and through a subsection
56(1) exemption under the CDSA.
Clinical trials
Health Canada has approved several clinical trials with psilocybin since 2018. These include clinical trials
to assess the efficacy of psilocybin in patients with depression or treatment-resistant depression, the
safety of low-doses of psilocybin, and the safety of psilocybin for health care providers enrolled in a
psychedelic training program.
Special Access Program
On January 5, 2022, regulatory amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations and Narcotic
Control Regulations allowing practitioners, on behalf of patients with serious or life-threatening
conditions, to request access to restricted drugs through the Special Access Program when other
therapies have failed, are unsuitable, or are unavailable in Canada. All requests will continue to be
assessed on a case-by-case basis taking into consideration the patient’s condition and the level of
evidence regarding the safety and efficacy of the drug. These regulatory changes were shared with all
interested parties, including organizations that represent patients seeking to possess and use psilocybin
for therapeutic purposes.
Individual subsection 56(1) exemptions
As for exemptions, Health Canada continues to receive a high volume of requests pertaining to
psilocybin, and, more recently, MDMA. Health Canada continues to prioritize exemption requests from
terminally ill patients seeking access to psilocybin for thetreatment of end-of-life distress.
Many factors are considered when reviewing and making a decision on a request for a subsection 56(1)
exemption to use psilocybin in relation to a medical condition. These factors may include but are not
limited to (as per Health Canada web page):
• The availability of clinical trials or other regulatory pathways, such as the Special Access
Program, to request access to the substance
• The medical condition for which the psilocybin is requested to be used
• The existing scientific evidence to support the use of psilocybin for the treatment of the
condition
• Whether other conventional therapies have been considered
• Whether the use of the substances is supported by a health care practitioner
• Public health and public safety objectives of the CDSA
• Other federal, provincial, and/or municipal laws or regulations that may apply to the proposed
activity
• Risks, including risk of diversion
Number of Patient-Requested Exemptions Approved
Health Canada has granted exemptionsunder subsection 56(1) of the Controlled Drugs and Substances
Act to patients with serious or life threatening illnesses, when conventional treatments have failed, to
allow them to possess psilocybin while undergoing psychotherapy, as well as to a small number of
health care professionals for professional training purposes. Total subsection 56(1) exemptions issued
for possession and use of psilocybin included below.
Psilocybin subsection 56(1) exemptions issued-total as of February 28, 2022:
Patients
Issued: 78 exemptions
Health care professionals
Issued: 19 exemptions
SMOKING AND TOBACCO USE IN CANADA
ISSUE
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death in this
country, killing approximately 48,000 Canadians each year. The Government has an ambitious target to
reduce tobacco use to less than 5% by 2035.
KEY FACTS
• Approximately 4.2 million Canadians smoke cigarettes–about 13% of thepopulation over the
age of 15.
• Canada’s Tobacco Strategy is a comprehensive and integrated approach to increase cessation
rates and protect youth and non-smokers from nicotine addiction, supported by a $330M investment
over five years, starting in May 2018.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to helping Canadians quit using tobacco and to protecting the
health of young people and non-smokers.
• Cigarette smoking is the leading cause of preventable disease and premature death, and we are
working to decrease tobacco use in Canada to less than 5% by 2035.
• Health Canada is updating the labelling requirements to reflect the latest scientific evidence. We
will continue to strengthen regulations to prevent youth and non-smokers from becoming addicted and
to provide Canadians with health information on tobacco use.
IF PRESSED ON HELP FOR SMOKERS…
• We urge Canadians who smoke to consider quitting. When you give up cigarettes, your body
starts to renew itself as early as the first day, reducing your chance of developing heart disease, cancer,
breathing problems, and infections.
• Quitting smoking can be difficult, but it is possible. The Government of Canada has many
resources to help.
• Canadians can contact the pan-Canadian toll-free quitline where trained specialists can help
them develop a plan, answer questions, and provide referrals to programs and services in their
community where available.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW …
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires a legislative review of
the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• Health Canada has started work onthe legislative review of the Act, and [is seeking] input from
Canadians on whether the Act is achieving its stated objectives.
BACKGROUND
Tobacco use in Canada
Data released on September 8th 2021, from the 2020 Canadian Community Health Survey (CCHS), show
the largest annual smoking decline in the survey’s history, decreasing from 4.7M to 4.2M Canadians 12
years of age and older. Decades of tobacco control have seen positive impacts, resulting in a national
average rate of 13% (4.2M) down from 15% (4.7M) in 2019. Daily smoking also declined to 9% (2.9M)
from 10% (3.2M) in 2019. A reliable estimate on daily smoking for youth aged 15-19 cannot be
determined for 2020.
While the recent declines are positive, millions of Canadians are still smoking, reminding us that, despite
decades of effort to deter smoking, tobacco use remains a significant public health problem in Canada.
Tobacco use is still the leading cause ofpremature death in Canada, killing half of all Canadians who
smoke daily for a long time. Furthermore, prevalence rates for on-reserve First Nations and Inuit are
higher than that of other Canadians.
In July 2020, the Canadian Centre on Substance Use and Addiction released an update of its report
entitled “Canadian Substance Use Costs and Harms 2015–2017”. The report identifies the enormous
burden tobacco use places on all Canadians. The report found that in 2017 the total cost of tobacco use
to society was approximately $12.3 billion or $336 for every Canadian. Tobacco use was identified as the
deadliest and most costly substance by far accounting for 47% of all attributable health care costs from
substance use and approximately 48,000 premature deathsin 2017 (over 128 deaths per day or 17% of
all deaths).
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy
Canada’s Tobacco Strategy represents the Government of Canada’s plan to address tobacco use. It is led
by Health Canada, in partnership with the Canada Border Services Agency, the Canada Revenue Agency,
Indigenous Services Canada, Crown-Indigenous Relations and Northern Affairs Canada, the Public Health
Agency of Canada, Public Safety Canada, and the Royal Canadian Mounted Police.
Tobacco Cost Recovery/Levy
Minister Bennett’s mandate letter includes a commitment to require tobacco manufacturers to pay for
the cost of federal public health investments in tobacco control. Health Canada is working closely with
other Government of Canada partners to examine options and determine next steps.
Both the Conservative Party of Canada and the New Democratic Party made similar commitments in
their election platforms.
YOUTH VAPING
ISSUE
• Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of
measuresto address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance and
enforcement of existing rules and advancing regulations to put in place more controls.
KEY FACTS
• Youth vaping rates doubled over a two year period (2017-2019).
• InMarch 2021, the 2020 Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine Survey (CTNS) indicated that youth
vaping rates had not increased from the previous survey in 2019. More data is needed to determine
whether this is a trend.
• In early 2019, Health Canada launched theConsider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign to inform youth and parents of the risks and harms associated with vaping. To date, Health
Canada has invested more than $14 million.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is concerned by the high rates ofyouth vaping, and is taking comprehensive
action.
• Regulations now prohibit the promotion and advertising of vaping products anywhere they can
be seen or heard by youth.
• New regulations are also now in force setting a maximum nicotine concentration forall vaping
products, and Health Canada has consulted Canadians on proposed regulations to restrict flavours in
vaping products to make them less attractive.
IF PRESSED ON THE YOUTH-ORIENTED PUBLIC EDUCATION CAMPAIGN…
• In 2019, Health Canada launched theConsider the Consequences of Vaping prevention
campaign, investing more than $14 million to date.
• The campaign has included in-print and online advertising, as well as an interactive learning tour
in schools and community venues or virtually. Vaping awareness kits were provided to all middle and
high schools, and information resources sent to health care professionals.
• The interactive learning tour has reached over 140,000 youth in over 515 schools across the
country, and will continue to reach more.
IF PRESSED ON COMPLIANCE AND ENFORCEMENT OF CURRENT MEASURES…
• The Tobacco and Vaping Products Act has significant restrictions in place to limit youth access to
vaping products and promotions.
• Health Canada has taken actions that have led companies toremove lifestyle advertising from
television and in-store displays, and online content from social media influencers.
• In 2019, Health Canada inspected more than 3,000 retailers and seized more than 80,000 units
of non-compliant vaping products. Between July 2020 and March 2021, over 300 online inspections of
Canadian vaping retailers’ Instagram accounts were conducted and approximately 160 warning letters
issued.
IF PRESSED ON THE LEGISLATIVE REVIEW …
• Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping ProductsAct (TVPA) requires a legislative review of
the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
• Health Canada has started work onthe legislative review of the Act, and [is seeking] input from
Canadians on whether the Act isachieving its stated objectives.
IF PRESSED ON FLAVOURS REGULATIONS …
• On June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the proposed order to amend the Tobacco and
Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes
Regulations.
• The proposed regulations would implement a complementary three-pronged approach to
restricting the flavours of vaping products.
• The consultations closed on September 2, 2021 and Health Canada received over 25,000
submissions and is currently reviewing the input it received from Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Since late 2018, the Government of Canada has implemented a comprehensive suite of measures to
address youth vaping, including enhanced public education, increased compliance andenforcement of
existing rules and advancing regulationsto put in place more controls.
Health Canada’s national public education campaign “Consider the Consequences of Vaping” informs
youth and their parents about the risks and harms associated with vapingthrough advertising,
interactive learning tours in schools and online. To date, Health Canada hasinvested more than $14
million.
Enforcing the strong set of controls already established under the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act
remains an important partof the Government’s efforts. The department has taken action to shut down
illegal promotions by major national brands.
Regulations
The Vaping Products Promotion Regulations came into force on August 7, 2020. These regulations
prohibit any vaping productpromotions in locations or media visible to youth. Additionally, the
regulations require all remaining permitted ads to include clear health warnings to increase awareness
of the risks of these products.
In addition, the Vaping Product Labeling and Packaging Regulations came into force on July 1, 2020.
These regulations require that vaping products containing nicotine display a standardized nicotine
concentration statement and a health warning about the addictiveness of nicotine as well as a toxicity
warning to further increase awareness of the risks.
On July 8, 2021, new Nicotine Concentration in Vaping Products Regulations came into force, which set a
maximum nicotine concentration for vaping products sold to 20 mg/ml, down from 66 mg/ml. As of July
23, 2021, it is prohibited to sell any vaping products with a nicotine concentration higher than 20 mg/ml
in Canada.
Building on feedback from consultations in 2019, on June 19th, 2021, Health Canada published the
proposed Order Amending Schedules 2 and 3 to the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (flavours) and the
proposed Standards for Vaping Products’ Sensory Attributes Regulations. The proposal is a three-
pronged approach to restricting flavoured vaping products. The regulations would restrict the
promotion offlavours in vaping products to tobacco, mint, and menthol; prohibit all sugars and
sweeteners and most flavouring ingredients; and prescribe sensory attributes standards to prevent a
sensory perception other than one that is typical of tobacco or mint/menthol. The consultation period
for the proposed regulations closed September 2, 2021 and the department is reviewing feedback on
this proposal.
On April 19, 2021, Finance Canada announced its intention to implement a tax on vaping products in
2022, throughthe introduction of a new excise duty framework. The proposed framework would
impose a single flat rate duty on every 10 millilitres (ml) of vaping liquid or fraction thereof, within an
immediate container (i.e., the container holding the liquid itself). Finance Canada requested input from
industry and stakeholders on the proposal by June 30, 2021, and is reviewing the feedback received.
Smoking is the leading preventable cause of premature death and disease in Canada. Smoking-related
disease is caused by the toxic and carcinogenic chemicals in smoke. Vaping products expose users to far
fewer toxic chemicals and substances than conventional cigarettes, and are less harmful alternatives to
tobacco products if they quit smoking and switch completely to vaping.
However, vaping is not harmless. Vaping nicotine can lead to addiction and physical dependence and
youth are especially susceptible to the negative effects of nicotine. Moreover, the long-term health
effects of vaping are unknown. For these reasons,the TVPA seeks to protect the health of youth and
non-users from exposure to and dependence on nicotine, and help ensure that Canadians are not misled
with regard to the health hazards of using vaping products and/or nicotine.
Results from the Canadian Tobacco and Nicotine (CTNS) survey in 2019 showed a rapid increase in youth
aged 15-19 from the previous survey, with 14% reporting past 30 day use compared to 6% in 2017.
Health Canada has not seen a corresponding increase in student smoking rates; these rates continue to
be at all-time lows.
In March 2021, Statistics Canada released the 2020 CTNS results that indicated youth vaping rates have
not increased from the previous survey in 2019. While the rates remain high, more data is needed to
determine apotential trend; results from the 2021 CTNS are expected in April 2022. Health Canada will
be closely monitoring youth use of vaping products through the CTNS.
Section 60.1(1) of the Tobacco and Vaping Products Act (TVPA) requires that the Minister perform a
legislative review of the Act on a two year cycle, three years after the legislation comes into force.
The US Food and Drug Administration, under its Premarket Tobacco Product Application process, has
reviewed the applications of over 6 million vaping products to determine whether any meet the criteria
of protecting public health, taking into account the risks and benefits to the population as a whole.
While the review process has not been completed, on October 12, 2021, the United States Food and
Drug Administration announced it had authorized the marketing of three new electronic nicotine
delivery systems (ENDS). The FDA issued orders to R.J. Reynolds (RJR) Vapor Company authorizing
marketing for its Vuse Solo closed ENDS device and accompanying tobacco-flavored e-liquid pods. The
RJR Vapor Company submitted data to the FDA that demonstrated that the marketing of these products
is appropriate for the protection of public health, and the authorization allows these products to be
legally sold in theU.S.
For these three products, the FDA determined that the potential benefit to smokers who switch
completely or significantly reduce their cigarette use, would outweigh the risk to youth, provided the
applicant follows post-marketing requirements aimed at reducing youth exposure and access to the
products (e.g., regular reporting to the FDA, marketing restrictions for digital, radio and television
advertising).
In Canada, the Food and Drugs Act applies to vaping products that make health claims, such ashelp to
quit smoking. These products must be authroized under this act before they can be advertised, sold, or
commercially imported. To date, no vaping products have been authorized under this Act and no
applications have been received.
AGILE REGULATORY PROCESSES TO SUPPORT ACCESS TO CLINICAL TRIALS FOR VACCINES AND
TREATMENTS FOR COVID-19
ISSUE
• Health Canada is using agile regulatory processes to expedite the review of COVID 19 clinical
trials for vaccines and treatments.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada is expediting the review of all clinical trials for treatments and vaccines for
COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed.
• Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half
the normal time).
KEY MESSAGES
• Health Canada introduced agile regulatory processes to expedite the review and facilitate the
conduct of clinical trials for COVID-19 vaccines and treatments while maintaining its high standardsfor
safety, efficacy and quality.
• Health Canada continues to expedite clinical trials, reviewing applications in under 15 days,
which is half the standard time.
• These measures have allowed us to rapidly authorize several clinical trials in Canada, including
for some vaccines being developed in Canada, without compromising on strict standards for the safety
of clinical trial participants.
IF PRESSED FURTHER ON CLINICAL TRIALS
• Clinical trials regulations allow the investigation of new drugs or new usesof drugs while
affording protection of participants and requiring the proper collection and retention of outcomes.
• Health Canada is expediting the review of clinical trial applications so that products can be
studied and made available to Canadians asquickly as possible.
• As of March 7, 2022, 116 clinical trials for COVID drugs and vaccines have been authorized in
Canada.
IF PRESSED ON APPROVAL OF VACCINE MANUFACTURING SITES FOR DOMESTIC PRODUCTION
• As the regulator of health products, Health Canada’s role is to authorize products for clinical
trials or for sale in Canada, regardless of where they are manufactured.
• For any domestic production of vaccines, Health Canada would inspect and license
manufacturing facilities.
• Health Canada inspectors have been working with the National Research Council to provide
advice on upgrading their facilities so that they can be licensed to produce vaccines.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada is expediting the review of all clinical trials applications for treatments and vaccines for
COVID-19 while continuing to ensure that clinical trial standards are followed. Clinical trials are
conducted to determine whether new vaccines and treatments are both safe and effective in human
beings. Health Canada has also been facilitating clinical trials related to COVID-19 in Canada, using the
Interim Order (IO) respecting clinical trials for medical devices and drugs (including vaccines) related to
COVID-19, which was issued in May 2020 (IO no1) and extended in May 2021 (IO no2).
On February 27, 2022, the Clinical Trials for Medical Devices and Drugs Relating to COVID-19 Regulations
(the Regulations) came into force, replacing the second interim order (IO No. 2), which was repealed on
February 26, 2022.
The Regulations maintainthe optional pathway introduced in the IOs as well as all the flexibilities set out
by them . They continue to facilitate the authorization and implementation of COVID-19 related clinical
trials by reducing administrative burden, all while upholding the health and safety requirements for trial
participants and validity of trial data.
The Regulations continue to offer regulatory flexibility to allow for broader types of COVID-19 clinical
trials to take place more efficiently. This flexibility also facilitates broader patient and volunteer
participation across the country. The Regulations help to:
• reduce administrative requirements for assessing the use of existing marketed products as
possible COVID-19-related therapies;
• allow alternate means ofobtaining patient consent in light of public health measures;
• broaden the criteria for health professionals who can carry out qualified investigator duties at
remote sites; and,
• expand the range of applicants who are able to apply for a medical deviceclinical trial
authorization.
The regulations include changes to reduce the records retention period for all clinical trials of drugs and
natural health products from 25 years to 15 years to improve alignment with international regulatory
partners. They also establish a records retention period of 15 years for all COVID clinical trials.
Health Canada reviews clinical trial applications and issues a decision in under 15 days (i.e., half the
normal time).
BULK IMPORT OF PRESCRIPTION DRUGS
ISSUE
• Drug shortages are a global issue that directly affect the health and safety of Canadians. Canada
is particularly vulnerable to shortages because of our small market share and heavy reliance on imports.
• On November 30, 2020, a rule came into effect inthe U.S. allowing state-sponsored programs to
import drugs intended for the Canadian market in bulk as a means to reduce the price of drugs for
American consumers.
• The Canadian market is too small to supply the U.S. and Canadian markets. The rule has the
potential to create supply disruptions.
KEY FACTS
• The U.S. is seeking to reduce domestic drug prices by allowing for the bulk importation of lower
priced drugs intended for the Canadian market.
• A rule facilitating bulk importation of drugs from Canada was established by the Trump
administration and endorsed by President Biden through an Executive Order made on July 9, 2021.
• With Canada representing 2% of global drug sales, this is not a viable solution as the U.S.
captures 44% of global drug sales.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians continue to have access to the medicines they need is a top priority for
our Government.
• Amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations to permanently establish measures
prohibiting certain drugs intended for the Canadian market from being sold for consumption outside of
Canada, if that sale could causeor exacerbate a drug shortage.
• We will continue to take steps to safeguard our drug supply and preserve access to needed
drugs for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE INCREASED DRUG PRICES FORCANADIANS DUE TO THE U.S. RULE
• We do not expect that the U.S. rule will lead to increaseddrug prices for Canadians. The
Government of Canada is committed to improving Canadians access to, and the affordability of,
necessary prescription medicines.
• Canadians are protected from excessive prices for patented medicines through the Patented
Medicine Prices Review Board. This protection will remain in place and we will continue to work with
key partners to ensure all Canadians have access to the medicines they need.
IF PRESSED ON POSSIBLE TRADE IMPLICATIONS AND THE CANADA-U.S. RELATIONSHIP
• The regulations respect international trade rules, andare not an export prohibition.
• Canada and the U.S. share a trillion dollar trade and investment relationship that contributes to
millions of jobs in both countries and to increasedNorth American competitiveness.
• The distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside of Canada
continues to be permitted in cases where the seller determines that the sale will not cause or
exacerbate a shortage.
IF PRESSED ON IMPLEMENTATION OF THE U.S. IMPORTATION PROGRAMS
• We are aware that two proposals for State importation programs have been submitted to the
U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA). However, these proposals have not yet been approved
and there are no bulk importationprograms running at this time.
• We are aware that the U.S. pharmaceutical industry is challenging the U.S. rule in court. We are
monitoring the proceedings and will consider the impact of the decisionwhen the outcome becomes
known.
• The Government of Canada continues to work with the U.S. to understand its implementation
plans and to mitigate any risks to the health and safety of Canadians posed by the U.S. rule.
• Drug establishment licence holders who violate the terms of the regulations will be subjectto
enforcement actions. This could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or the
suspension or cancellation of their licence.
BACKGROUND
U.S. Rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs
On November 30, 2020, the U.S. rule on the Importation of Prescription Drugs came into effect. The rule
creates a pathway for licensed U.S. pharmacists or wholesalers, working within a state-sponsored
program approved by the U.S. Food and Drug Administration (U.S. FDA), to import in bulk certain
prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market. Under this plan, eligible drugs must be U.S. FDA
and Health Canada-approved drugs labeled for sale in Canada, with exclusions for higher risk drugs. The
Canadian seller must be licensed by Health Canadafor wholesaling, be registered with a provincial
authority, and must also be registered with the U.S. FDA. The importer must submit a pre-import
request to the U.S. FDA at least 30 days in advance of product entry and arrival into the U.S. The
program allows only a direct supply chain of one manufacturer, one Canadian seller and one importer
for each imported drug.
If prescription drugs intended for the Canadian market were to be imported into the U.S. in bulk, it could
further exacerbate the existing problem of drug shortages in Canada, putting the health of Canadians at
risk. The Government of Canada does not consider the U.S. rule to be an effective solution to high drug
prices in the U.S. It opposed the rule during the formal regulatory consultationprocess and in bilateral
discussions with U.S. officials.
Industry and patient advocacy groups called on the Government to “act swiftly, firmly and publicly” in
response to U.S. plans. The industry group Pharmaceutical Research & Manufacturers of America
(PhRMA) is challenging the U.S. rule in court. As well, large industry players, representing 90-95% of
pharmaceutical distribution in Canada, have indicated that they do not intend to participate in this
program. However, there is the potential for smaller players in the market to participate, and any
industry uptake could have an impact on the Canadian drug supply.
States are at various stages of readiness to implement bulk importation programs of prescription drugs
from Canada. Florida, Colorado, Maine, Vermont, New Hampshire and New Mexico have enacted
legislation to authorize such a program, and 16 other states have similar legislation in progress. Florida
and New Mexico have submitted proposals for importation programs to the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services for review and approval. There is no timeline for when a decision will be made
about the proposals. The Governor of Florida criticized the Biden administration on March 2, 2022 for
acting too slowly to authorize its proposal. Florida has already identified a Canadian wholesaler and a
vendor to manage its importation program, if approved.
Regulatory action to safeguard the drug supply
The Regulations Amending Certain Regulations Concerning Drugs and Medical Devices (Shortages) were
made on August 11, 2021 and make permanent the provisions that were first introduced in the Interim
Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply). These provisions help ensure that bulk
importation programs, such as the one established by the U.S., do not cause or worsen a drug shortage
in Canada. Similar to the interim order, these Regulations maintain the prohibition on selling for
consumption outside of Canada certain drugs intended for the Canadian market if that sale could cause
or worsen a drug shortage. The Regulations came into force upon expiry of the interim order on
November 27, 2021.
The Regulations also authorize the Minister to require specific information from a manufacturer or drug
establishment licence (DEL) holder that could help Health Canada take steps to prevent or alleviate an
existing or anticipated drug shortage.
Distribution of drugs intended for the Canadian market for consumption outside Canada will continue to
be permitted if the seller determines that the distribution will not cause or exacerbate a shortage. Drugs
manufactured in Canada solely for export are not in the scope ofthe interim order.
Health Canada will administer these Regulations through compliance promotion, monitoring, and
verification activities. DEL holders who violate the Regulations may be subject to enforcement actions,
which could include corrective measures, issuance of public communications, or the suspension or
cancellation of the DEL.
COVID-19 CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE
ISSUE
• COVID-19 created an increased demand for drugs used in supporting patients with the disease,
against the backdrop of multiple global supply chain challenges. Drug shortages, particularly in the
context of COVID-19 critical drugs, could put the health of Canadians at risk.
• Working with provinces, territories and other partners, Health Canada established a COVID-19
Critical Drug Reserve to support patients with COVID-19.
KEY FACTS
• The Critical Drug Reserve was established with a three month supply of 12 key drugs used in the
treatment of COVID-19 symptoms.
• Canada assumed the upfront costs to build and manage the Reserve.The costs are shared 70% /
30% between provinces / territories and the Federal Government.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary. All jurisdictions except for Quebec and
New Brunswick have opted in, and have accessed drugs from theCritical Drug Reserve.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring Canadians have access to the drugs they need is a top priority. The Government of
Canada has taken proactive measures to help mitigate the risk of drug shortages, a global issue,
throughout the pandemic.
• Working with provinces and territories and other partners, Health Canada established the
COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve in 2020.
• This Reserve complements other federal, provincial and territorial drug shortage management
efforts, and functions as a safety net by augmenting the supply of key drugs used in treating patients
with COVID-19 in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON WHAT DRUGS HEALTH CANADA PURCHASED FOR THE CRITICAL DRUG RESERVE …
• The Critical Drug Reserve holds twelve drugs used in hospitals to support patients with COVID-
19, including sedatives, pain relievers, antibiotics, and neuromuscular blockers. These drugs have been
included in the Reserve based on Canada’s experience in managing drug supply, consultation with
provinces and territories, and adviceprovided by health care experts.
IF PRESSED ON PARTICIPATION …
• The Critical Drug Reserve functions as an additional safety net in the event of shortages of key
drugs used in the treatment of COVID-19 symptoms, and complements Canada’s current drug shortage
mitigation measures.
• Participation in the Critical Drug Reserve is voluntary, with most provinces and territories
participating. Both Quebec and New Brunswick have opted out, but the Government of Canada will
continue to provide support when requested.
IF PRESSED ON COST …
• To date, the Government of Canada has awarded close to $30 million in contracts for drugs in
the Critical Drug Reserve through competitive processes that are cost-shared with participating
provinces and territories.
• Drug pricing is influenced by a number of factors, including availability, supply chain constraints,
global import/export restrictions, and competition in the global marketplace.
• As with all purchasing, value for money was a key consideration.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s role
Health Canada works with provinces and territories and stakeholders across the drug supply chain to
identify mitigation strategies, which include regulatory measures and exploring access to alternative
products available in other jurisdictions. Creating a reserve for drugs critical to the treatment of COVID-
19 symptoms is one such strategy.
During the first wave of the pandemic, shortages were identified for key drugs used in treating patients
with COVID-19. The Critical Drug Reserveserves as a backstop for Canada’s existing supply,
complements the current drug shortage management systems, and has helped to prevent critical drug
shortages, which will in turn, has relieved pressures on provincial and territorial health care systems.
Factors that were considered in the pursuit of a critical drug reserve included whether the drug is
important for the treatment of COVID-19 symptoms, whether the drug is in shortage or is likely to be in
shortage, and whether alternative or substitute drugs are available. The following drugs are in the
Critical Drug Reserve:
• Cisatracurium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Epinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Fentanyl (Opioid analgesic);
• Norepinephrine (Adrenergic agonists);
• Propofol (Sedative);
• Rocuronium (Neuromuscular blocker);
• Salbutamol (Bronchodilator);
• Ceftriaxone (antibiotic);
• Dexamethasone (corticosteroid);
• Hydromorphone (analgesic);
• Midazolam (sedative); and
• Vasopressin (vasopressor).
Engagement with Provinces and Territories
To address drug supply issues, Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms for managing drug
shortages, and has leveraged existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple
partners to identify shortage signals earlier, particularlyfor critical drugs required for COVID-19.
Given the need for close cooperation on the shortage of critical drugs, a Framework for the Effective
Management of Drug supply in the Context of the COVID-19 Pandemic was developed and agreed to by
provinces, territories and the federal government. This Framework sets out the common principles for
managing drug shortages and guiding decisions in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic. Principles
include solidarity, fairness, openness and transparency, and FPT collaboration. These principles have
been implemented through the federal government facilitating access to alternative drug supplies to
prevent shortages, and building the Critical Drug Reserve to support patients with COVID-19.
The CDR was established as abackstop for a limited period of time and was set to end March 31, 2022.
However, due to the prolonged pandemic the reserve has been extended by an additional three months
and will now be in place until June 30 2022.
DRUG SHORTAGES
ISSUE
• Drug shortages pose a risk to the health of Canadians. The COVID-19 pandemic further exposed
vulnerabilities in the drug supply chain that impacted supplies of drugs required to treat patients with
COVID-19 and other health conditions.
• The need for vigilance in maintaining the national drug supply continues. Health Canada is
continuing its surveillance activities and engagement with provinces and territories, and key supply
chain players to mitigate impacts and move towards prevention of drug shortages where possible.
KEY FACTS
• Four Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviate the effects of shortages
related to COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. The provisions in these Interim Orders have been
transitionedinto permanent regulations.
• As of March 7, 2022, we have been able to de-escalate 45 shortages from critical status, out of a
total of 62 that have been deemed in critical shortage since the onset of the pandemic.
KEY MESSAGES
• Ensuring that Canadians have access to needed medication is a top priority for our Government.
• Significant efforts have been made throughout in the pandemic to respond to drug supply
disruptions. Four Interim Orders were put in place to help prevent or alleviate the effectsof shortages
related to COVID-19 and to safeguard supply. The provisions in these Interim Orders have been
transitioned into permanent regulations as of March 2, 2022, providing the government with new tools
to manage drug shortages.
• A COVID-19 CriticalDrug Reserve was also created in collaboration with the provinces and
territories to provide a safety net of supply.
• We will continue to collaborate with provinces and territories, industry, healthcare and patient
groups and international partners to closely monitor the situation and take necessary action to help
prevent and minimize the impact of shortages.
BACKGROUND
Health Canada’s Role
Drug shortages can have a significant impact on patients and health care professionals.
Addressing the complex issue of drug shortages is a multi-stakeholder responsibility requiring federal
leadership and collaborative action from provinces and territories, manufacturers, distributors,
practitioners. When national shortages occur, Health Canada works with provinces and territories and
stakeholders across the drug supply chain to identify mitigation strategies, which may include regulatory
measures, and explore access to alternative products available in other jurisdictions.
Factors such as whether the shortageis national in scope, whether alternative supplies are available and
whether the product is considered medically necessary are all considered in determining the potential
impact and any necessary actions by Health Canada.
Interim Order No. 2 Respecting Drugs, Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in
Relation to COVID-19
This interim order was made on March 1, 2021 to help prevent and alleviate shortages by permitting the
exceptional importation of specified drugs, biocides, medical devices, and foods for a special dietary
purpose that may not fully meet Canadian regulatory requirements, but are manufactured according to
comparable standards. This interim order repealed and replaced the Interim Order Respecting Drugs,
Medical Devices and Foods for a Special Dietary Purpose in Relation to COVID-19 that the Minister of
Health made on March 30, 2020. The provisions of this interim order came into force as permanent
regulations on March 2, 2022.
The Interim Order Respecting the Prevention andAlleviation of Shortages of Drugs in Relation to COVID-
19
This interim order, made by the Minister of Health on October 16, 2020 introduced new tools for the
Minister to address drug shortages, or the risk of drug shortages, that may be caused or exacerbated,
directly or indirectly, by COVID-19. The scope excludes shortages of veterinary or natural health
products.
This interim order allowed the Minister of Health to compel any person who sells a drug to provide
information within the person’s control about a shortage or potential shortage of that drug related to
COVID-19 under certain conditions. It also allowed the Minister to impose or amend terms and
conditions on authorizations to sell drugs for the purpose of preventing or alleviating a drug shortage
related to COVID-19 under certain conditions.
Interim Order Respecting Drug Shortages (Safeguarding the Drug Supply)
This interim order was made by the Minister of Health on November 27, 2020. It introduced new
measures to help safeguard the Canadian drug supply by ensuring that bulk importation frameworks,
such as the one established by the United States, do not cause or exacerbate a drug shortage in Canada.
It also enabled the Minister to require a seller to provide information that could help Health Canada
take steps to assess or alleviate an existing or potential drug shortage.
The provisions of the two above-notedinterim orders entered into force on November 27, 2021.
Engagement with Provinces and Territories in Managing Drug Shortages
Over the last number of years, capacity has been built up across governments, leading to a more
coordinated and effective approachto mitigate the impacts of shortages.
Health Canada has strengthened existing mechanisms to manage drug shortages, and has leveraged
existing FPT infrastructure and increased cooperation with multiple partners to identify shortage signals
earlier, especially for critical drugs required for COVID-19. Through FPT collaboration, a process for the
allocation of imported critical drugs is now in place to facilitate the distribution of critical products. The
process allows companies the opportunity to work withHealth Canada and provincial and territorial
governments in allocating supply where it is needed most. This has also been effective in managing
limited supplies of therapies being used to treat COVID-19 (e.g., Tocilizumab, Remdesivir) as well as
drugs thatare in high global demand upon authorization by Health Canada (e.g., Paxlovid).
A COVID-19 Critical Drug Reserve was established in 2020, working closely with provinces and territories
and other partners, to complement other drug shortage mitigation efforts and includes 12 drugs used to
support patients with COVID-19 that have been in high demand or in shortage, including sedatives, pain
relievers, antibiotics, muscle relaxants, and inhalers.
Health Canada officials continue to work with the provincesand territories, other international
regulators and industry stakeholders to closely monitor Canada’s drug supply so that timely action can
be taken to ensure Canadians have access to the drugs they need.
STRENGTHENING THECANADIAN ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION ACT, 1999
ISSUE
• The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 (CEPA) is Canada’s key statute to prevent
pollution and protect the environment and human health. The Act has not been substantially amended
since 1999.
• On February 9, 2022, the Government introduced in the Senate Bill S-5: Strengthening
Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada Act to amend CEPA to better protect Canadians and
their environment.
• Mandate letters issued to both the Minister of Health and the Minister of Environment and
Climate Change reaffirm the Government’s commitment to strengthen the Canadian Environmental
Protection Act, 1999 and to recognize the right to a healthy environment.
KEY FACTS
• CEPA is Canada’s cornerstone federalenvironmental protection law that protects Canadians and
the environment.
• On February 9, 2022, the Government introduced in the Senate Bill S-5: Strengthening
Environmental Protection for a Healthier Canada Act, which would modernize the Canadian
Environmental Protection Act, 1999 for the first time in twenty years and make related amendments to
the Food and Drugs Act.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of all Canadians.
• By strengthening the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999, the Government will
strengthen its ability to protect Canadians and their environment from chemical substances.
• The Government will recognize for the first time in federal law that every individual in Canada
has a right to ahealthy environment, and that the Government has a duty to protect that right when
administering the Act.
IF PRESSED ON …
• As the lead for these initiatives, the Minister of Environment and Climate Change will have my
full support to strengthen the Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999, to protect everyone from
chemical substances.
Bill S-5
• Bill S-5 recognizes the right to a healthy environment for every individual in Canada and it allows
the government to better protect Canadians who are more exposed to harmful chemicals or more
susceptible to their effects.
BACKGROUND
Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999:
The Canadian Environmental Protection Act, 1999 is Canada’s key statute to prevent pollution and
protect the environment and human health. While the Act is mainly under the authority of the Minister
of the Environment and Climate Change, the Minister of Health shares responsibility for Parts 5 and 6 of
the Act, which requires the Government to assess and manage the risks to Canadians and the
environment from substances.
The Minister of Health has authorities under the Act to:
• Conduct research and biomonitoring on the effects of chemicals on human health; and
• Issue health-related environmental objectives, guidelines and codes of practice (e.g., national
drinking water quality guidelines and health-based Residential Indoor Air Quality Guidelines).
Mandate Letter Objectives:
Mandate letters issued to the Minister of Health and to the Minister of Environment and Climate
Change instructed both Ministers to enact a strengthened CEPA to protect everyone, including people
most vulnerable to harm from toxic substances.
Minister Guilbeault was further instructed in his mandate letter to recognize the “right to a healthy
environment” in federal law and introduce legislation to require the development of an environmental
justice strategy and the examination of the link between race, socio-economic status and exposure to
environmental risk.
Consultations on supply chain transparency and labelling:
In addition, the Government has indicated that it will be moving forward on the following initiatives
related to thelabelling of products:
• Upcoming consultations to enhance supply chain transparency and strengthen mandatory
labelling in Canada to address the growing demand for greater information on the chemicals in various
products, some of which may have impacts onthe health of Canadians, on the environment or both.
• Proposed amendments to the Cosmetic Regulations to better inform consumers of the presence
of certain fragrance allergens in cosmetics, which will help them make decisions and protect their
health.
FOOD SAFETY
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has made key investments to its inspection activities in an effort to
enhance food safety in Canada. At present, the Canadian Food Inspection Agency has the resources it
needs to deliver on itsmandate for food safety, animal and plant health.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 provided the Canadian Food Inspection Agency with an additional $31M over two
years to maintain its inspection activities and to strengthen and modernize its food safety inspection
system.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada has one of the best food safety systems in the world.
• The Safe Food for Canadians Act and the Safe Food for Canadians Regulations, which came into
force in 2019, provides a new approach for food safety and improves the abilityto respond to non-
compliances.
• Budget 2021 invested $31M over two years in renewed funding to allow the Canadian Food
Inspection Agency to continue to apply and strengthen its risk management approach to food safety.
The funding will allow for improved risk targeting for both domestic and imported foods and guide
preventive and targeted food safety activities.
IF PRESSED ON COVID-19
• Food safety and consumer protection are key priorities of the Government of Canada.
• There is currently no scientific evidence that food or food packaging is a source or transmitter of
the COVID-19 virus and there have been no reported cases.
• The government has taken steps for the ongoing delivery of critical Canadian Food Inspection
Agency services during the pandemic to do its part to maintain Canada’s food supply, including
prioritizing its meat inspection work.
IF PRESSED ON FOOD SAFETY IN MEAT PROCESSING PLANTS
• This Government takes food safety seriously.
• The Canadian Food Inspection Agency conducts dailyinspections at federally licenced meat
processing establishments. The inspection approach is different for licence holders who produce foods
other than meat, where daily inspection presence is not a requirement.
BACKGROUND
All food sold in Canada isexpected to be safe, and it is industry’s responsibility to produce safe food.
When there is reason to believe that a food is contaminated or does not follow federal regulations, the
Canadian Food Inspection Agency (CFIA) may employ various compliance approaches and will typically
initiate a process to investigate and recall products, if necessary.
The number of inspection staff changes due to seasonal requirements and is adjusted based on demand.
The type and frequency of inspections done by CFIA vary by commodity, by risks, and mirror what is
done in other countries (for ex., CFIA staff do full-time slaughter inspection and daily meat processing
shift inspections just like USDA staff in US meat plants).
The CFIA does on-site visits once a day or more in meat processing plants in order to make them eligible
for export to the US under the terms of a long-standing equivalency agreement. The CFIA delivers
inspection activities in other food plants at a lower risk-based frequency that reflects the type of
product being made, the type of consumer it is being made for, and the food business` compliance
history.
On January 22, 2021, the federal government announced $162.6 million for CFIA over the next 5 years,
and then $40 million per year of ongoing funding. These funds will augment CFIA's oversight and
surveillance capacity in its domestic programs by dedicating resources to areas of highest risk.
The investment is critical to alleviating the resource pressures CFIA is facing due to increased demand
and operational risks, which are a result of rapid growth in international trade, technology
developments, changing consumer preferences and new food safety threats.
As part of its normal business, CFIA has been undertaking a series of initiatives to improve inspection
delivery, achieve greater industry compliance with food safety requirements, and better protect
consumers.
The Safe Food for Canadians Act (SFCA) and Safe Food for Canadians Regulations (SFCR), which came
into force on January 15, 2019, is an exampleof this Government’s commitment to strengthen an
already strong food safety inspection system. The regulations apply to imported, exported or inter-
provincially traded food.
The new regulations are also consistent with international food safety standards, they strengthen
Canada’s food safety system and enable industry to innovate and create greater market access
opportunities for Canadian food products exported abroad.
These regulations help Canadian food businesses continue to have access to trading partners like the
United States, who have already adopted similar regulations.
Budget 2021’s funding of $31M over two years will allow the CFIA to continue to strengthen its risk
management approach to food safety through improved understanding of the dynamic risk landscape,
both domestic and foreign, and to guide preventive and targeted food safety activities. This will be
achieved through sustained verification activities of industry compliance with legislation and improved
offshore preventive activitiesfor all exported and imported food products.
PROTECTION OF HEALTHCARE WORKERS
ISSUE
• What the government is doing to protect healthcare workers against harassment, particularly in
light of the pandemic?
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• The Governmentof Canada recognizes the incredible contribution that health care workers have
made and continue to make in Canada’s response to the pandemic.
• Yet, we have heard many stories about physicians, nurses and other health workers who have
been threatened andintimidated, in person and online. This behavior is completely unacceptable, and
adds another heavy burden on health care workers who are working tirelessly to keep us safe and
healthy.
• Our government recently took action to protect health care workers,through amendments to
the Criminal Code (under the former Bill C-3), in order to ensure health care workers are safe and free
from threats, violence and harassment.
• All Canadians, and especially healthcare workers, whose goal is help others, deserve a safe
working environment, free from violence and threats.
BACKGROUND
On December 17, 2021, Bill C-3, which amends the Criminal Code to enhance protections for health care
workers, those who assist them, and those accessing health care services, receivedRoyal Assent.
Health care workers have long faced difficult working conditions, including violence and threats of
violence in the workplace. This situation has been exacerbated by the COVID-19 pandemic. High profile
public demonstrations have interfered with heath care workers and with the public accessing health
care facilities.
Taken together, the amendments affirm the federal government’s recognition of the importance of
protecting health care workers and those who assist them, and of ensuring safe access to health
facilities. At the same time, these changes respect Canadians’ freedom to voice their concerns and
protest in a safe and peaceful manner, and ensure workers’ freedom to take labour action, consistent
with the Charter of Rights and Freedoms.
Intimidation and obstructing access offences
These amendments have created a specific intimidation offence to further protect health care workers,
those who assist them, and persons seeking health services. The new intimidation offence will address
circumstances where a health care worker, or person seeking health services, is subject to any
intimidating conduct. This could include threats, or other forms of violence, that are intended to
provoke fear, to interfere with the duties of a health care worker, or to impede a person from receiving
health care services.
The specific obstructing access offence prohibits obstructing any person from accessing health facilities.
This offence does not apply where a person is peacefully protesting or communicating information, such
as on a picket line outside a health facility, even if that has a minor impact on the ability of others to
access the facility.
These offences are both punishable by a maximum penalty of 10 years imprisonment on indictment.
Depending on the degreeof seriousness and circumstances of the alleged offence, the prosecutor will
have the option to proceed by indictment for more serious cases or by summary conviction for less
serious cases. The maximum penalty on summary conviction is two years less a day.
HOME CARE
ISSUE
• Home care services help people receive needed care at home, rather than in a hospital or long-
term care facility, and to live as independently as possible in the community. Home care usually includes
professional services at no cost to the client (e.g., physiotherapy, nursing, and occupational therapy) and
home support/personal care (e.g., personal hygiene, dressing, feeding, and toileting), which is income-
tested in most PTs.
• There is evidence thatCOVID-19 had a negative impact on access to home care services during
the pandemic, including both professional services and home support/personal care. This situation
increased social isolation of seniors and led to a higher burden for family caregivers.
KEY FACTS
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can get
the carethey need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to
ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as
well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Work with the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provinces and territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home,including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES:
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges that vulnerable
populations face in accessing the health care services they need, including access to home care services.
• Our government increased funding to provinces and territories to help protect these
populations as part of our pandemic response, which included providing $740 million through the Safe
Restart Agreement. In the case of home care specifically, that additional funding built on the $6 billion
we are already providing over ten years to support better home and community care, including
palliative care.
• Budget 2021 recognised the need to support people at home, with a $90 million investment
over three years to launch the Age Well at Home initiative led by Employment and Social Development
Canada. This will assist community-based organizations in providing practical support to help low-
income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age in place.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we committed to strengthen our healthcare system and public
health supports for all Canadians, especially seniors, veterans, persons with disabilities, and vulnerable
members of our communities. This care can include care at or close to home, to help them live longer
where they want to be.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONAL SUPPORT PROVIDED BY THE FEDERAL GOVERNMENT…
• The Public Health Agencyof Canada has published infection prevention and control guidance to
help prevent COVID-19 infections among workers and individuals in home care.
• Up to $3 billion in federal funding was provided in 2020 to support provinces and territories to
increase the wages of low-income essential workers, which could include front line workers in home
care settings, hospitals, and long-term care facilities.
BACKGROUND
Home Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada andprovincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these
services, including home care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• Home care is not publicly insured under the Canada Health Act.
• While not mandatory, every PT offers home care programs and services, with variations across
each PT.
COVID Impacts on Home Care
In July 2021, the Canadian Institute for Health Information highlighted the following impacts COVID-19
has had on home care services:
• Home care clients placed their services on hold to limit contact with people outside their
household.
• InApril 2020, the number of screening assessments declined 25% compared with March 2020.
• In April 2020, the number of full assessments completed declined by 44% compared with March
2020. This trend continued in June 2020.
• Home care assessments were transitioned to being completed by phone. Between April and
June 2020, there was a 53% increase of phone assessments.
The Omicron-dominated wave of COVID-19 will likely impact seniors’ services in a similar way to
previous waves. Many provinces and territoriesare experiencing health care staffing issues due to
workers being exposed to or testing positive for COVID-19. For example, the Winnipeg Regional Health
Authority announced that the cancellation of home care visits would be inevitable due to the volume of
staff absences.
Other Relevant Budget 2021 Commitments
Budget 2021 committed to:
• supporting retirement savings for personal support workers, through funding of $27.6 million
over three years for my65+, a Group Tax-Free Savings Account offered by theService Employees
International Union Healthcare. The funding will support incentives for worker participation;
• increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022; and,
• establishing a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program ($960 million over three years, led by
ESDC). The purpose of the program is to help employment sectors design and deliver relevant training,
and connect Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this
program will help to address the need for more skilled personal support workers who provide care for
Canadians at home.
FPT Home and Community Care bilateral agreements
The Federal Budget 2017 committed to $11B over 10 years targeted to improve home and community
care ($6B), and mental health and addictions ($5B).
In August 2017, FPT Health Ministers agreed to the Common Statement of Principles on Shared Health
Priorities, in which they committed to:
• Priority areas of action in home and community care, and mental health andaddiction services
• Reviewing progress on the objectives and commitments annually
• Developing and reporting on a focused set of common indicators (with CIHI and stakeholders)
The Government of Canada and the Government of Québec agreedto an asymmetrical arrangement.
Shared Health Priorities Indicators for access to home and community care (Canadian Institute for
Health Information)
• Hospital Stay Extended Until Home Care Services or Supports Ready
• Caregiver Distress
• New Long-Term Care Residents WhoPotentially Could Have Been Cared for at Home
• Wait Times for Home Care Services
• Home Care Services Helped the Recipient Stay at Home
• Death at Home/Not in Hospital
PT Action Plans
Provincial / territorial action plans are identified in bilateral agreements, which are all posted publicly,
and lay out the initiatives that each jurisdiction will take to meet the needs of each jurisdiction’s
population. For example,
Integration of Care in the Community
• Through the YK Home First and Complex Client Supports initiative, Yukon clients will be provided
enhanced services at home, with the goal of keeping them out of long term care
• SK is establishing Community Health Centres and teams toshift the delivery of care from
hospitals into community settings
• To allow people to remain in their homes as long as possible, QC is making a wide range of care
and services more readily available in the community (including nursing, nutrition, rehabilitation).
Investing in Digital and IT Infrastructure
• PEI, NWT, YK and NS are implementing various care assessment tools (InterRAI), which allow
clinicians to identify issues and develop care plans, and monitor home care client/LTC resident progress
• NLis expanding remote monitoring of dementia patients through the use of e-consults
Support for caregivers
• Better respite services for caregivers (NL, NS, NB, ON)
• Expanding the Caregiver Benefit (NS)
• Plans to introduce a paid family/community caregiver option (NWT)
Palliative Care
• MB and BC are investing in afterhours access to resources for palliative care clients and their
families;
• AB is enhancing palliative home care programming to rural, remote parts of the province
• NB will implement standardized assessment and monitoring tools, and develop a physician
model for integrated community-based palliative care
Initiatives aimed at specific population groups
• PEI is developing culturally appropriate information regarding programs, services andtraining
specific to First Nations continuing care needs
LONG-TERM CARE HOMES
ISSUE
• Throughout the COVID-19 pandemic, the federal government has been working collaboratively
with provinces and territories to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal
government has responded in a number of ways, including through key investments made to support
residents and staff.
KEY FACTS
• The COVID-19 pandemic has disproportionately affected Canadians receiving long-term care in
community settings, specifically long-term care facilities, assisted living facilities, and seniors’
residences. According to the Public Health Agency of Canada, more than 50% of COVID-19 deaths in
Canada have occurred in long-term care facilities (with a proportion varying from 0% in smaller
provinces and territories, to 42% in Ontario, 57% in Nova Scotia, and 72% in Québec. Eighty percent of
the deaths in long-term care facilities occurred in Quebec (53%) and Ontario (27%). Even residents of
facilities not affected directly by the disease are facing social isolation and reduced services.
• Health Minister Mandate Letter
The Government of Canada has committed to work in partnership with provinces and territories to
strengthen our universal public health care system and public health supports, so all Canadians can get
the care they need no matter where they live. Collaboration with provinces and territories will be key to
ensuring the primary care system is positioned for the future, including accessible health system data, as
well as working to improve the quality and availability of long-term care. Specific commitments include:
o Negotiating agreements with provinces and territories to support efforts to improve the quality
and availability of long-term care homes and beds. This includes working with provinces and territories
to improve infection prevention andcontrol measures, identify shared principles, and develop national
standards and a Safe Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve.
o Work with the Minister of Employment, Workforce Development and Disability Inclusion and
provincesand territories to train up to 50,000 new personal support workers and raise wages
o In this, the UN Decade of Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promoting seniors’ physical and mental
health to enable them to live longer at home, including by supporting the Minister of Seniors in their
work to establish an expert panel to provide recommendations for establishing an Aging at Home
Benefit.
KEY MESSAGES
• The COVID-19 pandemic continues to highlight longstanding challenges in long-term care,
including gaps in infection prevention and control, staffing, infrastructure, and visitation policies.
• Our Government has made significant investments in long-term care since the pandemic began,
including up to $4B billion dollars to help provinces and territories improve thestandard of care in those
facilities.
• In the Speech from the Throne, we have reiterated our commitment to strengthen health care
for everyone including seniors and persons with disabilities; we know there is work to be done to better
meet long-term careneeds.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to improve access to quality long-
term care and to support training and better wages for personal support workers.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON STANDARDS FOR LONG-TERM CARE…
• The past two years have been devastating for Canadians in long-term care, their families, and
for the hardworking people who care for them. Canadians deserve to feel confident in the care seniors
receive.
• We welcome the news that the Health Standards Organization and the CSA Group have
conducted extensive consultation and have released their draft LTC standards for public review.
• This is an important step to improving care for seniors that will set the bar higher for safe and
respectful care in these facilities.
• We look forward to working with provinces and territories to use the standards to drive lasting
change.
IF PRESSED ON WORK ON THE SAFE LONG-TERMCARE ACT…
• As long-term care falls under provincial and territorial jurisdiction, any legislation will be
designed in a manner that reflects jurisdictional responsibilities.
• The federal government will work collaboratively with provinces and territories, while
respecting their jurisdiction over health care, including long-term care.
IF PRESSED ON MOTION M-47…
• Iwould like to thank my colleague, the honourable Member for Avalon, for raising this motion
about a critical part of our health care system.
• The federal government has made significant investments to support vulnerable Canadians and
the workforce that supports them.
• We will continue to work in partnership with provinces and territories to strengthen our long-
term care system so that all Canadians can get the high quality care they need, no matter where they
live.
BACKGROUND
Long-term Care in Canada
• Healthcare is a shared responsibility between the Government of Canada and provincial and
territorial governments.
• While the federal government provides financial support to the provinces and territories for
health care services, the responsibility for matters related to the administration and delivery of these
services, including long-term care, falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction.
• While the Canada Health Act (CHA) covers physician and hospital services, long-term care is not
publicly insured under the CHA.
• While not mandatory, every PT has LTC legislation, regulations, policies and/or standards, but
variations and gaps exist in oversight, infection prevention and control, quality of care and workforce.
Situation in LTC homes throughout the COVID-19 pandemic
A number of long-standing issues in long-term care have been starkly revealed by the COVID-19
pandemic. This includes issues related to infection prevention and control; HHR; compliance with
standards and regulations; infrastructure; and PPE. Many LTC facilities in Canada suffered major COVID-
19 outbreaks and numerous deaths occurred. At the peak of the first wave, outbreaks in LTC and
seniors’ homes accounted for 81% of deaths in Canada. Many stakeholders have released reportsand
recommendations on addressing issues faced in LTC facilities.
Reports and recommendations
On March 30, 2021, CIHI released a report titled: Long-term care and COVID-19: The first 6 months. This
report examines the pandemic experience in LTC facilitiesacross all provinces and territories. This report
highlighted that:
• COVID-19 cases among residents of LTC and retirement homes increased by more than two-
thirds during Wave 2 compared with Wave 1.
• Compared with pre-pandemic years, in Wave 1, LTC residents had fewer physician visits; fewer
hospital transfers; and less contact with friends and family, which is associated with higher rates of
depression.
• In all provinces where it could be measured, the total number of resident deaths was higher
than normal during this period, even in places with fewer COVID-19 deaths.
• Provincial and national inquiries (to date) on COVID-19 in LTC have made similar
recommendations and speak to long-standing concerns in the sector.
Since the onset of COVID-19, a numberof organizations such as the Royal Society of Canada, Ontario
Long-Term Care Association and the Registered Nurses Association of Ontario, have released reports
calling for action from the Government of Canada to improve the quality of care for seniors living in LTC
facilities. Recommendations for improving LTC include:
• increasing procurement of personal protective equipment
• addressing workforce issues (e.g. increased staffing, national human resources strategy,
improved pay/benefits)
• providing capital investment to build and redevelop existing LTC homes
• developing national standards,
• enhancing data collection
• planning for management of resurgence of COVID-19
• Improving access to rapid testing
Current situation and investigations in long-term care facilities
As the Omicron wave continues to subside, many LTC restrictions across provinces and territories are
being loosened. This includes the ability for residents to have additional visitors, greater social
interaction among visitors, as well as the ability to leave facilities with family or friends.
Several provinces have launched inquiry processes related to long-term care facilities, including Alberta,
Manitoba, Ontario, Quebec, Nova Scotia, and Prince Edward Island. The majority of theongoing
investigations do not have set timelines for reporting results. Several provinces have already announced
initiatives to address gaps in LTC.
Government of Canada initiatives to support PT actions in Long-term Care
The Government of Canada has worked collaboratively with provinces and territories throughout the
COVID-19 pandemic to protect vulnerable Canadians in long-term care. The federal government has
responded to COVID-19 through a number of initiatives.
Budget 2021
Budget 2021 builds upon previous COVID measures taken by the Government of Canada to support
seniors and vulnerable populations across the country. Commitments included:
• $3B billion over five years to Health Canada to support provinces and territories in ensuring that
standardsfor long-term care are applied and permanent changes are made.
• $41.3 million over six years, and $7.7 million ongoing, starting in 2021-22, for Statistics Canada
to improve data infrastructure and data collection on supportive care, primary care, and
pharmaceuticals.
• $90M million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to Employment and Social Development
Canada (ESDC) to launch the Age Well at Home initiative. This would assist community-based
organizations in providing practical support that helps low-income and otherwise vulnerable seniors age
in place.
• Increasing Old Age Security for seniors 75 and over, beginning in 2022.
• $27.6 million over three years for a Group Tax-Free Savings Account to support retirement
saving for personal support workers.
• $960M million over three years for a new Sectoral Workforce Solutions Program, led by ESDC.
The purpose of the program is to help sectors design and deliver relevant training, and connect
Canadians with the training they need to access good jobs. For the health sector, this would include the
need for more skilled personal support workers.
Fall Economic Statement 2020
In addition to the $1Bbillion in funding for the Safe LTC Fund, the Fall Economic Statement committed:
• $6.4 million to the LTC+ initiative to expand to support up to 1,000 facilities across Canada. The
goal is to better position participating facilities to prevent and manage any future outbreaks.
Participating teams receive seed funding to support needed improvements, access to training sessions
and materials, and coaching on the implementation of the program’s key components.
• $38.5 million over two years to Employment and Social Development Canada to support training
up to 4,000 personal support worker interns through an accelerated 6-week online training program
combined with a 4-month work placement, to address acute labour shortages in long-term care and
home care.
In addition, the Government of Canada:
• Invested billions of dollars to procure personal protective equipment (PPE) andcontinued to
work with the provinces and territories to ensure LTC facilities have access to the protection they need.
• Proactively purchased and deployed high dose flu vaccine for all LTC residents in Canada, to
prevent twin illnesses of seasonal influenza and COVID-19 in LTC homes.
• Prioritized LTC and congregate living settings for vaccination, with most residents and staff
having already received at least two doses.
• Created volunteer inventories to support public health response, including in the LTC sector.
• Developed infection prevention and control guidance specific to LTC and congregate living
settings.
• Deployed the Canadian Armed Forces and the Canadian Red Cross to LTC homes to respond to
urgent needs.
• Provided up to $3 billion in federalfunding to support provinces and territories to increase the
wages of low-income essential workers, which included front line workers in hospitals and LTC facilities.
• Invested $740 million in the Safe Restart Agreements to support provinces and territories,
including to address the immediate needs in LTC.
• Created a new temporary COVID Resilience stream under the Investing in Canada Infrastructure
Program for quick-start, short-term projects, including in LTC.
• Accelerated training for up to 4000 personal support worker interns to address critical labour
shortages in LTC facilities and home care.
Third-party standards development process and Safe Long-Term Care Act
The new National Standards of Canada for long-term care being developed by the HSO andCSA Group
will take into account lessons learned from the COVID-19 pandemic and incorporate the latest evidence-
informed, people-centred requirements of quality care and services. The standards will address both the
delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality care, and the health infrastructure and environmental design
of long-term care facilities. The process is being undertaken by expert standards development
organizations, and is taking place at arms-length from the Government of Canada with broad
engagement.
The Health Standards Organization released their draft standards for public consultation on January 27,
2022. Its standard focuses on the delivery of safe, reliable and high-quality LTC services. CSA Group’s
standard will be released on February 11, 2022, and focus on safe operating practices and infection
prevention and control measures in LTC homes. Both sets of standards have a consultation period of 60
days. Final standards will be released in late 2022.
The Government has reiterated the commitment to national LTC standards in the Minister of Health’s
most recent mandate letter: “This includes working with provinces and territories to improve infection
prevention and control measures, identify shared principles, and develop national standards and a Safe
Long-Term Care Act to ensure seniors get the care they deserve”. We will continue to work with
provinces and territories to monitor progress on improvements in LTC, including using federal funding,
and consider how these new standards might inform federal legislation.
Private Member’s Motion M-47, Improvements to Long-Term Care
The motion brought forward by the Liberal Member for Avalon, Ken McDonald, on February 7, 2022,
calls upon the House to recognize the long-standing issues affecting LTC that have been exposed by the
COVID-19 pandemic and to work with the provinces and territories to ensure that working conditions
and standards of care provide for safer and better care for seniors. These improvements are as follows:
“[...] the government should work with PTs to (i) improve the quality and availability of LTC homes and
beds; (ii) implement strict infection prevention and control measures, including through more provincial
and territorial facility inspections for LTC homes; and (iii) develop asafe LTC act collaboratively to ensure
that seniors are guaranteed the care they deserve, no matter where they live.”
The motion repeats the commitments made in the Liberal Party of Canada’s electoral platform in fall
2021. These platform commitments are reiterated almost entirely in the Minister of Health’s mandate
letter.
Federal government ownership of long-term care facilities
The federal government does not own any long-term care facilities, including federal departments
responsible for the delivery of long-term care (i.e., Veterans Affairs Canada (VAC), Indigenous Services
Canada).
MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING (MAID)–SAFE IMPLEMENTATION OF RECENT LEGISLATIVE
AMENDMENTS
ISSUE
• Work is underway to implement a number offederal commitments as a result of legislative
amendments (former Bill C-7) relating to medical assistance in dying (MAID) that passed in March 2021.
The new law removes the eligibility requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably
foreseeableand includes additional safeguards for these new types of requests. These changes are
already in place. The law also mandates a Parliamentary Review of the legislation and an independent
review of MAID for persons suffering from mental illness, as well aschanges to the data collection
regulations, which are ongoing.
KEY FACTS
• In April 2021, a Special Joint Committee on MAID was struck to conduct the Parliamentary
Review; it met three times prior to the dissolution of Parliament. The Committee is expected to resume
its work early in 2022, and submit its recommendations by May 2022.
• In July 2021, Ministers of Justice and Health initiated an independent expert panel tasked with
making recommendations on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons suffering from
mental illness. The legislation stipulates that the Panel’s final report be provided to the Ministers by
March 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• The new law introduces significant changes in Canada’s framework for medical assistance in
dying (MAID). It removes the requirement that an individual’s death must be reasonably foreseeable in
order to be eligible, while including additional safeguards for this broader group of individuals. Data
collection for the federal monitoring system will be enhancedto provide more comprehensive picture of
who is requesting and receiving MAID.
• While these changes arise from a Court decision, they respond to the wishes of Canadians
expressed through public consultations and debated fully in the House of Commons andthe Senate.
• The Government continues to work closely with provincial and territorial governments, medical
experts and other stakeholders to support the safe implementation of legislative amendments arising
from Bill C-7.
IF PRESSED ON THEPARLIAMENTARY REVIEW PROCESS …
• The Government of Canada recognizes that other important issues related to MAID remain to be
explored.
• As set out in the legislation, a parliamentary review of the MAID legislation will consider areas
such as the eligibility ofmature minors, advance requests, mental illness, palliative care and the
protection of Canadians living with disabilities.
• The Government will do whatever is required to support this work.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF THE NEW LEGISLATIONON PROVINCES AND TERRITORIES …
• We recognize that the changes to the MAID regime present new challenges for provincial and
territorial governments and practitioners.
• We are working in close collaboration with provinces and territories to help ensure safe,
sensitive and consistent interpretation and application of the law in health systems across the country.
IF PRESSED ON THE TOPIC OF MAID FORPERSONS WITH A MENTAL ILLNESS…
• The Government of Canada recognizes the concerns and the challenges associated with allowing
MAID for individuals suffering solely from mental illness.
• That is why the new legislation included a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID
requests where mental illness is the sole condition. This was accompanied by a requirement for the
Ministers of Health and Justice to initiate an independent review to consider protocols, guidance and
safeguards that would be applied to MAID requests from persons who have a mental illness.
• In July 2021, members of the Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness were appointed and
began their work. The legislation stipulates that a final report containing the Panel’s conclusions and
recommendations be provided to Ministers by March 2022 and tabled in Parliament shortly thereafter.
• Parliamentarians and health professional regulatory bodies and associations will have a year to
consider and act on the advice of the Expert Panel.
IF PRESSED ON CHANGES TO THE MAID MONITORING REGULATIONS …
• Work is underway on amendments to the regulations to align with therevised eligibility criteria
and safeguards, as well as other data collection requirements set out in the new legislation.
• The legislation requires that data be collected with respect to race or Indigenous identity and
disability (with the consent of theindividual). Expanding the MAID monitoring regime in this way will
help determine whether there are any inequalities or disadvantages based on these or other
characteristics in the provision of MAID.
• The Government is consulting with a broad range of stakeholders, including groups representing
persons experiencing inequalities. These consultations will help identify the information that needs to
be collected and how collection can be undertaken in a way that is respectful, inclusive and does not
impose an unreasonable burden on clinicians who are legally obligated to provide the data.
BACKGROUND
BILL C-7, AN ACT TO AMEND THE CRIMINAL CODE (MEDICAL ASSISTANCE IN DYING)
On September 11, 2019, the Superior Court of Quebec ruled in favour of two plaintiffs(Jean Truchon
and Nicole Gladu) who had challenged the Criminal Code eligibility requirement that an individual’s
natural death be reasonably foreseeable and the more stringent provincial requirement for a person to
be at the end of life. The governmentsof Canada and Quebec did not appeal the decision.
On February 24, 2020, the federal government tabled proposed amendments to the 2016 Criminal Code
provisions on MAID (Bill C-7) in response to Truchon. The Bill was terminated with the prorogation of
Parliament but was re-introduced on October 5, 2020 (its content was unchanged). It received Royal
Assent on March 17, 2021.
The new MAID legislation:
• removes the requirement for a person’s natural death to be reasonably foreseeable in order to
be eligiblefor MAID
• introduces a two-track approach to procedural safeguards based on whether or not a person’s
natural death is reasonably foreseeable
o existing safeguards are maintained and, in some cases, eased for eligible persons whose natural
death is reasonably foreseeable
o new and strengthened safeguards are introduced for eligible persons whose natural death is not
reasonably foreseeable
• temporarily excludes eligibility for individuals suffering solely from mental illness for 24 months,
and requires theMinisters of Justice and Health to initiate an expert review tasked with making
recommendations within the next year on protocols, guidance and safeguards for MAID for persons
suffering from mental illness
• allows eligible persons whose natural death isreasonably foreseeable, and who have a set date
to receive MAID, to waive final consent if they are at risk of losing capacity in the interim
• requires expanded data collection and analysis through the federal monitoring regime to
provide a more completeand inclusive picture of MAID in Canada
PARLIAMENTARY REVIEW OF MAID LEGISLATION
The new legislation also required that a Parliamentary Review be initiated within 30 days following Royal
Assent. The review is expected to address (but not necessarily be limited to) the topics of mature
minors, advance requests, mental illness, the state of palliative care in Canada, and the protection of
Canadians with disabilities.
Members of the Special Joint Committee on Medical Assistance in Dying were named in April2021 in
accordance with the distribution among parties in the House and Senate as stipulated in Bill C-7. The
Committee held just 3 meetings before dissolution. It is anticipated that the Committee will be
reconstituted in the new Parliament early in 2022.Although the new legislation put a 1-year time frame
on the completion of its work, Parliamentarians can extend that time frame if all parties agree.
MENTAL ILLNESS: SUNSET CLAUSE AND INDEPENDENT REVIEW
The new legislation included a 24-month sunset clause on the exclusion of MAID requests from
individuals where mental illness is the sole underlying condition prompting their request for MAID. The
exclusion clause in the legislation sunsets in mid-March 2023, after which time individuals with a mental
illness as their sole condition will be able to request and receive MAID, providing they meet all other
eligibility criteria including those that define a grievous andirremediable medical condition.
The sunset clause is accompanied by a legislative requirement that an independent review be initiated
to consider protocols, guidance and safeguards to apply to MAID requests by persons who have a
mental illness as their sole condition.
The Expert Panel on MAID and Mental Illness was launched in July 2021 to undertake this work. It
includes experts from a range of disciplines and perspectives, including clinical psychiatry, MAID
assessment and provision, law, ethics, health professional training and regulation, mental health care
services, as well as lived experience with mental illness. The legislation stipulates that a report
containing the conclusions and recommendations of the Expert Panel be provided to Ministers no later
than 12 months after the day Bill C-7 came into force (i.e., by March 17, 2022), and tabled in Parliament
very shortly thereafter.
MAID STATISTICS AND MONITORING REGIME
Under the original MAID legislation passed in 2016, the federal Minister of Health was obligated to
develop regulations for the collection data and annual public reporting on MAID in Canada. The first
report was released in July 2020. The second annual report was released in July 2021 summarizing data
collected for the 2020 calendar year.
The second annual report indicates that, in 2020, there were 7,595 reported cases of MAID, accounting
for 2.5% of all deaths (this percentage is in the median relative to other permissive jurisdictions). This
represents an increase of 34.2% over 2019 when there were 5,631 reported cases of MAID. All provinces
have experienced a steady yearover year growth in the number of MAID cases since 2016. When all
data sources are considered, the total number of medically assisted deaths reported in Canada from the
enactment of federal legislation in 2016 to December 31, 2020 was 21,589.
CHANGES TO DATA COLLECTION
Now that Bill C-7 has received Royal Assent, Health Canada officials are working on amendments to the
regulations to align with the revised eligibility criteria and safeguards, as well as other data collection
requirements set out in the newlegislation. The legislation requires that data be collected with respect
to race or Indigenous identity and disability (with the consent of the individual). Expanding the MAID
monitoring regime in this way will help to determine whether there are any inequalities or
disadvantages based on these or other characteristics in the provision of MAID.
The Government is consulting with a broad range of stakeholders, including groups representing
persons experiencing inequalities, to help identify the informationthat needs to be collected and how
collection can be undertaken in a way that is respectful, inclusive and does not impose an unreasonable
burden on clinicians who are legally obligated to provide the data. It is anticipated that the draft
regulations will be published in Canada Gazette, Part 1 in May 2022 for a 30-day day public comment
period, with the amended regulations coming into force by January 1, 2023.
FUNDING FOR MAID INITIATIVES
Expanded access to MAID (as codified in the new legislation) increases the complexity of eligibility
assessments and requires the administration of stronger safeguards aimed at protecting vulnerable
people who might be induced to seek an assisted death. Budget 2021 provided $13.2 million to Health
Canada over five years,beginning in 2021-22, with $2.6 million per year ongoing, to support the
development of training and guidance materials for practitioners, as well as a policy driven research
agenda. This investment will contribute to an enhanced knowledge base to supportsafe, sensitive and
consistent implementation of the MAID legislation and safeguards across the country.
DENTAL CARE
ISSUE
• Some dental care stakeholders and the New Democratic Party have called for a universal dental
care program.
KEY FACTS
• CurrentDental Care Programs in Canada
According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental services in
2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was publicly
funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based private
health insurance plans.
KEY MESSAGES
• While most Canadians have dental coverage through their employment health plans, we know
there are unmet dental care needs in Canada.
• Dental care is only one aspect of improving health care for Canadians. The Government is
committed to work with provinces and territories to address health needs arising from the pandemic,
but also to improve access to primary care, set standards for long-termcare and address the opioid
epidemic.
BACKGROUND
• During the 2019 election campaign, the New Democratic Party (NDP) identified inequality and
wasted spending related to dental care as an issue, citing that care avoidance due to cost results in
preventable oral health emergency room spending. The NDP planned to address this issue through a
national, income-based “Denticare” plan that would have provided free care for households earning
under $70,000 annually, and a sliding co-payment scale for those earning between $70,000 and
$90,000.
• In October 2020, the Parliamentary Budget Officer published a cost estimate of a federal dental
care program for uninsured Canadians with a total household income below $90,000. It is estimated
that this program wouldcost close to $11 billion over five years (a one-time upfront cost of around $3
billion to clear accumulated care needs, plus ongoing program costs of around $1.5 billion annually
through 2024-25). The program was estimated to benefit close to 6.5 millionCanadians in the first year,
and decrease to 6.3 million by 2025 due to changes in population and labour market conditions.
• In the 2021 election, the NDP committed to “work together with provincial partners, health
professionals and dentists to developa roadmap to incorporate universal dental care into Canada’s
public health care system, and immediately deliver dental care coverage for people who don’t have any
private insurance.” According to the NDP, dental coverage would cost $11 billion in the first five years.
Current Dental Care Programs in Canada
• According to the Canadian Institute for Health Information, $15.9 billion was spent on dental
services in 2018: 55% was covered through private insurance; 39% was paid out-of-pocket; and 6% was
publicly funded. About two-thirds of Canadians receive dental coverage through employment-based
private health insurance plans.
• Provinces and territories (PTs) provide emergency, in-hospital medically necessary dental care
for all residents. Additional PT programs vary in eligibility and coverage, and are limited to select
services for groups such as those with low incomes, people with disabilities, children, and seniors.
• Federal support for dental care includes:
o The federal government provides recognized First Nations and Inuit with dental coverage for
services not available under other FPT programs. The Government also provides dental services to
Canadian Armed Forces personnel, inmates in federal penitentiaries,and some veterans and refugee
claimants.
o Federal public servants are provided with dental coverage through the Government of Canada’s
employee benefits program.
o The Canada Health Transfer is providing $41.9 billion to the provinces and territories in2020-21,
which is used to support health services (including PT dental programs if they choose).
o The federal government supports Canadians with private health insurance by not including the
value of these insurance plans in the taxable income of employees. In addition, the income tax system
provides assistance through the Medical Expenses Tax Credit, and through a refundable medical
expenses supplement available for working individuals with low-incomes and high medical expenses.
• Comprehensive data does not exist on unmet dental care needs at a national level in Canada. A
campaign led by the Canadian Association of Public Health Dentistry suggests that 1 in 5 people (6
million Canadians) are not receiving needed dental care due to cost, and that only Canadians with
financial resources or insurance can experience good oral health.
DIGITAL SUPPORTS AND VIRTUAL CARE
ISSUE
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada put in place a range of
digital supports to help Canadiansget the information, resources and care they need.
KEY FACTS
• In May 2020, $240.5 million was committed to support Canadian health systems to accelerate
their efforts to meet health care needs throughvirtual tools and approaches.
• Of this, $200M issupporting work in health systems to expand deployment of virtual care.
Funding also helped launch a suite of digital tools, including an online self-assessment tool, a mobile app
to provide trusted information and resources and an online portal for accessto mentalhealth and
wellness supports.
• Budget 2021 provided an additional $62 million in 2021-22 for the Wellness Together Canada
portal for continued services to support the mental health and well-being of Canadians, bringing the
total investment upto $130 million to date.
KEY MESSAGES
• Canadians need access to readily available digital tools and resources to help during the COVID-
19 pandemic, including education, information, mental health and substance use supports, alerts,
screening tools.
• The Government of Canada is working closely with provinces and territories, vendors and
stakeholders to make these tools widely available to Canadians and their families.
• This investment is supporting virtual care services so that Canadians can safely engage with their
regular health providers through telephone, text or video-conferencing, to have their health needs met.
It also means they can continue to access specialist services throughout this time of uncertainty.
• This investment also enabled creation of Wellness Together Canada, a free online portal of
virtual mental health and substance use supports. By using the portal, individuals have free access to
different levels of mental health and substance use support 24 hours a day, 7 days a week ranging from
information and self-assessment tools, to support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals for confidential text session or phone calls with instantaneous interpretation in 200
languages.
IF PRESSED ON VIRTUAL CARE
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to support the rapid uptake
anduse of virtual care services.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada helps reduce the pressure on health systems
and provides Canadians with needed health services and authoritative information in a safe and secure
manner, through telephone, text, or video-conferencing, in addition to in-person visits.
• Our government has signed agreements with all provinces and territories, which will provide a
totalof $150M to support enhancements to virtual care.
• In addition, we are providing up to $50M to Canada Health Infoway to develop pan-Canadian
standards on secure messaging and videoconferencing, and provide support to provinces and territories
to implementvirtual care initiatives.
IF PRESSED ON PRIVACY
• Privacy considerations were–and continue to be–front and centre at every stage of these
initiatives.
• Vendors are bound by the privacy protective terms that are inserted in all contracts that involve
personal information.
IF PRESSED ON MENTAL HEALTH AND/OR SUBSTANCE USE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that COVID-19 is creating stress and anxiety for many
Canadians, particularly those who do not have ready access to their regular support networks.
• That is why the Government launched an online portal for mental health and substance use
supports: Wellness Together Canada. The portal makes it easy for individuals living in Canada to access
self-directed tools and find credible information on mental health and substance use issues.
• It also connects individuals across Canada to peer support workers, social workers, psychologists
and other professionals for confidential chat sessions, phone calls and online counselling.à
• The $62 million provided in Budget 2021 will ensure that these valuable services continue to be
available and aligned with the needs of Canadians in 2021-22.
IF PRESSED ON ADDITIONALPLANNED ACTIVITIES IN THIS AREA
• Our government recognizes that this is an unprecedented timefor Canadians, and are
continuing to explore how we can best take action in innovative ways.
• We will continue to work closely with provinces and territories and other partners to evaluate
needs and adapt digital supports as the pandemic evolves.
• Recognizing that virtual care and digital systems are powerful tools to improve access to health
care, the Government committed in its election platform to continue working with provinces and
territories to advance virtual care.
• Health Canada continues tomonitor the Wellness Together Canada portal by supporting data
collection, reporting and evaluation to ensure the portal’s value and impact to Canadians.
BACKGROUND
Support for virtual care (May 3, 2020)
• On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced $240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools
for Canadians. As agreements are finalized and announced, they will be posted onCanada.ca.
• Of this, funding of $150M is flowing to PTs through bilateral agreements for enhancements to
virtual services focused on secure messaging and file transfer, secure videoconferencing, remote patient
monitoring, patient online access to test results, and back-end supports to integrate these tools within
existing digital systems.
• In addition, Canada Health Infoway has received up to $50M to develop pan-Canadian standards
on secure messaging and videoconferencing and support PTs as they implement new initiatives pursuant
to the bilateral agreements. To date, Infoway has led consultations on standards with all jurisdictions,
with a view of identifying key priorities and informing the standards development process.
• Health Canada is working with provinces and territories to identify where support is needed
most on virtual care and supporting infrastructure. As part of this work, Health Canada is supporting key
organizations (Infoway, CIHI, CADTH, Centre for Digital Health Evaluation) to provide insight on the
implementation of virtual care.
COVID-19 self-assessment tool (March 21, 2020-June 20, 2021)
• Developed in collaboration with Health Canada and the Public Health Agency of Canada, this
tool was available to all Canadians through theCanada.cawebsite and the Canada COVID-19 app (see
below). While active, the self-assessment tool provided guidance over 1.6 million times.
• Its intent was to complement PT self-assessment tools and empower Canadians to make
informed decisions on the appropriateness of COVID-19 testing and when to access other resources like
telehealth, primary care providers and emergency departments.
Canada COVID-19 app (March 31, 2020-June 30, 2021)
• Accessible via mobile and web-enabled devices, this nationally available app provided an
integrated platform for Canadians to receive trusted information and engage on issues related to
COVID-19. While active, over 1 million people downloaded the app.
Portal for mental health and substance use supports: Wellness Together Canada (April 15, 2020)
• Wellness Together Canada is a free online portal for virtual mental health and substance use
supports, available 24/7 in all provinces and territories in both official languages. It is available online at
https://ca.portal.gs/
• Depending on their needs, individuals living in Canada can access different levels of support,
ranging from information and self-assessment tools to connecting to peer support workers, social
workers, psychologists and other professionals for confidential text sessions or phone calls. It also
provides individuals living in Canada the opportunity to assess their mental health and monitor their
progress as they engage in their chosen care option.
• Three broad types of supports are available:
o Triage and self-monitoring tools: These are self-directed tools to guide and connect users to
credible and appropriate promotion and prevention resources. They also help with determining the level
of need as well as self-managing mental health and substance use issues.
o Mental health promotion tools and resources: These tools and resources promote mental health
as well as prevent poor mental health, mental illness and problematic substance use. These will focus on
enhancing protective factors (e.g., resilience, coping, social support and social networks) and addressing
risk factors (e.g., substance use, social isolation, discrimination and stigma).
o Live psychosocial supports: The portal also provides confidential triage support, chat sessions,
phone calls and online counselling with peer support workers, social workers, psychologists and other
professionals.
• These supports complement, and do not replace, existing provincial and territorial services. Use
of Wellness Together Canada is closely monitored to ensure that tools and supports best align with the
needs of Canadians. New resources are continuously added to the portal to support Canadians in
addressing diverse mental health and substance use needs.
Get Updates on COVID-19 (April 30, 2020)
• The Government of Canada put in place an opt-in email subscription service called “Get Updates
on COVID-19.” The service provides valuable updates to thoseCanadians who would like to be alerted to
updates on the COVID-19 situation in Canada.
CovidTrends through the WeatherCAN app
• CovidTrends, a tool from the Public Health Agency of Canada is available through Environment
and Climate Change Canada’s WeatherCAN app and provides Canadians with summary data about
COVID-19 that is specific to their area.
Health Canada continues to explore other digital tools with a view to providing Canadians with the
information and resources they need to stay safe and healthy during the COVID-19 pandemic.
PRIMARY CARE
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada recognizes that primary care plays a critical role in the delivery of
healthcare services for Canadians and is the backbone to highperforming healthcare systems.
• In 2020, the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health systems to support
access to health care services, including primary care, through virtual approaches and digitaltools.
• The Government of Canada is committed to improving access to high-quality primary care and
continues to work with provinces andterritories in this regard.
KEY FACTS
• In Election 2021, our Government outlined continued support for primary and virtual care.
These election promises include:
o $3.2B to PTs for hiring 7,500 new doctors, nurses, and nurse practitioners;
o $6B to support the elimination of health system waitlists;
o $400M (over 4 years) to improve access to virtual care; and,
o Expanding access to family doctors and primary health teams in rural areas.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importanceof high-quality primary care and
acknowledges that many Canadians are still struggling to access the carethey need in a timely manner.
• In 2020, the Prime Minister committed $240.5M to help Canadian health system to support
access to health care services and meet the health care needs of Canadians through virtual approaches
and digital tools, including supporting access to primary care, particularly in northern, rural and remote
communities.
• Going forward, the Government of Canada will continue to workwith provinces and territories
to support the delivery of and access to high-quality primary care in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON FUNDING FOR PRIMARY CARE
• The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories to support the rapid uptake
and useof virtual care services, supported by $150M in fundingthrough bilateral agreements.
• Supporting the expansion of virtual care in Canada provides Canadians with new ways to access
the primary care services on which they rely, while reducing pressure on in-person health services
during the pandemic.
• Through this investment, we have been able to work jointly with provinces and territories to
develop secure messaging and information-sharing platforms, secure video-conferencing technology,
remote patient monitoring tools, ensuring access to COVID-19 and other lab results.
• We will continueto work with provinces and territories to identify innovative ways to support
improved access to high-quality primary care services.
BACKGROUND
Primary care is the backbone of high-performing healthcare systems. It serves a dual function in the
healthcare system as the direct provision of first-contact services and a coordination function to ensure
continuity across health care settings. However,Canadians continue to struggle to access primary care.
In 2020, 14.2% of Canadians 12 years and over lacked a regular health care provider1.
Health is a shared responsibility in Canada, with the federal government and the provinces and
territories havingdistinct roles. While primary responsibility for delivery of health care services to
Canadians falls within provincial and territorial jurisdiction, the federal government sets and administers
national standards for publicly insured health services through the Canada Health Act, and provides
funding support for provincial and territorial health care services through the Canada Health Transfer.
Therefore, the department continues to work closely with FPT partners to advance primary care
priorities.
Virtual care is increasingly recognized as an important component of high-quality care and can help
support access to primary care, particularly in northern, rural and remote communities. The adoption of
virtual care accelerated as a health system response to the COVID-19 pandemic in order to sustain
access to primary care and specialist health services. On May 3, 2020, the Prime Minister announced
$240.5M to support virtual care and digital tools for Canadians. $150M of this funding is being provided
to provinces and territories through bilateral agreements to enhance virtual services.
Health Canada has been collaborating with provinces, territories and other partners to identify ways in
which primary care system could be strengthened to:
• Ensure every Canadian has timely access to a family practitioner, and
• Leverage virtual care to support access to and delivery of high-quality healthcare, including
within the context of primary care.
In Election 2021, our Government outlined continued support for primaryand virtual care. These
election promises include:
• $3.2B to PTs for hiring 7,500 new doctors, nurses, and nurse practitioners;
• $6B to support the elimination of health system waitlists;
• $400M (over 4 years) to improve access to virtual care; and,
• Expanding access to family doctors and primary health teams in rural areas.
1Statistics Canada. Table 13-10-0096-16 Has a regular healthcare provider, by age group
https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1310009616
ACCESS TO SEXUAL ANDREPRODUCTIVE HEALTH CARE INFORMATION AND SERVICES
ISSUE
• Currently, women, youth, LGBTQ2 people, racialized Canadians, and Indigenous populations
face the highest sexual and reproductive health risks and the greatest barriers to accessing support,
information, and services. Too often, they do not receive the same quality of care, particularly if they are
from marginalized communities.
KEY FACTS
• Investment of $45M over three years to help make sexual and reproductive health care
information and services more accessible to Canadians.
• Investment of $7.6M over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill existing
information gaps and help us target appropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for Canadians.
KEY MESSAGES
• All Canadians should have access to a full suite of sexual and reproductive health resources and
services, no matter where they live.
• We are investing $45 million over three years to help make sexual and reproductive health care
information and services more accessible to Canadians.
• We will fund community-based organizations to produce inclusive training materials for sexual
and reproductive health care providers, work with providers to develop and implement best practices,
carry out public awareness activities, and provide travel and logistical support to access abortion care.
IF PRESSED ON DATA…
• We are also investing $7.6 million over five years for Statistics Canada to collect data that will fill
existing information gaps and help us targetappropriate sexual and reproductive health supports for
Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON ABORTION SERVICES…
• Our Government believes that Canadians should have access to the full range of reproductive
health services, including abortion services.
• Individuals should not face charges when seeking these insured services regardless of where the
services are provided.
• The Canada Health Act is clear: where there is evidence of patient charges, a mandatory
deduction to federal health transfer payments to the province or territory must be taken.
• Our Government will uphold the Canada Health Act to help ensure that patients do not face
barriers when accessing medically necessary health care.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER THE GOVERNMENT WILL PROVIDE FUNDING TO ORGANIZATIONS OFFERING
ALTERNATIVES TO ABORTION (I.E. CONTINUING THE PREGNANCY).
• One element of this initiative will provide funding to support travel and logistical costs for
individuals who would not otherwise be able to access abortions. Other elements of the funds will
support initiatives to help improve access and improve professional skills and competencies in a broad
range of sexual and reproductive health issues.
• This fund will not support initiatives that discourage or are opposed to freedom of choice or
attempt to override the individual’s right to make decisions about their own body.
BACKGROUND
The Government of Canada has made strong commitments to gender equality, using a feminist lens, and
realizing and protecting sexual and reproductive health rights.
Key barriers and challenges related to inequitable and variable access to sexual and reproductive health
services remain. Women, members of LGBTQ2 communities, youth, racialized Canadians and Indigenous
peoples face the highest sexual and reproductivehealth risks and the greatest barriers to accessing
support, information, and services.
An initial targeted call for proposals inviting select organizations to submit applications for funding was
launched on July 29th, 2021 and closed October 4, 2021. Contribution agreements are now being
finalized. A subsequent solicitation will follow to address any remaining gaps and ensure the priorities of
the initiative are adequately addressed.
Canada’s current national-level data on sexual and reproductive health is limited to a narrow range of
indicators. There is insufficient data available to support understanding and evidence-based decision-
making to address a full range of key indicators of sexual and reproductive health, including prevalence
of sexually transmitted infections, contraception use, pregnancy intention, and sexual knowledge and
behaviours.
Patient charges for abortion services
Patient charges for abortion services received in private clinics are considered extra-billing and user
charges under the Canada Health Act and raise concerns under the accessibility and comprehensiveness
criteria of the Act. In New Brunswick, Regulation 84-20 of the NB Medical Services Payment Act limits
coverage of surgical abortion services to approved hospitals (three NB hospitals currently offer the
service–two in Moncton and one in Bathurst). This means that individuals who receive these services at
the private clinic in Fredericton are required to pay out-of-pocket. In March 2021, NB’s CHT payments
were reduced by $64,850 in light of patient charges for medically necessary abortion services in Clinic
554 during fiscal year 2019-2020.
Evidence indicates that some private abortion clinics in Ontario (ON) charge to access insured surgical
abortion services. While the Ontario Health Insurance Plan provides coverage for physicians' fees related
to abortion services in all private clinics, the province only covers facility fees in the four private abortion
clinics licensed as Independent Health Facilities (IHF). Health Canada has advised ON that patient
charges being levied in non-IHF clinics are user charges under the CHA, and based on patient charges
reported by ON to Health Canada, a deduction of $13,905 was levied against the province’s CHT
payment in March 2021.
HEALTHY EATING STRATEGY
ISSUE
• In October 2016, Health Canada launched the multi-yearHealthy Eating Strategy, which consists
of a suite of initiatives that aim to improve the food environment and help make the healthier choice
the easier choice for all Canadians. Recognizing that a healthy population is key to reducing vulnerability
to health events, the 2021 Minister of Health mandate letter included a commitment to promote
healthy eating by advancing the Healthy Eating Strategy. This includes finalizing front-of-package
labelling and supporting restrictions on the commercial marketing offood and beverages to children.
KEY FACTS
• Obesity and diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the Canadian
health care system, and we know now that they increase the risk of COVID-19 severity and mortality.
• Since 2016, ourGovernment has taken a number of steps to help make it easier to choose
heathier foods.
• The food guide is a mobile-friendly web application that provides Canadians with easier access
to information about healthy eating. It provides advice on what to eatand recognizes that healthy
eating is more than food choices, by encouraging healthy eating habits.
• Health Canada has continued to advance work on front-of-pack (FOP) nutrition labelling and
restricting food advertising to children.
KEY MESSAGES
• Obesity and diet-related chronic diseases are critical issues for Canadians and the Canadian
health care system. We now know that they increase the risk of COVID 19 severity and mortality.
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health of Canadians andcreating conditions to
make the healthier choice easier for all.
• Significant progress has been made by improving nutrition labelling, eliminating industrial trans
fats in the food supply, releasing a new Canada’s Food Guide, and publishing new sodiumreduction
tagets for processed foods.
• Although more remains to be done, we have also continued to advance work on front-of-pack
nutrition labelling and restricting food advertising to children.
IF PRESSED ON FRONT-OF-PACK NUTRITION LABELLING…
• Poor diet, particularly a diet high in sodium, sugars and saturated fat, is one of the major risk
factors for chronic diseases.
• In 2018, Health Canada proposed a FOP nutrition labelling system to help Canadians quickly and
easily identify foods high in sugars, sodium or saturated fat.
• Following extensive consultations and consumer research, Health Canada has considered all
feedback and evidence received to inform adjustments to the proposal.
• Publication of the final FOP nutrition labelling in Canada Gazette, Part II, was delayed due to the
unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic.
• However, as stated in the Minister of Health’s December 2021 mandate letter, Health Canada
remains committed to finalizing FOP labelling regulations to promote healthy food choices and is
working towards publishing the final regulations.
• The Department will engage with health and industry stakeholders as we finalize the FOP
labelling regulations.
• This will provide them with an opportunity to be aware of the changes that were made to the
proposed regulations based on the feedback received during the 2018 formal consultation, ask
questions and share comments.
IF PRESSED ON ADVERTISING TO CHILDREN…
• Since 2016, the Government has been working towards reducing children’s exposure to food
advertising.
• Our Government remains committed to supporting restrictions on the advertising of certain
foods to children, in order to protect them from the risks of chronic diseases caused by an unhealthy
diet.
• In June 2021, a cohort of industry stakeholders launched a self-regulatory advertising Code, to
be implemented by summer 2023.
• In February 2022, my colleague Ms. Patricia Lattanzio M.P. introduced a Private Member’s Bill,
Bill C-252, to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children.
• Health Canada is actively reviewing the content of the Bill to determine the types of protection
it could offer. We are encouraged to see continued support for a range of approaches to restricting
advertising to children and protecting their health.
• Health Canada also continues its work, including reviewing international initiatives and new
evidence as well as the results of its monitoring activities on advertising practices to children, to
determine an appropriate approach to supporting restrictions in Canada.
• Health Canada remains committed to engaging with all key stakeholders including health and
industry organizations as we move forward.
IF PRESSED ON REVISION OF CANADA’S FOOD GUIDE…
• The new food guide was released in January 2019.
• Canada’s Food Guide is based on a rigorous scientific process using the best available evidence
and extensive consultation.
• The food guide is a mobile-friendly web application that provides Canadians with easier access
to information about healthy eating. It provides advice on what to eat and recognizes that healthy
eating is more than food choices, by encouraging healthy eatinghabits.
• Health Canada continues to develop new resources for various audiences to increase reach and
use of the food guide.
IF PRESSED ON SODIUM REDUCTION…
• Most Canadians still consume too much sodium, which can lead to high blood pressure, a risk
factor for heart disease and stroke.
• Our Government is committed to protecting the health of Canadians and to ongoing work with
food industry to further reduce sodium in processed foods, the main source of sodium in the diet.
• Our Government released revised voluntary sodium reduction targets in December 2020. The
goal of these targets is for the food industry to further reduce the sodium levels in processed foods by
2025.
IF PRESSED ON EVIDENCE…
• Health Canada follows a rigorous scientific process in reviewing pertinent evidence when
developing policies related to the Healthy Eating Strategy.
• Health Canada focuses on the strongest evidence, where there is a well-established evidence
base on public health need, and where the evidence is unlikely to change in the foreseeable future.
IF PRESSED ON OPENNESS AND TRANSPARENCY AND CONSULTATIONS…
• Health Canada remains committed to openness, transparency and meaningful engagement with
the public andstakeholders on healthy eating initiatives.
• Health Canada has conducted public consultations on the revision of the Food Guide, FOP
nutrition labelling, sodium in processed foods, and restrictions on advertising of certain foods to
children.
• All stakeholders, including industry and health organizations, will continue to be invited to
submit comments on Healthy Eating.
BACKGROUND
Health Portfolio Initiatives
Unhealthy diet is a major risk factor for many chronic diseases, such as obesity, diabetes and heart
disease, which are becoming more and more common in Canada. This places a significant burden on the
health of Canadians and our healthcare system. Evidence shows that many factors in our food
environment influence our ability to make healthy food choices and to follow a healthy eating pattern.
An increasing number of foods high in calories, saturated fat, sodium and sugars are readily offered in
multiple settings. There is also a constant flow of changing and often conflicting messages creating
confusion about what to eat. Elements of the healthy eating initiatives include:
• Improving nutrition information and literacy by revising Canada’s Food Guide, and the nutrition
information on food labels by updating the Nutrition Facts table and List of Ingredients and introducing
FOP nutrition labelling.
• Facilitating healthier food options by reducing sodium in processed foods.
• Protecting and supporting marginalized and vulnerable populations by restricting the
advertising of certain foods to children.
Improve nutrition information and literacy
Canada’s food guide
• Canada’s new food guide, released in January 2019, is a mobile-friendly web application that
provides Canadians with easier access to dietary guidance.
• The goal of the revision was to strengthen healthy eating recommendations and communicate
guidance in ways that better meet the needs of different users, such as the public, policy makers and
health professionals.
• Canada’s Food Guide is based on a rigorous scientific process using the best available evidence
and extensive consultation.
• The food guide takes a less prescriptive approach to communicating healthy eating guidance to
Canadians. Canada’s Dietary Guidelines for health professionals and policy makers set out Health
Canada’s guidelines and considerations on healthy eating. The food guide snapshot provides a summary
of the dietary guidelines and healthy eating recommendations, and is available in 31 languages,
including nine Indigenous languages, making it more accessible for Canadians.
• New resources and tools will be developed on an ongoing basis to help Canadians apply
Canada’s new food guide where they live, learn, work and play. This includes expanding the reach of the
food guide to children and youth, developing additional resources for health professionals and policy
makers, supporting publicly funded institutions to adapt their food environments to align with the food
guide, and leveraging existing partnerships with PTs and stakeholders.
• Health Canada continues to work andconsult with interested parties and the public to make
sure that new guidance and resources are relevant and useful. This includes integrating a diversity and
inclusion lens into food guide content and supporting the development of healthy eating tools for
Indigenous Peoples.
Improve the Nutrition Facts table and list of ingredients
• In December 2016, Health Canada published final amendments to the Food and Drug
Regulations on nutrition labelling and food colours, to make the Nutrition Facts table (NFt) and list of
ingredients (LOI) on packaged foods easier for Canadians to use and understand. Key changes include:
regulating serving sizes to make it easier to compare similar products, providing more information on
sugars in the NFt and the LOI and requiring that all food colours be declared by their common name.
• The transition period for these changes ended on December 14, 2021. However, in response to
industry feedback related to challenges caused by the COVID-19 pandemic, flexibility will be providedto
support the food industry. For the first year (until December 14, 2022), the CFIA will focus its efforts on
education and compliance promotion.
• As of December 15, 2022, regulated parties must be compliant with the new regulations. CFIA
will verify compliance and apply enforcement discretion in cases where non-compliant companies have
detailed plans showing how they intend to meet the new requirements at the earliest possible time.
Front-of-package (FOP) nutrition labelling
• Since fall 2016, HealthCanada consulted extensively and meaningfully on the FOP nutrition
labelling proposal. In February 2018, Health Canada published proposed regulations for mandatory FOP
nutrition labelling on foods that are high in sodium, sugars, or saturated fat in CanadaGazette, Part I.
The final FOP nutrition labelling regulations take into account the feedback received but the publication
in the Canada Gazette, Part II, was delayed due to the unprecedented COVID-19 pandemic.
• Evidence shows that obesity and its related health conditions place individuals at increased risk
of COVID-19 severity and mortality.
• The FOP symbol will complement other nutrition information on the label and will help a wider
range of consumers, particularly those vulnerable to poor health outcomes, interpret nutrition
information and make healthier choices.
• Data from countries having implemented mandatory “high in” FOP labelling (e.g. Chile, Israel)
shows that it has resulted in consumers making healthier food purchasing choices.
• As reaffirmed in the December 2021 Minister of Health’s mandate letter, Health Canada
remains committed to finalizing FOP labelling regulations to promote healthy food choices.
Facilitate healthier food options
Reduce sodium in processed foods
• Efforts to reduce sodium have been ongoing. In 2012, Health Canada established voluntary
sodium reduction targets for processed foods and encouraged the food industry to achieve these targets
by the end of 2016.
• In 2018, Health Canada released a progress report that showed that Canadians daily sodium
intake was reduced from 3400 to 2760 mg which remain above the goal of 2300 mg per day.
• In December 2020, Health Canada released revised voluntary sodium targets for processed
foods to encourage the food industry tofurther reduce sodium in foods by 2025.
• Continued efforts are needed for Health Canada to meet the WHO target of achieving a 30%
relative reduction in mean population intake of sodium by 2025. To do so, the current voluntary targets
for processed foodsin Canada should be complemented by implementing FOP nutrition labelling.
Protect and support marginalized and vulnerable populations
Restrict the advertising of certain foods to children
• The government committed to this file in previous mandate letters as well as in 2021.
• In 2016, Bill S-228 was introduced in the Senate to prohibit advertising of certain foods to
children but did not receive Royal Assent.
• Between 2016 and 2019, Health Canada engaged extensively on a policy proposal to
comprehensively restrict advertising to children of foods that contribute to excess intakes of sodium,
sugars and saturated fat.
• In June 2021, a cohort of industry stakeholders publicly announced a new self-regulatory Code
governing food advertising to children, tobe implemented by 2023.
• In February 2022, Ms. Patricia Lattanzio, M.P. (Liberal) introduced a Private Member’s Bill (Bill C-
252–Child Health Protection Act) to prohibit food and beverage marketing directed at children. Health
Canada is actively reviewing the content of the bill to determine the ways in which it would offer
protection and preparing a government response.
ADVANCING RECONCILIATION IN CANADA’S HEALTH SYSTEMS
ISSUE
• Systemic racism has no place in Canada. Unfortunately, Indigenous Peoples continue to
experience racism, discrimination, stigma and bias in many facets, including when interacting with the
health systems, which has been well documented in a number of reports. There are ongoing domestic
and international calls for Canada to implement measures that address racism and discrimination in the
health systems and to demonstrate timely and meaningful progress.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million overthree years, beginning in 2021-22, for Health
Canada and Indigenous Services Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and
discrimination where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe.
KEY MESSAGES
• The federal government is committed to take action to foster health systems free from barriers,
including racism and discrimination.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government is investing funding to support Indigenous organizations
in the development of distinctions-based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism in health systems.
This includes support for activities such as anti-racism and discrimination training, tools and resources
for medical professionals, standards and guidelines for cultural safety.
• The Government of Canada acknowledges that Indigenous Peoples are best placed to determine
and address their health care needs. This investment will ensure that First Nations, Inuit and Métis
peoples are engaged in actions to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination where
Indigenous Peoples are respected and safe and support Indigenous partners to undertake meaningful
engagement on the development of policy and programs for health priorities.
IF PRESSED …
• Health Canada continues to work with Indigenous partners andhealth service providers to
identify and support Indigenous-led solutions to eliminate anti-Indigenous racism across Canada’s health
systems.
BACKGROUND
In September 2020, the death of Joyce Echaquan, an Atikamekw woman from Manawan, Quebec,
sparked widespread indignation, media attention, a public coroner’s inquest, and a lawsuit from
Echaquan's family against the hospital where she suffered racist insults from hospital staff before she
died in Joliette, QC. On November 16th, 2020, the Manawan Atikamekw Council and the Council of the
Atikamekw Nation submitted Joyce’s Principle to the Prime Minister, as well as federal, provincial, and
territorial ministers, which demands that all Indigenous Peoples have an equal right to the highest
standard of physical and mental health, with a right to traditional medicines.
In response to Joyce Echaquan’s death, Ministers Miller, Bennett, Vandal and Hajdu held three National
Dialogues on October 16th, 2020, January 27-28th, 2021, and June 28-29th, 2021, to listen toIndigenous
patients and health service providers regarding their lived experiences with racism, to provide federal,
provincial, and territorial governments and health system partners a platform to present their past,
ongoing, and planned actions to address anti-Indigenous racism in the health systems, and to hear
recommendations from Indigenous Representatives and Health System Partners.
At the January meeting, Minister Hajdu announced $4M in funding to a National Consortium of
Indigenous Medical Education to work on improving the experiences of Indigenous Peoples in medical
school/practices. Minister Miller also announced plans to begin co-developing distinctions-based
Indigenous health legislation and funding of $2M to the Atikamekw Nation and Manawan First Nation to
implement Joyce’s Principle.
Following the January National Dialogue, FPT leaders released a joint statement to express a collective
commitment to working with Indigenous communities, organizations, and leadership to address
Indigenous-specific racism in the health systems. The federal government also committed to hosting a
third national discussion in spring 2021, and its intention to continue to convene thematic, distinctions-
based, and regional roundtable discussions.
The June National Dialogue included breakout sessions where recommendations were heard from
Indigenous Representatives and Health System Partners on the following thematic areas: increasing
Indigenous representation in postsecondary health education, cultural safety and humility, traditional
approaches to health, and safe patient navigation. During the meeting, the Government of Canada
publicly announced funding for specific initiatives to address anti-Indigenous racism in Canada’s health
systems, including Budget 2021 funding for Health Canada’s proposed Addressing Racism and
Discrimination in Canada’s Health Systems Program. Early findings from the January and June 2021
National Dialogues demonstrate the importance of ensuring accountability and distinctions-based
approaches.
While the federal government is working with Indigenous partners on a number of health policy
initiatives, dedicated work must be undertaken to directly address anti-Indigenous racism in the health
systems. The Government has committed to responding to a number of high profile reports and
recommendations to address anti-racism, cultural safety, and safe and equitable care, including the
Truth and Reconciliation Commission’s Calls to Action and the Inquiry into Missing and Murdered
Indigenous Women and Girls’ Calls for Justice. In addition, there are class action lawsuits on forced and
coerced sterilization of Indigenous women in multiple jurisdictions, and both the House of Commons
Standing Committee on Health and the Senate Committeeon Human Rights have undertaken studies on
this issue.
Budget 2021
The Government’s commitment to engaging with Indigenous Peoples has placed a heavy burden on
Indigenous organizations who may not have the capacity to participate in the multiple engagement
requests from the federal government, including Health Canada. This investment will support
Indigenous organizations to build capacity to engage with the Department and will support distinctions-
based measures to address anti-Indigenous racism. Distinctions-based measures contribute to a
meaningful reduction in racism, discrimination, bias and stigma experienced by Indigenous Peoples
when interacting with health systems.
Budget 2021 announced $126.7 million over three years, beginning in 2021-22, for Indigenous Services
Canada and Health Canada to take action to foster health systems free from racism and discrimination
where Indigenous peoples are respected and safe. Prior to this investment, there was no federal funding
available to specifically addressanti-Indigenous racism in the health systems.
PERINATAL MENTAL HEALTH
ISSUE
• Perinatal mental illness is a significant complication of pregnancy and the postpartum period
and refers to mental health conditionsexperienced during this time, including major depressive disorder
and anxiety disorders.
• Addressing perinatal mental health includes more than identifying and treating mental illness
during the perinatal period. Mental health promotion and mental illness prevention activities, such as
improving the mental health literacy of pregnant and postpartum individuals, are a critical part of
addressing perinatal mental health needs.
KEY FACTS
• According to a 2018 Government of Canada survey, almost one quarter(23%) of mothers
reported feelings consistent with either post-partum depression or an anxiety disorder. These reports
varied across provinces, ranging from 16% in Saskatchewan to 31% in Nova Scotia. Covid-19 has
exacerbated the problem; as the rates of perinatal mental health issues and the need for services has
increased, the availability of services has decreased due to shutdowns.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to promoting the mental health and wellbeing of mothers and
children.
• We havemade significant investments in programs that support the mental health of pregnant
and postpartum individuals, including funding for improving community-level access to supports, and
$26.5 million annually for the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program (CPNP), which serves 236 projects with
over 45,000 participants.
• Through such investments and the development of health promotion resources, we are
ensuring timely access to perinatal mental health services, when and where needed.
IF PRESSED ON 2021 MANDATECOMMITMENTS …
• As the first Minister of Mental Health and Addictions, my mandate is to ensure that mental
health care is treated as a full and equal part of our universal health care system, working in close
collaboration with provinces and territories,and to lead a whole-of-society approach to address
problematic substance use in Canada.
• To realize these objectives, I will deliver on several commitments, including ensuring timely
access to perinatal mental health services.
BACKGROUND
The perinatal period includes both pregnancy and the postpartum period. Perinatal mental health is a
state of well-being in which a pregnant or postpartum person realizes their own abilities, can cope with
the normal stresses of life and work productively,care for themselves and their newborn, and is able to
make a contribution to their community and society.
Perinatal mental illness refers to mental health conditions experienced “around” pregnancy. This
includes pre-existing mental health conditions, but can also refer to new or different mental health
concerns arising around this period.
Maternal stress, anxiety and depression are significant public health issues, increasing the risk of poor
mental and physical health outcomes for mothers along with potential impacts for children and families.
If untreated, consequences include prolonged maternal depression, paternal depression, partner
relationship dissatisfaction and conflict, impaired parent-infant interactions and attachment, risk for
impaired cognitive or psychosocial development for the child (and increased risk of later child
psychopathology) and, in extreme situations, maternal suicide or infanticide. Maternal deaths with a
mental health component, by suicide or drug toxicity, are increasingly recognized as making up a
significant proportion of all maternal deaths.
In recent years, some stakeholders have called for greater federal action in the area of perinatal mental
health. On May 13, 2020, a petition was brought forward to create a nationalperinatal mental health
strategy that would provide direction, policy, and funding to develop specialized, comprehensive
perinatal mental health care services. This includes universal screening and timely access to treatment
for all people during pregnancyand the postpartum period.
On May 5, 2021 (World Maternal Mental Health Day), various MP’s offices sent a request to the former
Minister of Health’s Office on behalf of their constituents regarding a National Perinatal Mental Health
Strategy. It was brought forward by MP Heather McPherson (Edmonton-Strathcona).
On June 3, 2021, MP Don Davies (Vancouver-Kingsway) put forward Bill C-306, which calls for a National
Perinatal Mental Health Strategy that includes mental health screening and treatment servicesduring
the full perinatal period. This Bill died on the order paper when Parliament was dissolved in August
2021.
Perinatal Surveillance
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Canadian Perinatal Surveillance System monitors and
reports on maternal,fetal and infant health determinants and outcomes while conducting targeted
epidemiological research to address emerging issues. This program has focused largely on indicators of
physical health, some of which can be associated with maternal mental health(e.g., fetal/infant
mortality, maternal chronic diseases, smoking, and alcohol use during pregnancy). However, formal
indicators concerning risk and protective factors for maternal mental health have yet to be established,
as there are presently no routinenational sources of data on maternal mental health or maternal access
to/use of mental health services.
PHAC Policy and Program Activities
The Health Portfolio undertakes a number of activities to promote maternal and child health, which
includes supporting positive maternal mental health during the perinatal periods. PHAC makes
significant investments to support perinatal mental health through programs aimed at improving
community-level access to supports for prenatal and recently postpartum people, newparents and
young children facing health inequities. In particular, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program provides
$26.5 million annually to improve the health of at-risk pregnant individuals, with a focus on mental
health, nutrition, and the promotion ofpositive health behaviours during pregnancy. Through 236
funded projects, the Canada Prenatal Nutrition Program serves more than 45,000 participants across
Canada each year.
PHAC also supports the development of several resources promoting the positive mental health of
pregnant/postpartum individuals. These resources provide guidance and advice for both healthcare
professionals and individuals that may face poor mental health during the perinatal period, including
Family-Centred Maternity and Newborn CareNational Guidelines; the Mothers’ Mental Health Toolkit;
and ‘Your Guide to a Healthy Pregnancy’.
To provide rapid support for new parents during the COVID-19 pandemic, Health Canada and PHAC have
recently developed resources to support the mental healthof those who are pregnant or have recently
had a baby.
BUDGET 2021 INVESTMENTS IN MENTAL HEALTH
Issue
Budget 2021 included investments for the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) to promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in the context of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Key Facts
• Positive mental health in Canada has declined during the pandemic. Some groups screened
positive for mental disorders at higher rates, including young adults, women, those who had difficulty
meeting financial needs, those with Indigenous identity, and frontline workers.
Key Messages
· The Government of Canada is concernedabout the impacts that the COVID-19 pandemic has
had on the mental health of Canadians, and we know that these impacts have been particularly severe
for certain groups.
· This is why, through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada provided $100 million overthree
years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental health and prevent mental illness in
populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19 pandemic.
· In addition, the Government of Canada provided $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22,
to support projects to address posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD) and trauma in frontline workers and
others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic.
Background
The COVID-19 pandemic has had significant impacts on mental health across the population, with
concerns about the virus itself compounded by impacts on work and routines, financial stress, social
isolation, grief and bereavement, and reduced access to services and supports. These impacts have been
particularly acute for certain groups, including children and youth, older adults, First Nations, Métis,
Inuit, and Black and other racialized populations.
During the pandemic, frontline and essential workers (e.g. health workers, public safety and social
services providersand long-term care workers) have experienced higher workload, stressors and new
challenges. These workers are at risk of stress, anxiety, vicarious trauma, moral injury, and
posttraumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
The Government of Canada has responded by establishing time-limited funding for the Public Health
Agency of Canada (PHAC) to address the mental health needs of priority populations in the context of
COVID-19. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada is providing:
• $100 million over three years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects that promote mental
health and prevent mental illness in populations disproportionately impacted by the COVID-19
pandemic, including health care workers, frontline workers, youth, seniors, First Nations, Inuit and
Métis, and Black and other racialized Canadians
• $50 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to support projects to address PTSD and trauma
in frontline workers and others who are most affected by the COVID-19 pandemic
• $3 million over two years,starting in 2021-22, to support indicator development to monitor
national standards for mental health and substance use services
As a part of Budget 2021’s investments towards a National Action Plan to End Gender-Based Violence,
PHAC will receive $50 million over five years, starting in 2021-2022 ($27.9 million in existing funds, $22.1
million in new funds) to design, deliver and test public health interventions that promote safe
relationships and prevent family violence.
GLYPHOSATE
ISSUE
• Glyphosate is the most widely used pesticide globally. Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) published its final re-evaluation decision document for pesticides containing
glyphosate, on April 28, 2017, allowing itscontinued use in Canada (marketed under brand names such
as Roundup and Vision). Several Notices of Objection (NoOs) were filed at the time, and following a
review of stakeholders’ concerns, the Department confirmed that issues raised in these NoOs were not
scientifically supported.
KEY FACTS
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOsin January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel was filed. On February 13,
2020, the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. This decision has been
subsequently appealed.A hearing on the merits of the appeal was held December 9, 2021, before the
Federal Court of Appeal. The Court has reserved judgment.
• Media and stakeholder interest in glyphosate remains high. It is the subject of class action
lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that have yet to be resolved. Much of the interest stems
from the hazard classification of glyphosate as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer (IARC). This concern was addressed by Health Canada in itsfinal decision based on
an extensive risk assessment, which aligns with major pesticide regulatory bodies around the world.
• Public debate regarding the safety of glyphosate continues. There are also a number of
Canadian municipalities that have bannedor are examining the issue of glyphosate use.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions. Health Canada scientists regularly re-evaluate pesticides approved inCanada
to ensure they can be used safely and that human health andthe environment are protected.
• Health Canada scientists have conducted an extensive review of this chemical and have
concluded that glyphosate can be used safely when label directions arefollowed.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes increased collaboration to generate independent data and enhanced
transparency of decision making.
• We will continue to monitor the situation for new information, and will not hesitate to take
action if needed.
IF PRESSED ON HEALTH CANADA’S AWARENESS AND USE OF THE “MONSANTO PAPERS” IN THE REVIEW
OF GLYPHOSATE
• Health Canada scientists are aware of concerns raised in the media around the independence of
some scientific reviews of glyphosate.
• Health Canada scientists had access to all relevant data and information from the federal and
provincial governments, international regulatory agencies, published independent scientific reports and
pesticide manufacturers. A total of 1368 peer-reviewed scientific papers were considered in the review.
IF PRESSED ON THE INTERNATIONAL AGENCY FOR RESEARCH ON CANCER (IARC)
• Health Canada took the International Agency for Research on Cancer findings into consideration,
but found that the level of exposure of Canadians to glyphosate does not cause any harmful effects,
including cancer.
• Health Canada’s finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority, the European
Chemicals Agency,the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority, and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency. None of these pesticide regulatory authorities considers glyphosate
to be a cancer risk to humans when used according to the label.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE FOUND IN FOOD
• Recent testing by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency shows levels found are not a cause for
concern for Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON GLYPHOSATE IN DRINKING WATER
• Health Canada has assessed potential human health risk ofglyphosate from drinking water.
Dietary (food and drinking water) exposure associated with use of glyphosatewas found not to be of
concern.
• Monitoring data from both surface and ground water sources were considered in this risk
assessment.
IF PRESSEDON WHY HEALTH CANADA PAUSED DECISIONS ON INCREASES TO MAXIMUM RESIDUE
LIMITS UNTIL 2022
• The Government of Canada will begin consulting on specific provisions of the Pest Control
Products Act to ensure the pesticide review process meets the expectationsof Canadians in the areas of
transparency and sustainability.
• During this period the Government of Canada is pausing all proposed increases to Maximum
Residue Limits (MRLs), including those for glyphosate. As a result, there will be no increases to MRLs
until at least spring 2022.
BACKGROUND
• Health Canada published its Re-evaluation Decision document for glyphosate on April 28, 2017.
The evaluation determined that glyphosate is unlikely to be genotoxic or carcinogenic. Health Canada
considered thefindings of the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) that glyphosate is
“probably carcinogenic to humans”, but did not alter the decision. It is important to note that the IARC
classification is a hazard classification and not a health riskassessment. This means that the level of
human exposure, which determines the actual risk, was not taken into account by IARC. Health Canada’s
finding is consistent with the European Food Safety Authority (EFSA), the European Chemicals Agency
(ECHA), the Australian Pesticides and Veterinary Medicines Authority (APVMA), and the United States
Environmental Protection Agency (USEPA).
• In May 2017, eight Notices of Objection (NoO) to the glyphosate decision were filed with Health
Canada. On January 11, 2019, Health Canada scientists concluded that the concerns raised by the
objectors could not be scientifically supported when considering the entire body of relevant data.
Therefore, the final re-evaluation decision for glyphosate did not change. Health Canadapublished its
response to each notice of objection in the Public Registry.
• Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the NoOs in January 2019, an application for
judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in respectof part of the
glyphosate re-evaluation was filed on February 11, 2019 by two of the objectors. On February 13, 2020,
the Federal Court dismissed the application for judicial review. One of the objectors appealed the
decision to the Federal Court of Appeal(FCA) on March 13, 2020. On August 14, 2020, three NGOs
sought leave to intervene jointly in the appeal and the Court granted leave to intervene on October 7,
2020. A hearing on the merits of the appeal was held December 9, 2021, before the FCA. The Courthas
reserved judgment. In December 2020, a fourth NGO filed a motion with the Court seeking leave to
intervene in the appeal, which the Court denied on February 5, 2021. This NGO applied for leave to
appeal the FCA’s decision to the Supreme Court of Canada (SCC) on April 7, 2021. No decision on the
request for leave has been made.
• Public interest in the safety of glyphosate used in agriculture, forestry, and by homeowners
remains high. Media interest stems from the hazard classification of glyphosateas a probable
carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) and coverage of class action
lawsuits in both Canada and the United States that have yet to be resolved. A number of Canadian
municipalities are examining the issue of glyphosate use. The City of Laval, QC banned the use of
glyphosate earlier in 2021.
• As part of targeted reviews of the Pest Control Products Act announced on August 4, 2021,
Health Canada is pausing decisions on increases to MRLs, including glyphosate, until at least spring 2022.
The announcement of August 4, 2021, also included funding that will allow the creation of a new expert
panel process to provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions on pesticides,
including on MRLs.
• The European Commission renewed the authorization of glyphosate for five years starting in
December 2017, until December 15, 2022. The renewal process is currently underway. France, Hungary,
the Netherlands and Sweden are acting jointly as rapporteurs. On June 15,2021, a draft renewal
assessment report and a proposal for harmonised classification and labelling was submitted to EFSA and
ECHA. The draft assessment report is consistent with Health Canada’s re-evaluation decision published
in 2017. A parallel publicconsultation by both EFSA and ECHA was recently completed in November,
2021. The rapporteurs are currently evaluating comments received. EFSA is looking to finalize their peer
review in the second half of 2022. Luxembourg became the first EU country tocompletely ban products
containing glyphosate, effective December 31, 2020. France and Germany have announced their
intention to ban or severely restrict the use of glyphosate in the next few years. These plans are
contingent on alternatives to the uses of glyphosate being developed. Austria has notified the
Commission of its intention to ban glyphosate.
• The USEPA published an interim registration review decision in January 2020. The EPA uses
interim decisions to finalize enforceable mitigation measures. The EPA has concluded that there are no
risks of concern to human health when glyphosate is used according to the label and that it is not a
carcinogen. The EPA released a final biological evaluation (endangered species assessment) for
glyphosate, in November of 2021. The US National Marine Fisheries Service and the Fish and Wildlife
Service will now consider the report for impacts on species or habitats.
• Mexico has announced that they will gradually reduce the use of glyphosate, towards a total
banin 2024.
GOVERNMENT OF CANADA FUNDING OF PESTICIDE REGULATIONS
ISSUE
• On August 4th, 2021, the Federal Government announced that it will begin consulting on
specific provisions of the Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) toconsider ways to balance how pesticide
review processes are initiated in Canada and increase transparency.
• In addition, the Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's
Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agricultureand Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest
management research, to be supported by Environment andClimate Change Canada (ECCC).
• This includes $42 million over three years to be invested in the PMRA to further strengthen its
oversight and protection of human health and the environment. This includes improving the availability
of independent data to further support pesticide review decisions, and the transparency of decision-
making. A further $7 million will be invested to AAFC, and $1 million to ECCC in supporting work, to
accelerate the research, development and adoption of alternative pest management solutions.
• This investment supports Health Canada’s commitment set forth in the Prime Minister’s
Mandate letter: To ensure Canadians are protected from risks associated with the use of pesticides and
to better protect human health, wildlife and the environment, modernize and strengthen the Pest
Control Products Act to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent scientific evidence and
input to the decision-making process.
KEY FACTS
• Following the announcement of August 4th, 2021, a Transformation Team was established at
PMRA.
• Transformation will be structured around four major areas: consulting on specific provisions of
the PCPA; strengthening human and environmental protection through modernized business processes;
improving access to independent data; and improving transparencyfor Canadians and stakeholders.
• Early and extensive consultation with the Canadian public is a cornerstone of this process.
KEY MESSAGES
• The Government of Canada takes pesticide safety very seriously, and believes strongly in making
evidence-based scientific decisions. Pesticides are only registered in Canada after being thoroughly
assessed to ensure no harm to human health or the environment will result from their use.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human healthand the
environment. This includes improving access to independent data, strengthening protection of human
health and the environment through modernized business processes, and improving transparency of the
regulatory process and decision-making on pesticides.
• This winter, the Government of Canada will begin consulting on specific provisions of the Pest
Control Products Act (2002) to ensure it supports transparency, use of independent scientific evidence
and input into the decision-making, and ensure that the pesticide review process meets the
expectations of Canadians.
IF PRESSED ON FURTHER DETAIL OF THE FUNDING ANNOUNCEMENT
• The 42 million dollars announced on August 4, 2021 for the PMRA will allow the generation of
additional independent data (including new water and agricultural monitoring information) and create
an expert panel to provide advice, when appropriate, on pesticides.
• On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new
Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. The call for nominations closed on
March 11, 2022. Health Canada is currently reviewing the nominations received. The committee is
expected to be operational later this spring.
BACKGROUND
In Canada, all pesticides are subject to the federal Pest Control Products Act (PCPA) administered by
Health Canada. Under the Act, pesticide products must be registered, or otherwise authorized, before
they may be sold or used in Canada.
Before a pesticide is approved, it must undergo a rigorous scientific assessment process that provides
reasonable certainty that no harm, including chronic effects such as cancer, will occur when pesticides
are used according to label directions. Under this registration process, results from more than 200 types
of scientific studies must be submitted to determine if the pesticide would have any negative effect on
people, animals (including birds and insects), or plants, including organisms in the soil and water.
The Federal Government announced that it will begin consulting on specific provisions of the PCPA to
consider ways to balance how pesticide review processes are initiated in Canada and increase
transparency. This consultation will be conducted with a broad range of stakeholders.
The Federal Government announced a $50 million investment in Health Canada's Pest Management
Regulatory Agency (PMRA) and Agriculture and Agri-Food Canada (AAFC)'s pest management research,
to be supported by Environment and Climate Change Canada (ECCC).
This includes $42 million over three years to be invested in the PMRA to further strengthen its oversight
and protection of human health and the environment. This includes improving the availability of
independent data to further support pesticide review decisions,and the transparency of decision-
making.
A further $7 million will be invested to AAFC, and $1 million to ECCC in supporting work, to accelerate
the research, development and adoption of alternative pest management solutions.
This new funding will increase opportunities for external parties such as non-government organizations,
universities, and governments to provide independent data for consideration in the pesticide approval
process, as well as allow Health Canada to increase independent data generation. It will allow the
modernization of business processes for pesticide reviews to ensure they strengthen environmental and
human health protection, and improve transparency and stakeholder accessibility. It will also allow the
creation of a new expert panel process to provide advice, as appropriate, prior to certain evidence-
based decisions of the PMRA on pesticides.
On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new Science
Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. The call for nominations closed on March 11,
2022. Health Canada is currently reviewing the nominations received. The role of the Science Advisory
Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada is to provide independent scientific advice in response to
targeted questions from the PMRA related to specific technical aspects of assessments or scientific
reviews. PMRA could ask the Committee to provide scientific advice on certain assumptions or scientific
data underpinning a particular pesticide assessment; however, not all pesticide decisions will go to the
Committee for specific scientific advice. This committee is expected to be operational later this spring.
HUMANE USE OFPESTICIDES
ISSUE
• In the interest of seeking Canadians’ views and input on the humaneness of pesticides used to
control predators, Health Canada published a consultation document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest
Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-dayconsultation period ending April 18, 2019.
• Health Canada received over 4000 responses, many of which revealed a lack of awareness of
federal and provincial roles and responsibilities with respect to pesticide regulation, wildlife
management and animal welfare, and the high degree of restriction placed on the use of these
products.
• On January 29, 2021, Health Canada published a consultation summary outlining the comments
received, as well as an information note to better inform Canadians on the strict label conditions that
must be followed, as well as the federal/provincial/territorial roles and responsibilities regarding
pesticide regulation, wildlife management and animal welfare.
KEY FACTS
• NOT APPLICABLE
KEY MESSAGES:
• Our Government takes pesticide safety and the concerns of citizens very seriously.
• The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by
provincially authorized personnel in Alberta and Saskatchewan. These products are used as a last resort
to protect endangered species, people living in remote communities, and livestock.
• All uses of sodium cyanide were cancelled by the manufacturer in December 2021. Health or
environmental concerns raised during consultations on the use of strychnine and Compound 1080 are
being taken into consideration in the current re-evaluation of these two products, which was initiated in
January 2021.
BACKGROUND
• In Canada, pesticides are regulated under the Pest Control Products Act administered by Health
Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA). Health Canada published a consultation
document entitled Humane Vertebrate Pest Control on December 20, 2018 for a 120-day consultation
period ending April 18, 2019.
• The purpose of the consultation was to seek input from Canadians on how the humaneness of
pesticides to control vertebrate predators could be considered during their approval and use.
• As communicated in our Consultation Summary, at this time, Health Canada will not take steps
towards incorporating humaneness considerations into the pesticide risk assessment framework. There
are currently no internationally recognized science-based parameters to evaluate the humaneness of
pesticides, and no new information on this topic was brought forward through the consultation process.
Provincial and territorial governments are responsible for and have measures in place to address both
wildlife management and animal welfare.
• To address concerns raised by Canadiansthrough this consultation, Health Canada published an
information note in late January 2021 to improve awareness of federal and provincial/territorial roles
and responsibilities with respect to wildlife management and animal welfare, improve awareness of
predacide use restrictions and scenarios, as well as improve awareness of the legal requirements that
must be followed when using such products, and the systems in place for reporting incidents (such as
non-target animal deaths).
• In January 2021, HealthCanada initiated a re-evaluation of strychnine and Compound 1080
(sodium monofluoroacetate) as a cluster, based on the similarity of the use pattern and toxicity profile.
All uses of sodium cyanide were discontinued by the manufacturer in December 2021 and will therefore
not be included in the re-evaluation. Information submitted during the humaneness consultation period
relevant to the re-evaluation (i.e., with respect to possible health or environmental risks) are being
considered. This re-evaluation isalso considering information related to non-target animal incident
reports.
• The use of pesticides to control large predators is highly restricted and limited to use by
provincially authorized personnel in Alberta and Saskatchewan. These products are used as a last resort
to protect endangered species, people living in remote communities, and livestock.
PESTICIDE MAXIMUM RESIDUE LIMITS (MRLs)
ISSUE
• Pesticides are stringently regulated in Canada to ensure they pose minimal risk tohuman health
and the environment. As part of the assessment process before a pesticide can be used on a food
product, Health Canada scientists determine whether the pesticide residues that may be found in or on
food will be a concern to human health, and determine the safe levels of residues, called Maximum
Residue Limits, or MRLs.
• Health Canada sets science-based MRLs to ensure the food Canadians eat is safe. The MRLs for
each pesticide-crop combination are set at levels well below the amount that couldpose a health
concern. If it is determined that a risk exists, the product will not be permitted for sale or use in Canada.
• During the summer of 2021, Health Canada received extensive comments during consultations
for proposed changes to MRLs, in particular for proposals to raise the MRL for glyphosate on certain
crops. Changes to glyphosate MRLs are paused as extensive consultation comments are reviewed.
• The Pest Control Products Act (2002) provides robust protection of human health and the
environment. However, some provisions of the Act now warrant review to ensure the pesticide approval
process meets the expectations of Canadians in the area of transparency and sustainability.
• In addition to the targeted review of the Pest Control Products Act announced on August 4,
2021, Health Canada has paused decisions on increases to all MRLs until at least spring 2022. The
announcement also included funding that will allow the creation of a new science advisory committee to
provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions on pesticides, including on MRLs.
KEY FACTS
• N/A
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safety very seriously. Health Canada sets science-based
Maximum Residue Limits to ensure the food Canadians eat is safe. The Maximum Residue Limits are set
at levels well below the amount that could pose a health concern.
• Health Canada is strengthening its oversight and protection of human health and the
environment. This includes enhanced transparency of decision making to ensure the pesticide review
process meets the expectations of Canadians.
• Health Canada is establishing an independent scientific advisory committee to provide advice as
required, to better inform its decisions, including on Maximum Residue Limits. This committee is
expected to be operational later this spring.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF PAUSING MRL DECISIONS ON CANADIANS, AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF
A SCIENCE ADVISORY COMMITTEE:
• Recently announced funding by the government will allow the creation of a newexpert panel
process to provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions on pesticides, including on
MRLs.
• The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide scientific
advice to Health Canada’s Pest Management Regulatory Agency (PMRA).
• PMRA could ask the Committee to provide scientific advice on certain MRL-setting related
scientific questions.
• Health Canada remains committed to timely, evidence-based decisions on pesticides.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACTOF THE FEDERAL COURT OF APPEAL RULING THAT PMRA MUST
RECONSIDER ITS DECISION WITH RESPECT TO A NOTICE OF OBJECTION AND THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A
PANEL RELATING TO HEALTH RISKS OF GLYPHOSATE. HOW DOES THIS IMPACT THE 2021 PROPOSAL TO
INCREASE GLYPHOSATE MRLS:
• Health Canada is currently reviewing the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
• The Federal Court of Appeal did not question the science underlying the re-evaluation decision.
Rather, the Court called upon Health Canada to provide a more comprehensive explanation of how
various aspects of the Act apply vis-à-vis the decision.
• The Government of Canada has paused all proposed increases to Maximum Residue Limits
(MRLs), including those for glyphosate. There will be no increases to MRL levels until at leastspring
2022. Health Canada scientists are currently reviewing comments received during consultations.
BACKGROUND
Before a pesticide is approved, it must undergo a rigorous scientific assessment process, which provides
reasonable certainty that no harm,including chronic effects such as cancer, will occur when pesticides
are used according to label directions. Under this registration process, results from more than 200 types
of scientific studies must be submitted to determine if the pesticide would haveany negative effect on
people, animals (including birds and insects), or plants, including organisms in the soil and water.
The results of these studies are evaluated by scientists within Health Canada’s Pest Management
Regulatory Agency, to determine whether a pest control product may cause adverse effects for the
health of Canadians. This assessment takes into consideration sensitive sub-groups, such as pregnant
and nursing women, infants, children and seniors. All pesticides registered in Canada, including
agricultural, forestry and those intended for lawn and garden uses,undergo this level of scrutiny.
After a pesticide is applied to a food crop, trace amounts of pesticide residues may stay in or on the
food. Pesticides intended for use on food cropsmust be tested for the safety of these residues. As part
of the assessment process before a pesticide can be used on a food product, Health Canada scientists
must determine whether the pesticide residues that may be found in or on food will be a concern to
human health, and determine the safe levels of residues, called Maximum Residue Limits, or MRLs.
Canadian MRLs are set for each pesticide and crop combination, for an approved pesticide use.
Canadian MRLs are; legally established as the highest amount ofallowable residue, are set at levels far
below the amount of pesticide residue that could cause health concerns, take into account all of the
population including infants, children, and pregnant women, are set for all foods sold in Canada,
whether producedlocally or imported, apply to fruits, vegetables, meat, dairy products, grains, and
some processed foods.
In May 2019, the Joint Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/World Health
Organization (FAO/WHO) Meeting on Pesticides Residues (JMPR) recommended use of new glyphosate
MRLs for consideration by the World Health Organization's Codex Alimentarius Commission. Bayer
CropScience submitted an application requesting to align certain MRLs with those being proposed. In
response to the application, Health Canada launched a public consultation on MRLs relating to the
import of dry beans, dry peas and tree nuts in May 2021 on the proposed change.
As announced on August 4, 2021, Health Canada is pausing decisions on increases to MRLs until at least
spring 2022. This also includes funding that will allow the creation of a new expert panel process to
provide advice, as appropriate, prior to evidence-based decisions on pesticides, including on MRLs.
On January 27, 2022, Health Canada officially launched a call for nominations to create a new Science
Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products in Canada. The call for nominations closed on March 11,
2022. The role of the Science Advisory Committee on Pest Control Products is to provide independent
scientific advice in response to targeted questions from the PMRA related to specific technical aspects of
assessments or scientific reviews. PMRA could ask the Committee to provide scientific advice on certain
assumptions or scientific data underpinning a particular pesticide assessment; however, not all PMRA
decisions will go to the Committee for specific scientific advice. This committee is expected to be
operational later this spring.
Following Health Canada’s decision regarding the glyphosate Notices ofObjection in January 2019, an
application for judicial review challenging PMRA's decision not to establish a review panel in respect of
part of the glyphosate re-evaluation was filed. On February 2, 2022, the Federal Court of Appeal allowed
Safe Food Matters’ appeal of the Federal Court decision, set aside the decision of the Federal Court and
quashed PMRA’s decision dated January 11, 2019. PMRA must now reconsider its decision with respect
to the notice of objection filed by Safe Food Matters on whether tostrike a review panel relating to the
health risks of glyphosate. Health Canada is currently reviewing the Federal Court of Appeal decision.
Global interest in maximum residue levels (MRLs) and regulation of glyphosate remains high following
the classification of the chemical as a probable carcinogen by the International Agency for Research on
Cancer in 2015 (IARC). However, it should be noted that this assessment did not take real-world
exposures into account.
Contrary to the IARC findings, and consistent with Health Canada’s review, the U.S. Environmental
Protection Agency’s January 2020 decision concluded that glyphosate is not likely to be carcinogenic to
humans. The European Commission also renewed the authorization of glyphosate for five years starting
in December 2017 based on its own science-based risk assessments. The EU renewal assessment is
currently underway, and in June 2021, the EU Rapporteur State Members (France, Hungary, the
Netherlands and Sweden) submitted its draft assessment of glyphosate to the European Food Safety
Authority (EFSA) and the European Chemicals Agency (ECHA) for preparation of consultation documents
to begin in September 2021.
NEONICOTINOID PESTICIDES
ISSUE
• On May 19, 2021, Health Canada released the final re-evaluation decision for the neonicotinoid
pesticide, imidacloprid. This followed the recent special review decisions related to aquatic organisms
for two neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam, released by Health Canada on March
31, 2021. Previously, Health Canada had consulted publicly on a proposal to cancel all outdoor uses of
these pesticides.
• Over 47,000 comments were received, as well as a substantial amount of new information,
including new studies and water monitoring data. In order toprotect the environment, in this final
decision, Health Canada cancelled some uses of imidacloprid, and introduced additional mitigation
measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered, which is consistent with the
recent Special Review decisions for clothianidin and thiamethoxam.
KEY FACTS
• Health Canada received over 47,000 comments in a public consultation on a proposal to cancel
all outdoor uses of neonicotinoid pesticides.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government takes pesticide safetyvery seriously, and believes strongly in making evidence-
based scientific decisions.
• Health Canada reviewed more than 47,000 comments, as well as a substantial amount of new
information, including new studies and water monitoring data that were receivedon the environmental
risks of neonicotinoids.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of neonicotinoids, and
introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on some of the uses that remain registered.
Health Canada will continue to monitor the situation and take action if necessary.
IF PRESSED ON WHETHER HEALTH CANADA–WHO IN 2018 PROPOSED TO CANCEL ALL USES–IS TAKING
A SOFTER STANCE DUE TO PRESSURE FROM THE AGRICULTURAL SECTOR:
• Health Canada has concludedthat a complete ban on neonicotinoid pesticides is not warranted.
• As part of the public consultation on its decisions, Health Canada received more than 47,000
comments from the public, pesticide registrants, non-governmental organizations and provinces.As
well, a significant amount of new water monitoring data and scientific studies and papers from various
sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities were reviewed.
• The Department considered these new scientific papers, data and comments to make sound,
science-based, final decisions regarding the risks to the environment from the use of these
neonicotinoid insecticides in Canada.
BACKGROUND
NEONICS AND AQUATIC ENVIRONMENT
• On November 23, 2016, Health Canada proposed to phase out all agricultural uses of
imidacloprid due to unacceptable aquatic risk. This proposed decision led to a special review on the
aquatic risks of two other neonicotinoid pesticides, clothianidin and thiamethoxam. At the time,
concerns wereidentified by Health Canada from available scientific information that these two
pesticides were frequently being detected in aquatic environments in Canada at concentrations that
could pose a risk to aquatic insects.
• Health Canada consulted on proposed special review decisions on risks to aquatic insects for
clothianidin and thiamethoxam in the fall of 2018. This review proposed the cancellation of all outdoor
uses based on risks to the aquatic environment, similar to the previous consultation on imidacloprid.
Health Canada then reviewed the more than 47,000 comments that were received via the consultation,
as well as a substantial amount of new information, including new studies and water monitoring data
from various sources such as registrants, provinces, academia and other regulatory authorities.
Approximately 65% of the water monitoring information considered in the special reviews was new
since the publication of the proposed decisions.
• The final special review decisions related to aquatic insects for clothianidin and thiamethoxam,
and the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, originally targeted for fall 2020, were delayed
until March 31, 2021 and May 19, 2021 respectively, due to the unprecedented volume of information
received during consultation and the challenges of COVID-19.
• In order to protect the environment, Health Canada cancelled some uses of clothianidin,
thiamethoxam and imidacloprid, and introduced additional mitigation measures and restrictions on
some of the uses that remain registered.
NEONICS AND BEES
• On April 11, 2019, Health Canada published the final pollinator re-evaluation decisions for the
neonicotinoid pesticides clothianidin, imidacloprid and thiamethoxam. The implementation timelines
outlined in the thiamethoxam decision were challenged by several organizations in proceedings against
the Minister of Health. The Federal Court dismissed the application in December of 2019.
• The Proposed Special Review Decision PSRD2021-02 on the potential environmental risk related
to squash bee exposure to clothianidin, thiamethoxam and imidacloprid used on cucurbits, was
published on June 29, 2021. These proposed special review decisions were published for a 45-day public
consultation. Scientific assessments have shown that when these neonicotinoids are used on cucurbits,
the risks are considered acceptable when applied according to the mitigation measures described in the
2019 pollinator re-evaluation decisions of these pesticides, which have already been implemented.
NEONICS AND HUMAN HEALTH
• Based on data reviewed for the general re-evaluation decision for imidacloprid, the assessment
did not identify human health concerns. This included additional data received following publication of
the proposed decision, along with consideration of the proposed interim decision on neonics by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency (US EPA).
• All available information will be considered in Health Canada’s ongoing cyclical re-evaluations of
clothianidin and thiamethoxam. Health Canada is expecting to publish the proposed cyclical re-
evaluation decisions of clothianidin and thiamethoxam in spring 2022.
OTHER JURISDICTIONS
• The US EPA expressed similar concerns regarding aquatic insects in their preliminary ecological
risk assessments of the neonicotinoids in 2017. The EPA published a proposed interim decision for
acetamiprid, clothianidin, dinotefuran, imidacloprid, and thiamethoxam on January 30, 2020. It contains
new measures to reduce potential ecological risks, particularly to pollinators, and to protect public
health. A final decision from the US EPA is expected later in 2021.
• The European Union voted to prohibit all agricultural uses of neonicotinoids except in
greenhouses. This measure came into effect on December 19, 2018. This decision was driven by
unacceptable risks to bees and other pollinators. Emergency use is permitted in some European
countries.
• Health Canada cannot speak to the decision-making process in other countries with regards to
neonicotinoids. Each country takes into account its own legislative requirements, policies, and scientific
analysis before making a decision. In Canada, pesticides are allowed on the market only after a full
scientific analysis is completed based on Canadian use, and the risks are found to be acceptable as per
the requirements of the Pest Control Products Act.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
ISSUE
• Rare diseases are often chronic, can be seriously debilitating and potentially life-threatening.
With few or no treatment options, available treatments can command high prices, which pose
significant challenges to patients, caregivers, and the health caresystem, including the sustainability of
public and private drug plans that pay for these drugs.
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-23, with up to
$500 million per year ongoing. As reaffirmed in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Speech from the
Throne, as well as Budget 2021, this includes working with provinces, territories and stakeholders to
establish a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases for launch in 2022.
KEY MESSAGES
• We recognize that for many Canadians who require prescription drugs to treat rare diseases, the
cost of these medications can be astronomically high.
• To help Canadians get better access to effective treatments, we are working with provinces,
territories and other partners willing to move forward to develop a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases to be launched in 2022.
• Budget 2019 proposed to invest up to $1 billion over two years, starting in 2022-2023, with up
to $500 million per year ongoing, to help Canadians with rare diseases access the drugs they need. The
Fall Economic Statement 2020 and Budget 2021 highlight the Government’s continued commitment in
developing a national strategy.
IF PRESSED ON COLLABORATION WITH STAKEHOLDERS…
• We held a virtual public and stakeholder engagement in early 2021, which concluded on March
26th, 2021. Canadians-especially patients with rare diseases, their families and their caregivers-were
invited to provide their views on the national strategy by participating in a public town hall or
completing the online questionnaire. A “What We Heard” report summarizing key themes and feedback
that emerged during the public and stakeholder engagement has been published on the engagement
webpage.
• Building on what we heardfrom stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, there will be more engagement opportunities in early 2022 to
further refine and inform the development of the national strategy.
IF PRESSED ON STATUS OF THE NATIONAL STRATEGY…
• Despite the pandemic, our Government recognizes the pressing need to improve access and
affordability of treatments for rare diseases.
• In collaboration with willing provinces, territories and other partners, we continue to work
towarddelivering a national strategy for launch in 2022.
• Building on what we heard from stakeholders and partners thus far and recognizing the
importance of ongoing engagement, there will be more engagement opportunities in early 2022 to
further refine and inform the development of the national strategy.
IF PRESSED ON THE SPECIAL ACCESS PROGRAM…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of Canadians having access to the treatments they
need.
• Health Canada's Special Access Program considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale in Canada.
IF PRESSED ON RESEARCH….
• Our Government recognizes that supporting research is another important aspect of addressing
rare diseases. Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), Canadais playing an
important role, both at the national and international levels, to tackle rare diseases.
• For example, Canada, through CIHR, is a founding member of the International Rare Diseases
Research Consortium and is also engaged in E-Rare, the European Union’s main instrument for funding
research in areas related to rare diseases.
IF PRESSED ON TRIKAFTA…
• Health Canada understands that patients with Cystic Fibrosis (CF) want faster access to new and
promising drugs, particularly when limited treatment options are available.
• Recognizing the importance of this new treatment option for patients, following a priority
review, on June 18, 2021, Health Canada authorized Trikafta for CF patients aged 12 years and older,
with a gene mutation found in 90% of patients. It was approved in an aligned review with the Canadian
Agency for Drugs and Technologies in Health (CADTH), which expedited the review and reimbursement
recommendation process.
• The pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) undertook negotiations to reach a mutual
agreement with Vertex Pharmaceuticals for Trikafta and individual jurisdictions have begun to make
decisions as to whether they will cover the drug under their drug plans.
IF PRESSED ON AMX-0035…
• Health Canada recognizes the tragic consequences of Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS), the
extreme burden it places on patients and their families, and the urgency for patients to have timely
access to potential treatments, particularly when limited treatment options are available.
• On August 23, 2021, Health Canada received into review a New Drug Submission for AMX-0035
from Amylyx Pharmaceuticals for the treatment of ALS.
• Despite not meeting the necessary criteria to be assigned priority review status, Health Canada
will work to review the drug as quickly as possible, while ensuring that our high standards of safety,
efficacy, and quality are met.
• Health Canada continues to advance numerous policy and regulatory initiatives, which will
facilitate earlier access to drugs when the data is promising.
BACKGROUND
CANADIANS LIVING WITH RARE DISEASES
Rare diseases are life-threatening, seriously debilitating and sometimes chronic in nature. They are often
genetic conditions, with onset either at birth or early childhood.
Rare diseasesare not rare as a group: it is estimated there are between 6,000 and 8,000 in the world.
They are considered rare because they each affect small numbers of people, ranging from a handful of
individuals to a few thousand. It is estimated that one out of twelve Canadians has a rare disease.
Patients generally have reduced quality of life and shortened life span, and are high-end users of the
public health care system.
DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Patients with rare diseases generally have few treatment options,resulting in unmet clinical need.
Accordingly, treatments are in high demand and can command high prices. The pharmaceutical
treatments for rare diseases are often referred to as orphan drugs, or expensive drugs for rare diseases,
or drugs for rare diseases.
High prices are often attributed to factors such as the high cost of research, limited number of patients,
small market size, and lack of competitors.
The Government of Canada is working with provinces and territories as an active member of thepan-
Canadian Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) to combine the governments’ collective buying power to
negotiate lower prices on brand name drugs for all public plans, including drugs for rare diseases.
In August 2019, the Government modernized the PatentedMedicines Regulations to ensure the
Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) has the tools and information to protect consumers
from excessive patented medicine prices. It is estimated that the amendments will result in savings for
governments and private payers of approximately $13.2 billion over 10 years. However, the brand-name
pharmaceutical industry and some patient groups have expressed concerns that the amendments could
result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and access to medicines.
ACCESS TO DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Having timely access to safe and effective treatments can significantly improve the health and overall
quality of life of a person with a rare disease.
Currently, Canadians with rare diseases can access the drugs they need through government drug plans,
through private drug plans or by paying out of pocket. Because these drugs are so expensive, patients
generally cannot afford to pay by themselves.
Canadians have been able to gain access to drugs for rare diseases through participation in clinical trials,
or as drugs are approved under Division 8 of the Food and Drug Regulations. In cases where criteria are
met, Health Canada’s Special Access Program (SAP) considers requests for access to drugs that are
unavailable for sale inCanada. About 150 of the drugs accessed through the SAP are for the treatment
of rare diseases.
IMPACT OF COVID-19 ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
Despite the pandemic, attention continues to be focused on drugs for rare diseases, including on new
drugs for specific patient cases, and general calls emphasizing the need for a national strategy.
To date, private drug plans have reported minimal changes to the coverage status of patients taking
drugs for rare diseases, but it is unknown if this will change over time.
STAKEHOLDER ENGAGEMENT ON DRUGS FOR RARE DISEASES
There is broad consensus amongst political parties, PT governments, private insurers and other health
system partners for federal funding for drugs for rare diseases.
Reaching an agreement on the scope/details of the strategy–and the balance of access vs. affordability
vs. appropriate use–will require a comprehensive engagement approach. This will also help manage
expectations around the limits of federal funding.
In December 2020, federal, provincial and territorial (FPT) Ministers of Health mandated their officials to
establish a FPT ADM-level group to guide the development and implementation of the national strategy.
A comprehensive engagement process commenced in late 2020 and continued through early 2021,
starting with PTs, health technology assessment organizations, the pan-Canadian Pharmaceutical
Alliance and national Indigenous health partners. Key stakeholders include patients and patient groups,
clinicians, academics and researchers, private payers, and pharmaceutical manufacturers. Canadians
were also invited to provide their views through virtual public town halls and an online questionnaire,
which concluded on March 26th, 2021. The perspectives gathered from this process are helpingto
inform the design of the national strategy.
Over the summer, as a follow up to the What We Heard Report, Health Canada continued discussions
with patients and caregivers, and other stakeholders and partners to build a strategy that will work for
all Canadians. Further consultations to inform a comprehensive model for the national strategy will take
place early 2022. With the support of all those involved, the Government of Canada will work towards
launching the national strategy for drugs for rare diseases in 2022.
INVESTMENT IN RESEARCH
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government is supporting research on
rare diseases and has taken a leadership role by joining important international research initiatives, such
as the International Rare Disease Research Consortium, which aims to accelerate medical breakthroughs
for people affected by rare diseases and includes 58 organizations from 22 countries. As of 2017, this
international Consortium has yielded 279 new medicinal products and therapies for rare diseases.
Budget 2021 also proposed to provide $250 million over three years, starting in 2021-2022, for the CIHR
to implement a new Clinical Trials Fund to increase clinical research capacity.
Additionally, Budget 2021 proposedto provide $400 million over six years, starting in 2021-2022, in
support of a Pan-Canadian Genomics Strategy. This funding would provide $136.7 million over five
years, starting in 2022-23, for mission-driven programming delivered by Genome Canada to kick-start
the new Strategy and complement the government’s existing genomics research and innovation
programming.
Budget 2021 proposes to provide a total $2.2 billion over seven years towards growing a vibrant
domestic life sciences sector. This support would provide foundational investments to help build
Canada’s talent pipeline and research systems, and support the growth of Canadian life sciences firms,
including: $500 million over four years, starting in 2021-2022 for the Canada Foundation for Innovation
to support the bio-science capital and infrastructure needs of post-secondary institutions and research
hospitals, and $45 million over three years, starting in 2022-2023, for the Stem Cell Network to support
stem cell and regenerative medicine research. These various initiatives have potential linkages to
research and innovation for drugs for rare diseases.
CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
ISSUE
• The government is committed to creating a new Canadian Drug Agency (CDA, the Agency). The
Canadian Drug Agency Transition Office (CDATO) is engaging provinces, territories, and stakeholders to
develop options for the mandate and functions of the new agency. The CDATO also supports work on
other pharmacare-related initiatives (e.g., national formulary, drugs for rare diseases strategy).
KEY FACTS
• Budget 2019 announced the creation of a new national drug agency that would build on existing
provincial and territorial successes and take a coordinated approach to improving the Canadian
pharmaceuticals management system.
• The Budget provided $35 million over 4 years, starting in 2019–20, to establisha CDATO to
design the agency.
• In April 2021, the government announced Susan Fitzpatrick, a former Associate Deputy Minister
of Health from Ontario, as the head of the CDATO.
• Under Ms. Fitzpatrick’s leadership, the CDATO has conducted analysis of the current
pharmaceuticals management system and undertaken significant engagement. CDATO has held over
175 meetings and roundtables to date including with all provinces and territories, stakeholders,
Indigenous representatives, and international leadersin pharmaceuticals management.
• In December 2021, the Prime Minister reinforced the commitment to creating the CDA in the
Minister of Health’s mandate letter, stating the government would “continue engaging with willing
provinces and territories towards national universal pharmacare, while proceeding with a national
strategy on high-cost drugs for rare diseases and advancing the establishment of the Canada [sic] Drug
Agency.”
KEY MESSAGES
• Canada’s high prices and patchwork of drug coverage leave many Canadians facing significant
barriers to getting the prescription drugs they need.
• Creating the CDA is a step towards ensuring accessand equity for all Canadians.
• Prescription drug prices in Canada are among the highest in the developed world; the CDA will
work towards making our drug system sustainable andprepare Canada for the future.
• Since April 2021, the Transition Office has held over 175 meetings and roundtables with
provinces and territories and a wide range of stakeholders to informthe development of the Agency.
• We will continue to work with all provinces, territories, and stakeholders to lower costs and
improve access to the safe, high-quality drugs and vaccines Canadians need.
IF PRESSED ON THE NEED FOR A CANADIAN DRUG AGENCY
• Canada has internationally recognized pockets of excellence in pharmaceuticals management,
including the regulatory approvalsprocess within Health Canada.
• The CDA will not duplicate well-performing functions or organizations; rather it will focus
squarely on addressing system gaps and removing duplication, improving coordination across provinces,
territories, and implicated organizations, addressing poor return on investment, while improving access
and equity in the system.
• In the face of mounting pressures on provincial and territorial healthcare systems, especiallyin
the wake of COVID-19, the timing is right for an Agency dedicated to supporting a coordinated national
approach.
IF PRESSED ON RESULTS TO DATE
• COVID-19 sent shock waves through the entire healthcare system andHealth Canada was no
exception.
• If wehave learned anything from the pandemic, it is that we need a coordinated national
approach to ensure timely, affordable access to high quality drugs and vaccines.
• Since April 2021, the Transition Office has held over 175 meetings and roundtables with
provinces and territories and a wide range of stakeholders to inform the Agency.
• This continuing work will inform options for creating the Agency, including its mandate and
functions.
• We will continue to collaborate with willing provinces, territories, and other partners towards
launching the Agency.
IF PRESSED ON RESPECTING PROVINCIAL AND TERRITORIAL JURISDICTION
• Federal, provincial, territorial collaboration will be the cornerstone of the CDA, and we will
continue to work collaboratively with jurisdictions toward launching the Agency.
BACKGROUND
5. Advisory Council on the Implementation of National Pharmacare
• Budget 2018 announced the creation of the Advisory Council on the Implementation of National
Pharmacare, chaired by Dr. Eric Hoskins.
• The Council engaged with Canadians, patients, provincial, territorial, and Indigenous leaders,
health care experts, and stakeholders through regional roundtables, town halls, an online questionnaire,
and written submissions.
• On June 12, 2019, the Council’s final report was tabled in Parliament, recommending the
implementation of national universal pharmacare over several years, including FPT collaboration to
create a new arms-length Canadian drug agency with the following functions:
o Assessing the clinical effectiveness of drugs compared to other treatment options
o Assessing the cost effectiveness of drugs compared to other treatment options
o Deciding which drugs and related products (such as devices and supplies) should be on the
national formulary
o Negotiating prices and supply arrangements with manufacturers
o Providing advice to prescribers, pharmacists, and patients on how best to use drugs
o Monitoring the safety and effectiveness of drugs in real-world use
6. Budget Commitments
• Budget 2019 announced federal investments to move forward on three foundational elements
of national pharmacare
o Creation of a Canadian Drug Agency to take a coordinated approach towards assessing
effectiveness and negotiating drug prices.
o As part of the work of theAgency, development of a national formulary to promote more
consistent coverage across the country; and,
o Creation of a national strategy for drugs for rare diseases to help Canadians get better access to
the effective treatments they need.
• Budget 2019 proposed $35 million over four years, starting in 2019-20, to establish a Transition
Office to support this initiative. It also announced an investment of up to $1 billion over two years,
starting in 2022-23, with up to $500 million per year ongoing, tohelp Canadians with rare diseases
access the drugs they need.
• These commitments were reiterated in the 2020 Fall Economic Statement and Budget 2021.
7. Impact of COVID-19
Media and Public Opinion
• Media coverage of COVID-19 has increased publicawareness of some elements of the
pharmaceuticals management system (e.g., science, brand names, regulatory approvals, domestic
production capacity, and supply distribution). Long-term impact on overall trust for the system is still to
be determined but may be impacted.
• National pharmacare continues to receive a moderate volume of mainly balanced media
coverage. Recent coverage has linked affordable drugs with calls to provide supports for vulnerable
Canadians in the context of COVID-19.
• An October 2020, Angus Reid study found that one quarter (26%) of Canadians say they have
had to pay for half or more of their prescription drug costs over the past year. Against this backdrop of
COVID-19, nearly nine-in-ten Canadians support the idea (86%) of an affordable drugs program and
more than seven-in-ten (77%) supporting increased coverage should be a high priority for government.
Provinces and Territories
• Through the Council of the Federation, provincial and territorial Premiers publicly and
persistently call on the federal government to increase funding for healthcare through the Canada
Health Transfer (CHT). These calls have intensified due to the consequences of COVID-19 on healthcare
systems.
• Ahead of the federal election in August 2021, Premiers called on all federal party leaders to
commit to increasing the CHT, citing COVID-19 as having exacerbated existing stresses in the health care
system.
• Following the federal election in September 2021, Premiers called on the Prime Minister to hold
an urgent First Ministers’ Meeting on long-term, unconditional health funding and reiterated their call
for an immediate increase to the CHT. In February 2022, Premiers called for a First Ministers’ Agreement
on Sustainable Health Care Funding.
• The financialrequest from the Council is for the federal government to increase its share of
health care costs from 22% to 35% of total health care spending and to maintain this contribution level
over time with a minimum annual escalator of 5%.
8. Canada’s Pharmaceuticals Management Landscape
• The core functions of pharmaceuticals management in Canada, as elsewhere, revolve around
activities related to scientific evidence, pricing, and reimbursement, and ultimately coverage. Access to
and use of Data to inform decisions is a significant and growing consideration, as is post-market
research, which plays an increasingly important role in reviewing and refining decisions related to
pharmaceutical products.
• Responsibilities for aspects of Canada’s system are situated in relation to jurisdictional roles and
responsibilities.
• Some functions, introduced in response to emerging system demands, new technologies, and
evolving market factors, are challenging to reconcile with the traditional division of responsibilities and
the provisions of the Canada Health Act.
• This evolution has resulted in gaps, challenges, and inefficiencies particularly in relation to:
o Coordination across jurisdictions and throughout the life cycle of a drug
o Data, real-world evidence,and analytical capacity
o Health outcomes and appropriate use
o Negotiations, pricing mechanisms and sustainability
Scientific Review of Drug Safety and Effectiveness
• Regulatory Market Authorization: The federal government, through the Minister of Health, is
responsible for reviewing the safety, quality, and efficacy of health products, including pharmaceuticals
and medical devices , and authorizing their sale in Canada. This function is out of scope for the CDATO.
• Clinical and Cost-Effectiveness Reviews: The Canadian Agency for Drugs and Technologies in
Health (CADTH) is an independent not-for-profit organization that delivers timely, evidence-based
information tohealth-care decision-makers about the clinical and cost effectiveness of pharmaceuticals,
medical devices, diagnostics, and procedures. A core program area for CADTH is advice for drug
coverage and listing decisions.
• Quebec conducts its own clinicaland cost-effectiveness reviews through INESSS, which has a
mandate to promote clinical excellence and the efficient use of resources in the health and social
services sector in Quebec.
Pricing
• Price Regulation: The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB) is a federal quasi-judicial
tribunal that regulates price ceilings for all patented pharmaceuticals in order to guard against excessive
profit taking. The PMPRB mandate includes reporting on price and use trends as well as research and
development activities by pharmaceutical companies in Canada.
• Price Negotiation: The provincial and territorial governments created the pan-Canadian
Pharmaceutical Alliance (pCPA) in 2010; federal drug plans joined in 2016. The pCPA brings the collective
buyingpower of FPT governments to price negotiations with drug companies to achieve optimal drug
pricing outcomes for public payers. The pCPA does not include private payers. Canadians with no
coverage pay the highest regulated prices.
Coverage and Reimbursement
• Public Drug Plans: Although outpatient drug coverage is not a mandatory feature of Canada’s
healthcare system, each of Canada’s provinces and territories offer drug coverage to some residents,
generally vulnerable or at-risk populations such as thosewith low income, high drug costs, or significant
health conditions. The federal government provides drug plans for some populations, including First
Nations and Inuit. Each public drug plan maintains a formulary that lists eligible drugs and the terms and
conditions of reimbursement.
• Private Drug Plans: Many working Canadians receive employer-sponsored health benefits that
typically include drug insurance. Each private plan also has a unique formulary; consequently, the terms,
conditions and limits of coverage vary from plan to plan. Employers are not required to offer health
benefits, and many employees of small businesses, casual workers, and participants in the “gig”
economy do not have employer-sponsored coverage.
• No/Inadequate Plans: A relatively small but important share of Canadians have insufficient drug
coverage and approximately 11% of Canadians no coverage at all. Canadian patients pay nearly one
quarter (22%) of total prescription drug costs out-of-pocket.
• Mandatory coverage: Quebec isthe only jurisdiction that requires citizens have prescription
drug insurance coverage, either through mandatory opt-in to a private plan or mandatory participation
in the public plan.
MODERNIZATION OF THE PATENTED MEDICINE PRICES REVIEW BOARD (PMPRB)
ISSUE
• The brand-name pharmaceutical industry has expressed concerns that the regulatory
amendments could result in reduced pharmaceutical investments and reduced access to medicines.
They have also filed legal proceedings. To date, the Federal Courtruled to maintain most of the
Amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate information. This ruling is currently
the subject of an appeal by the applicants and cross-appeal by the Crown. In a separate challenge, the
Court of Appeal ofQuébec found that the three new price regulatory factors and collection of
confidential rebate information to be invalid. A decision is pending on whether the Crown seeks leave to
appeal to the Supreme Court of Canada.
KEY FACTS
• The Amendments includethree main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth and medicine markets as Canada.
• The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six
months due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. In December 2021, stakeholders
were informed of another6-month delay to July 1, 2022.
• The most recent delay provides additional time for impacted stakeholders to continue to focus
their efforts on combatting the pandemic, but also recognizes the changing pharmaceutical landscape
since the Amendments were first introduced and the need for additional discussions withstakeholders.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government remains firmly committed to improving the access to and affordability of
quality medicines for Canadians.
• Canada has among the highest patented medicine prices in the world. Our Government’s focus
remains onhelping Canadians access the prescription medicines they need.
• Canada will continue to be an important market for new medicines. New medicines are
launched in major markets in very similar timeframes, including in countries with prices that are well
below those in Canada. France, the United Kingdom, Italy, and Norway are examples of this.
IF PRESSED ON THE COMING-INTO-FORCE DATE…
• Health Canada is mindful of the ongoing impact of the COVID-19 pandemic, and the continued
need for focused and urgent response, which is why the Government delayed the coming into force of
the Amendments until July 1, 2022.
• This delay provides additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the changes introduced in
the Amendments, allowing them to continue to focus theirefforts on combatting the pandemic.
• A delay also allows the Government to further engage stakeholders on the application of these
Amendments within the changing pharmaceutical landscape.
IF PRESSED ON THE ATIP RELEASE OF PMPRB’S COMMUNICATIONS PLAN…
• While we are aware of concerns from some stakeholders that regulatory changes will adversely
impact drug launches in Canada, it is important to underscore that there is no evidence to substantiate
such claims.
• Nevertheless, we recognize the pressing needto improve access and affordability of prescription
drugs, particularly for many Canadians who require them to treat rare diseases, where the cost of these
medications can be astronomically high.
• That is why our Government is working with all stakeholders and partners, including patients
with rare diseases, their families, and their caregivers–to launch a national strategy for drugs for rare
diseases.
IF PRESSED ON ACCESS TO COVID-19 PATENTED MEDICINES (Drugs and Vaccines)…
• Our Government iscommitted to ensuring that Canadians have access to the drugs, vaccines,
and medical devices that are urgently needed in response to COVID-19.
• In its revised Guidelines, the PMPRB indicates that special consideration will be given to
specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-19. This policy is part of a government-
wide effort to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed for COVID-19
diagnosis, treatment, mitigation, or prevention.
• Under this approach,the PMPRB indicated that certain patented medicines on lists published by
Health Canada would not be subject to review or investigation unless a pricing complaint is received
from myself or any of my provincial or territorial counterparts.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH IMPACTS ON REVENUE TO INDUSTRY AND DRUG ACCESS…
• The Government of Canada understands the importance of the pharmaceutical sector and in
supporting research and development in Canada. A balance between supporting innovation and
improving theaffordability and accessibility of patented drugs for Canadians is essential.
• Even with lower prices, revenues from patented drug sales are expected to continue growing
over the next ten years in Canada.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products.
IF PRESSED ON IMPACT OF PHARMACEUTICAL INVESTMENTS IN CANADA…
• Our Government recognizes the importance of the life sciences sector to the Canadian
economy, innovation, and quality oflife. We remain committed to strengthening the innovation
ecosystem in Canada.
• Budget 2021 announced significant investments to grow Canada’s life sciences and bio-
manufacturing sector, providing a total of $2.2 billion over seven years towards growinga vibrant
domestic life sciences sector.
• Our Government has also streamlined regulatory processes supporting faster access to the
Canadian market for products and strengthened intellectual property protection in recent trade
agreements.
IF PRESSED ON THE COURT’S DECISION TO GRANT MERCK’S MAIN APPEAL IN PART, AND DISMISS
CANADA’S CROSS-APPEAL…
• The Government of Canada is disappointed by the Court’s decision and remains firmly
committed to improving the access to and affordability of quality medicines for Canadians.
• The Government of Canada will review the Court’s findings in order to make a decision about
next steps.
IF PRESSED ON THE IMPACT OF THE DECISION ON THE GOVERNMENT’S POSITION IN OTHER ONGOING
LITIGATIONS ON THE PMPRB…
• The Government of Canada will review the Court’s findings in order to make a decision about
next steps, and consider potential impact on other litigation.
IF PRESSED ON CONCERNS WITH THE PMPRB GUIDELINES CONSULTATION PROCESS…
• The PMPRB had made revisions to its Guidelinesin response to the significant stakeholder
feedback it received.
• The Board has decided not to proceed with the changes that were proposed in the July 15, 2021
Notice and Comment.
• Moving forward, the PMPRB will seek to monitor and evaluate trends in the pharmaceutical
market before and after the implementation of the new framework through the Guideline Monitoring
and Evaluation Plan.
BACKGROUND
The Patented Medicine Prices Review Board (PMPRB), an arm’s-length organization of the government,
reviewsthe prices patentees charge for patented medicines available in the Canadian market. The
PMPRB can work with patentees to achieve voluntary price reductions or hold public hearings to
determine whether a price is excessive, and (if so) order price reductions or the offset of excess
revenues.
The Minister of Health has the authority under the Patent Act to direct the PMPRB to inquire into any
matter regarding patented medicine prices and report its findings back to the Minister. Additionally, the
Ministeris responsible for making recommendations to Cabinet on changes to the Patented Medicines
Regulations, which inform how the PMPRB fulfills its mandate.
On August 21, 2019, the Government of Canada published the final Amendments in the Canada Gazette,
PartII. At that time, the Amendments were scheduled to take effect on July 1, 2020.
The Amendments include three main elements:
• Providing the PMPRB with additional price regulatory factors that consider the price of patented
medicines relative to their value and impact on the Canadian health care system;
• Requiring patentees to report Canadian price information that is net of all adjustments (e.g.
rebates, discounts); and,
• Revising the “basket” of comparator countries, to include markets with comparable consumer
protection priorities, economic wealth, and medicine markets as Canada.
On November 21, 2019, the PMPRB launched consultations with stakeholders on the draft Guidelines
that operationalize the Amendments. The PMPRB revised draft Guidelines onJune 19, 2020 and
published its updated Guidelines on October 23, 2020.
The original coming-into-force date of the regulatory amendments was delayed four times by six months
due to considerations associated with the COVID-19 pandemic. On March 29, 2020, stakeholders were
informed of an initial delay of 6 months to January 1, 2021. In December 2020, stakeholders were
notified of another 6-month delay to July 1, 2021. In June 2021, the coming-into-force was delayed
further to January 1, 2022. More recently in December 2021, stakeholders were informed of another 6-
month delay to July 1, 2022. These delays provide additional time for stakeholders to prepare for the
new reporting obligations and to familiarize themselves with the final Guidelines, allowing themto
continue to focus their efforts on combatting the pandemic. The most recent delay to the coming-into-
force date of the Amendments acknowledged the continuing challenges presented by the pandemic, but
also the evolution of the pharmaceutical landscape since the Amendments were first introduced,
signalling the government’s openness to further discussion with stakeholders.
In light of the second delay of the coming-into-force of the regulatory amendments, on January 15,
2021, the PMPRB initiated a stakeholder consultation on two consequential adjustments to their
Guidelines. These two proposed adjustments pertain to the definition of Gap Medicines and compliance
timelines. On March 17, 2021, the PMPRB published the Board’s decision to extend the definitionof Gap
Medicines to the new coming-into-force date of July 1, 2021, and to reduce the compliance timelines for
Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum list prices to one filing period, so as to
retain January 1, 2022 as the operative date for assessing compliance. On April 16, 2021, the Board
revised its decision on the latter, reverting the compliance timeline back to two filing periods. Thus, the
operative date for assessing compliance was shifted to July 1, 2022.
Following the third delayof the coming-into-force, on July 15, 2021, the PMPRB launched a Notice and
Comment on proposed amendments to the Guidelines. The PMPRB proposed to change the definition of
Gap medicines, the references to the comparator countries and the international price tests for
Grandfathered medicines and their line extensions. No change to the compliance date was proposed,
thereby retaining the operative date for Grandfathered and Gap medicines to meet the new maximum
list prices as July 1, 2022. The deadline to submit feedback was August 31, 2021. On December 17, 2021,
the Board announced that it has decided not to proceed with the changes that were proposed in the
Notice and Comment.
Moving forward, the PMPRB is putting in place a Guideline Monitoring and Evaluation Plan (GMEP) to
assess the impact of its guidelines and inform any future adjustments required to ensure that they are
working as intended. The GMEP will be used to monitor four different areas: impact on prices, impact on
access, impact on the ecosystemand impact on PMPRB processes. For each of these four areas, the
PMPRB, in consultation with its stakeholders, will identify relevant indicators to monitor. Baseline
results (benchmarks) will be generated based on the years immediately preceding the coming-into-force
of the Amendments. Changes will be monitored on an ongoing basis and compared to the benchmarks
to identify and evaluate any relevant changes in the trends in the data.
The Amendments have been challenged in the Federal Court and Superior Court of Quebec. In the
Federal Court challenge, Innovative Medicines Canada and sixteen Canadian subsidiaries of brand-name
companies filed an application for a judicial review of the Amendments. On June 29, 2020, the Court
upheld most of the regulatory amendments, but struck down the collection of confidential rebate
information. Similarly, on December 18, 2020, the Quebec Superior Court ruled to uphold the
constitutionality of the existing PMPRB regime and the regulatory amendments, except the collection of
confidential rebate information. Following this, the Court of Appeal of Québec on February 18, 2022,
upheld the constitutionality of the existing regime and the validity of the updated basket of comparator
countries, but found that the three new price regulatory factors in addition to the collection of
confidential rebate information to be invalid.
On September 17, 2020, to ease the regulatory pathway for drugs and medical devices urgently needed
for COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, or management, the PMPRBissued a policy notice stating that
special consideration would be given to specified patented medicines authorized for use against COVID-
19. As such, patented medicines appearing on any list associated with other COVID-19 Interim Orders
will not be subject to review or an investigation unless a complaint is received from either the federal
Minister of Health or any of her provincial or territorial counterparts.This policy is reflected in the
PMPRB’s final Guidelines.
ANTIMICROBIALRESISTANCE
Issue
Antimicrobial resistance has become a leading cause of death and has been declared a top global health
threat by the World Health Organization. Coordinated ‘One Health’ action across the human and animal
health sectors and the environmentis needed to address the growing threat to Canadians and our
healthcare system.
Key Facts
• Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is one of the top 10 global public health issues and Canada needs
to be prepared to face this threat.
• AMR is characterized by adecline in the effectiveness of antimicrobial drugs in treating an
infection. Resistance can develop naturally over time; however, the inappropriate use of antimicrobials
in human and veterinary medicine has greatly accelerated its emergence and spread across the human,
animal, food chain, Antimicrobials have been instrumental in medical advances and saving lives. Without
effective antimicrobials, our ability to fight infectious diseases will significantly decline. Routine medical
procedures such as cesarean sections and joint replacements, and even chemotherapy for cancer
patients that depend on antibiotics, will become riskier for Canadians.
• A 2022 study revealed that AMR is now a leading cause of death worldwide–estimated at
causing over 1.2 million deaths in 2019. The study has garnered significant media attention, ringing the
alarm on the next public health threat.
• There is growing international attention on the urgent need to combat AMR. The 2022 G7
Germany Presidency identified 3 health priorities of which controlling AMR was one. Canada is lagging
behind its international partners who are taking aggressive and concrete steps to address AMR. Canada
tied last among G7 countries in a 2021 study on AMR Preparedness
• Domestically, the Canadian Antimicrobial Innovation Coalition and McMaster University recently
released a new report entitled, “Antibiotic access and capacity: A grassroots solution to improving
patient access to novel antibiotics in Canada.” The report underscores the seriousness of AMR,its
impacts on the Canadian health care system, and the need for coordinated action across multiple
disciplines and sectors to improve access to antimicrobials through incentivization and regulatory
changes.
• In 2018, 26% of total infections in Canada were resistant to first-line antimicrobial treatment,
and an estimated 15 deaths a day were directly attributable to AMR. The economic cost of AMR is
currently estimated at $2 billion and is projected to grow to $20 billion by 2050.
• Concerted action through the One Health approach that takes into account the linkages
between the health of people, animals, and the environment is necessary to combat AMR.
Key Messages
• The Government recognizes that antimicrobial resistance is increasing worldwide and is posing a
serious and growing threat to human health, the health of animals, and the environment.
• We are working across multiple jurisdictions and sectors to preserve the effectiveness of
antimicrobials and limit the development and spread of antimicrobial resistance to improve health for
all.
• The Government’s multi-pronged, One Health and equity-based approach to antimicrobial
resistance includes an emphasis on securing access to new antimicrobials to address our unmet clinical
needs, preserving theeffectiveness of our most life-saving antimicrobials, and strengthening Canada’s
leadership role to position us as a key player in AMR response.
• Through Budget 2021, the Government committed over $28 million over five years, beginning in
2021-22, to expand efforts in key areas of surveillance and monitoring to help control antimicrobial
resistance, and to support the appropriate use of antimicrobials in Canada.
• The ongoing COVID-19 pandemic has taught us the importance of a responsive and prepared
public health system. Investing further in antimicrobial resistance efforts now will ensure that Canada
addresses this growing threat in an impactful way to better protect Canadians.
Background
The antibiotics we rely on to treat common infections are becoming less effective, resulting in serious
illness and death. Already, 1 in 4 bacterial infections are resistant to the first line of antibiotic treatment.
In Canada in 2018, it is estimated that antimicrobial resistance (AMR) resulted in 5,400 deaths, $1.4
billion in healthcare system costs, and a loss of $2 billion in GDP. If current AMR trends are left
unchecked, by 2050 cumulative costs could rise as high as 396,000 lives, $120 billion in healthcare costs,
and $388 billion in GDP.
There is sustained momentum to address AMR through collaboration and concerted action, both
domestically and globally.
Government of Canada Actions and Investments
The Government of Canada, through Budget 2021, committed to providing $28.6 million over five years,
beginning in2021-22, with $5.7 million per year ongoing, to the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC),
Health Canada, and the Canadian Food Inspection Agency. These investments will support efforts to
prevent the inappropriate use of antimicrobials and expand effortsto monitor the emergence of AMR in
Canada.
An AMR Task Force was created within PHAC to establish a clear focus for AMR work across federal
departments and agencies. The AMR Task Force will spearhead and coordinate federal actions to
combat AMR, as wellas mobilize and collaborate with domestic and international partners and
stakeholder groups to optimize the effectiveness of AMR actions.
The Government of Canada outlined its commitment to addressing AMR in the Federal Framework on
AMR and its supporting Action Plan under a One Health approach. In July 2018, the first Progress Report
on the Federal Action Plan was released.
Recognizing that the federal government cannot reduce the threat of AMR alone, and consistent with
our international partners, theGovernment of Canada led efforts with provinces, territories, and
stakeholders to develop the pan-Canadian AMR Framework, which was released in September 2017.
Work has been underway on a pan-Canadian AMR Action Plan to identify optimal and concrete actions
to address this complex issue across the human and animal health, and agri-food sectors. This work has
been undertaken in consultation, and with input from provincial and territorial partners and key
stakeholders. The focus by all jurisdictions on the response to the COVID-19 pandemic has slowed
progress on finalizing the Action Plan. PHAC is working with federal departments, and provinces and
territories to determine the way forward to ensure that governments and stakeholders can advance
priority actions on AMR in the short and medium-term.
The Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), leads Canada’s
research efforts and is a global leader in AMR research. Over the past five years, CIHR has invested over
$138 million in AMR-related research, investing $28 million in 2019-2020 alone, to strengthen research
in areas such as antimicrobial discovery, target identification, alternatives, diagnostics, surveillance, and
stewardship.
CIHR is also a founding member and major funder of the Joint Programming Initiative on Antimicrobial
Resistance (JPIAMR)—a collaboration of 28 member states aimed at coordinating research in AMR to
achieve long-term reductions in resistance levels and better public health outcomes. Through CIHR,
Canada is leading the development of the JPIAMR Virtual Research Institute—a global virtual network of
researchers, facilities and infrastructure of AMR research.
The Government of Canada participates in international forums, such as the G7, G20, WorldHealth
Organization and United Nations to advance AMR and other priorities with like-minded partners. At the
G7 Health Ministers’ call on November 17, 2021, and the G7 Finance Ministers’ call on December 13,
2021, Canada supported statements calling for efforts to promote the appropriate valuation of
antimicrobials and expand consideration of options to improve the antimicrobial pipeline. At the
working level, the federal government participates on numerous technical groups to address AMR and
antimicrobialuse issues related to human health, animal health, and food production.
Regulatory and Policy Changes
As of 2017, amendments were made to the Food and Drug Regulations, including policy changes under
existing regulatory tools, to address gaps in the regulation of veterinary drugs to support the prudent
use of medically important antimicrobials (MIAs) in animals by:
• controlling the “own use” importation of veterinary drugs
• increasing oversight on importation and quality of veterinary activepharmaceutical ingredients
• facilitating access to low risk veterinary health products, as additional tools to enhance animal
health and wellness
• requiring reports of veterinary antimicrobial sales to support resistance surveillance;
• removing growthpromotion claims from MIAs
• increasing veterinary oversight with prescriptions required before the sale of all MIAs
Health Canada continues to work with other federal partners to focus on enhancing animal health and
wellness in order to reduce the reliance on routine use of antimicrobials in animals. In 2020, Health
Canada published a risk-based approach to determine whether the availability of antimicrobials in
veterinary medicine may contribute to AMR in humans (that is, whether it increases the risk that
antimicrobials become ineffective in treating infections in humans).
Additionally, Health Canada maintains a Pathogens of Interest List that serves to inform companies of
the bacterial pathogens in most urgent need of innovative therapeutic products in Canada. Health
Canada has also sponsored a challenge under the Innovative Solutions Canada program, where up to $1
million is available to innovators and entrepreneurs to support the development of new, easy-to-use
and cost effective, point-of-care diagnostic tools to help combat the rise of AMR.
AUTISM
Issue
The Government of Canada is committed to improving the health and well-being of autistic Canadians
and to supporting caregivers. The Government is also committed toworking collaboratively with
provinces, territories, families, autistic Canadians, and stakeholders toward the creation of a national
autism strategy.
Key Facts
• Autism is a neurodevelopmental disorder characterized by communication difficulties as well as
social and behavioural challenges. Each person on the autism spectrum is unique, and the term
“spectrum” refers to the wide variation in strengths and challenges.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to helping and supporting the needs of all Canadians
with disabilities, including developmental disabilities like autism, as well as those who care for them and
provide much-needed support.
• Budget 2021 provided $15.4 million over two years, starting in 2021-22, to work collaboratively
with provinces, territories, families and stakeholders toward the creation of a national autism strategy.
• The national autism strategy will be developed through a broad and inclusive engagement
process that will include an evidence and scientific review undertaken by the Canadian Academy of
Health Sciences.
BACKGROUND
In the Minister of Health’s 2021 Mandate Letter, the Prime Minister asks the Minister to work in
collaboration with provinces, territories, families and stakeholders, to accelerate the development of
the national autism strategy. This reiterates the 2019 Mandate Letter commitment to work towards the
creation of a national autism strategy.
Government of Canada Initiatives: the Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is leading the
developmentof a national autism strategy, and is investing $1.46 million for the Canadian Academy of
Health Sciences (CAHS) to lead the consultation process.
The CAHS’ consultation process, launched in February 2021, was broad, inclusive, evidence-based and
providedall Canadians the opportunity to inform the development of the strategy. In recognition of the
breadth of issues to be considered to develop a strategy that reflects diverse needs, the CAHS applied a
social determinants of health lens in their approach togathering evidence and structuring the dialogue
by focusing on 3 key themes: social inclusion, economic inclusion and evidence-based interventions.
PHAC continues to engage with provinces, territories, and Indigenous Peoples, through a variety of
mechanisms, regarding the national autism strategy. PHAC is organizing a national conference in fall
2022 to build consensus on the priorities for action towards a national autism strategy.
Budget 2021: the $15.4 million announced in Budget 2021 ($8.4 million residual balance of Budget 2018
and $7 million of new funding) includes funding to support strategy development ($4.1 million), address
gaps in autism spectrum disorder surveillance ($2.2 million), and assist with the development of IT
infrastructure to support data collection ($0.7 million).
PHAC Investments: Budget 2018 provided $20 million over five years to support two new initiatives:
1) The Autism and Intellectual Disabilities Knowledge Exchange Network (AIDE Canada) ($10.9 million/5
years) provides access to online resources, including an inventory of services, supports, employment
opportunities and local programming for families across the country. Six AIDE Canada locations across
the country provide a point of access for Canadians to obtain resources and supports on autism. AIDE
Canada also released a COVID-19 Resource Hub to share up-to-date, trusted information related to
COVID-19 specifically tailored to, or relevant for, Canadians on the autism spectrum, their families and
caregivers; and
2) The Autism Spectrum Disorder Strategic Fund is providing $9.1 million over 5 years for community-
based projects that pursue innovative program models, help reduce stigma, and integrate health, social
and educational components to better serve the complex needs ofAutistic Canadians and their families.
PHAC provided $102,189 to the Canadian Paediatric Society to develop autism Guidelines for early
detection and screening, diagnosis, and post-diagnosis follow-up (released October 2019).
PHAC Surveillance Activities: In support of the development of a national autism strategy, PHAC
continues to enhance surveillance of autism spectrum disorder to provide evidence that informs future
related investments and activities. PHAC is working with federal, provincial, territorial and Indigenous
partners, researchers and autism stakeholders to address the recommendations made in the 2018
National Autism Spectrum Disorder Surveillance System (NASS) report to move beyond reporting solely
on prevalence and include all jurisdictions, all age ranges (children, youth and adults), co-occurring
conditions as well as other important demographic and equity indicators. On February 3rd 2022, PHAC
released a report titled “Autism Spectrum Disorder–Highlights from the 2019 Canadian Health Survey
on Children and Youth.” This report is one of the key commitments made as part of Budget 2021 to
support the development of a national autism strategy. It provides new evidence on prevalence, health
status and life experiences of Canadian children andyouth with diagnosed ASD, prior to the COVID-19
pandemic.
CIHR Investments: In the past five years, there has been an investment of close to $68 million in
research to increase the understanding of autism, as well as to improve the ability to intervene more
effectively.
CIHR-funded researchers are also developing innovative technologies for children with autism and their
families. For instance, an interdisciplinary team led by Dr. Francois Bolduc from the University of Alberta
is creating an artificial intelligence-based interactive ‘chatbot’ that will allow persons with autism (and
other neurodevelopmental disorders), their families, health professionals and teachers to better
navigate the healthcare system by identifying personalized interventions and resources.
Through Canada’s Strategy for Patient-Oriented Research, CIHR and its partners are investing in CHILD-
BRIGHT, an innovative pan-Canadian network that aims to improve life outcomes for children with
brain-based developmental disabilities and theirfamilies. The network’s many projects include:
• “Ready 2 Work”, an online vocational/employment readiness platform developed alongside self-
advocates who operate vocational programs for young people with autism; and
• “MEGA TEAM”, which is evaluating whether a take-home video game can improve executive
functioning in children with autism.
Employment and Social Development Canada (ESDC): In April 2020, Minister Qualtrough announced the
establishment of the COVID-19 Disability Advisory Group, comprised of experts in disability inclusion.
This Group provides advice based on the lived experiences of persons with disabilities during the COVID-
19 pandemic; disability-specific issues, challenges and systemic gaps; and strategies, measures and steps
to be taken. Areas of particular focus have been: equality of access to health care and supports; public
communications and accessibility; support for civil society and the not-for-profit sector; support for
populations at highest risk; and finances and employment. TheAdvisory Group built on previous work
advising the Minister, continues to provide expert advice on promoting disability inclusion and targeting
barriers to the full participation of Canadians with disabilities and on implementation of programs and
initiatives related to the Minister’s disability inclusion and accessibility mandate.
In the September 2020 Speech from the Throne, the Government of Canada announced the Disability
Inclusion Action Plan (DIAP) to improve the economic inclusion and quality of lifefor Canadians with
disabilities. As part of this action plan, the government is developing a robust Employment Strategy for
persons with disabilities. This Strategy will take a holistic and intersectional view of the experiences of
persons with disabilities in the workforce. It will include measures to expand access to skills training and
opportunities for workers and entrepreneurs, while also supporting employers to create inclusive
workplaces. The DIAP also includes a commitment to create a new Canada Disability Benefit (CDB),
create accessible and inclusive communities, and adopt a modern approach to disability across the
Government of Canada including a better process to determine eligibility for Government disability
programs and benefits.
The DIAP isevergreen. In consultation with the disability community, it will be built upon and refreshed
over time, and grounded in the principle of “Nothing Without Us”. It is a whole-of-Government plan that
crosses over departmental responsibilities.
Employment Support (through the Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities Program): To
improve employment outcomes for persons with intellectual disabilities and autism, the Government of
Canada’s Opportunities Fund for Persons with Disabilities has invested over $40 million since 2010 in the
Ready, Willing and Able (RWA) project. RWA is a national employment program for persons with
intellectual disabilities and autism that is delivered through a partnership between Inclusion Canada
(formerly the Canadian Association for Community Living) and the Canadian Autism Spectrum Disorders
Alliance. In 2021, the Government announced a platform commitment to invest in the Opportunities
Fund and the Ready, Willing & Able inclusive hiring program to support employment for persons with
disabilities.
Senate Bill S-203–An Act Respecting a Federal Framework for Autism Spectrum Disorder: On November
24, 2021, the Honourable Leo Housakos introduced Bill S-203, An Act Respecting a Federal Framework
on Autism Spectrum Disorder inthe Senate. The purpose of the Act is to bring forth the development of
a federal framework designed to support autistic Canadians, their families and their caregivers. The Act
outlines requirements for the development of a federal framework, including measures to be provided,
such as financial support for autistic persons, support for caregivers, online resources and best practices,
a national research network and a national awareness campaign. The Act also sets out requirements for
consultation, a national conference, and regular reporting to Parliament on implementation of the
federal framework. The Bill was referred to committee in the Senate on December 8, 2021.
Provincial/Territorial Support: All provinces provide autism-specific funding for a range of services and
supports with current investments focused on interventions, services and education supports for pre-
school and school-aged children. While the three territories do not have any autism-specific funding,
they do have supports for broader disability services, which includes autism.
DEMENTIA
Issue
Dementia is a set of symptoms affecting brain function. It is often characterized by changes in memory,
mood, judgement, and other cognitive functions. Alzheimer’s disease is the most common form. In
2017–2018, almost 452,000 Canadians aged 65 and older were living with diagnosed dementia. This
number is expected to increase with Canada’s growing and aging population.
Key Facts
• In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Federal
investments in dementia research, surveillance, awareness initiatives, community-based projects, and
guidance are supporting the implementation of the strategy. The 2021 annual report to Parliament on
the strategy was tabled on January 19, 2022.
Key Messages
• In 2019, our government released Canada’s first national dementia strategy. We report to
Parliament annually on the strategy and the third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022.
• Our government recently announced more than $9.5 million to support 15 projects across
Canada. This investment will contribute to reducing the risk of developing dementia and improving the
quality of life of people living with dementia, their families, and caregivers.
• This investment is part of a $70 million investment over 5 years to fund dementia awareness,
surveillance, guidance on diagnosis and treatment, and community-based projects. This is in addition to
over $212 million invested between 2016 and 2021 to advance research on dementia.
Background
Dementia Strategy
On June 22, 2017, the National Strategy for Alzheimer’s Disease and Other Dementias Act came into
force and provided for the development and implementation of a national dementia strategy A
Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released in June 2019. The Strategy has three
national objectives: prevent dementia; advance therapies and find a cure; and improve the quality of life
of people living with dementia and their caregivers. As per the Act, the Minister must prepare an annual
report to Parliament. The third annual report was tabled on January 19, 2022.
Federal Investments
Budget 2019 announced $50 million over 5 years, starting in 2019-20, to support key elements of the
strategy’s implementation, including a national public education campaign, targeted awareness raising
projects, dementia guidance, and enhanced dementia surveillance. Thirteen awareness raising projects
under the Dementia Strategic Fund (DSF) began in summer/fall 2021. This fund also supports
Indigenous-led organizations to build capacity to conduct dementia awareness-raising activities. In
addition, the results of a capacity-building project focused on dementia-related stigma in Indigenous
communities, led by the Native Women’s Association of Canada, are being used to support an
awareness initiative. Under the DSF, a call for proposals to improve dementia guidance took place in
December 2021 and is now closed with the review of applications underway.
Budget 2018 allocated on-going annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia Community Investment
(DCI) to support community-based projects that optimize the health and wellbeing of people living with
dementia and family/friend caregivers, and increase knowledge about dementia and related risk and
protective factors. Funded projects undertake intervention research to evaluate the effectiveness of
their interventions and the context in which they work best. The DCI has launched 21 projects to date,
including the “Canadian Dementia Learning and Resource Network” which acts as a knowledge hub to
facilitate learning, collaboration and amplification of project findings and successes.
Federal investments are supporting improvements in health care relevant to dementia. Budget 2021
announced $3 billion over five years, starting in 2022-23, for Health Canada to supportprovinces and
territories in ensuring standards for long-term care are applied. Our government is also providing $6
billion over ten years, starting in 2017-18, directly to provinces and territories to better support home
and community care services, including palliative care.
In response to the impact of COVID-19, Government of Canada investments are supporting vulnerable
populations, including people living with dementia and their caregivers. On April 21, 2020, the
Government of Canada announced $350million for the Emergency Community Support Fund, delivered
by national charitable and non-profit organizations and assisting, for example, with home deliveries of
groceries and medications, as well as transport services.
Dementia Research
Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), the Government of Canada continues to
invest in research across the country to delay the clinical progression of symptoms of dementia, and
improve the quality of life of people living with dementia and their caregivers. Between 2016-17 and
2020-21, CIHR invested over $212 million in dementia research. This includes through the Canadian
Consortium on Neurodegeneration in Aging, which is Canada’s research hub on neurodegenerative
diseases that affect cognition in aging, including Alzheimer’s disease, and was renewed in 2019 for five
years with $31.6 million in federal funding and an additional $14 million from partners.
Dementia Surveillance
The Enhanced Dementia Surveillance Initiative (EDSI) funds projects that support the surveillance and
data pillar of the national dementia strategy. Nine projects were put into place to better understand
how dementia affects Canadians. This includes projects, led by academic and federal partners, exploring
innovative ways to address surveillance data gaps related to the causes, progression stages and impacts
of dementia; the associated sociodemographic, risk and protective factors; and caregivers. In addition,
several provinces, in collaboration with PHAC, are implementing projects to enhance surveillance of
dementia through the Canadian Chronic Disease Surveillance System. These projects are building on
PHAC's ongoing work with all provinces and territoriesthrough this system to provide updated data on
the prevalence, incidence and all-cause mortality of Canadians with dementia by age group, sex,
province and territory over time. A new webpage was created onCanada.cato showcase the EDSI, and
to promote the projects being undertaken to inform public health actions with new surveillance data on
dementia.
International
Internationally, Canada endorsed the World Health Organization’s (WHO) Global Action Plan on a Public
Health Response to Dementia (2017-2025). The WHO’s Global Dementia Observatory (2017), supported
by the Government of Canada, monitors progress on the Global action plan and is actively collecting
data on 35 key dementia indicators. PHAC also represents Canada on the World Dementia Council,
which is an international charity that identifies and pursues opportunities for global collaboration on
dementia.
DIABETES
Issue
Diabetes is a chronic disease that occurs when the pancreas does not produce enough insulin orwhen
the body cannot effectively use the insulin it produces. Uncontrolled or undiagnosed diabetes can lead
to serious complications and premature death. Those who have diabetes can take steps to control the
disease and lower the risk of complications. Canadians living with diabetes may be at greater risk of
severe COVID-19 outcomes.
Key Facts
• Approximately 3.4 million Canadians are living with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases
are diagnosed each year.
• Some Canadians, such as First Nations andMétis people, people of African and South Asian
descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type 2 diabetes
compared to the general population.
• Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reducethe risk of type 2
diabetes and prevent negative diabetes-related health outcomes.
Key Messages
• Our top priority is to protect the health and safety of Canadians. Our Government recognizes
the impact diabetes has on the health of Canadians.
• Startingin 2021-22, the Government is investing $35 million over five years, with up to $15
million matched by JDRF Canada (formerly the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation), to support
diabetes research, surveillance and prevention, including the development of a national framework for
diabetes and a Diabetes Challenge Prize.
• We are also supporting community-based initiatives that aim to help Canadians reduce their risk
for chronic diseases, including diabetes, by promoting physical activity, healthy eating,and tobacco
prevention and cessation.
BACKGROUND
Approximately 3.4 million Canadians are living with diabetes and more than 200,000 new cases are
diagnosed each year. Some Canadians, such as First Nations and Métis people, people of African and
South Asian descent, and people with lower income and education levels have higher rates of type 2
diabetes compared to the general population.
Healthy behaviours (e.g., healthy eating and physical activity) can reduce the risk of type 2 diabetes and
preventnegative diabetes-related health outcomes. Evidence demonstrates that there is an increased
risk of severe outcomes from COVID-19 (both hospitalization and mortality) among Canadians with
diabetes and those who are obese. COVID-19 is also having a disproportionate impact on specific sub-
groups of the population, many of whom are at greater risk of suffering from the health, social and
economic effects of the pandemic.
Government of Canada
The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) undertakes data collectionand analysis of chronic diseases
and their risk and protective factors, strengthens collaborations to better track disease trends and risks,
and supports the development of policy and program interventions and prevention guidelines for
primary care.
PHACis also supporting community-based initiatives to improve health behaviours and address health
inequalities among priority populations at greater risk of developing chronic diseases. In particular,
PHAC’s Healthy Canadians and Communities Fund invests approximately $20 million annually and
leverages additional funding from partners to support projects that focus on behavioural risk factors,
including physical inactivity, unhealthy eating and tobacco use, that are associated with the major
chronic diseasesof diabetes, cardiovascular disease and cancer.
To help Canadians identify their risk of diabetes and how they can reduce it, PHAC developed CANRISK,
the Canadian diabetes risk questionnaire. CANRISK is accessible to Canadians through partnerships with
Diabetes Canada, major food and drug stores such as Loblaws, Shoppers Drug Mart, Rexall and
Pharmasave, and others.
From 2015-16 to 2019-20, the Government of Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health
Research (CIHR), invested approximately $238 million in diabetes research.
In Budget 2021, the Government announced $25 million over five years, starting in 2021-22, for diabetes
research (including Type 1 diabetes), surveillance and prevention, and to work towards the development
of a national framework for diabetes. As part of these investments, the Government of Canada, through
CIHR, will recommit to the JDRF-CIHR Partnership to Defeat Diabetes, investing up to $15 million to be
matched by JDRF Canada and its donors. The national framework will be developed in consultation with
provinces and territories, Indigenous groups and stakeholders, and will help to support improved access
to prevention and treatment, as well as better health outcomes for Canadians.
Budget 2021 also announced $10 million overfive years, starting in 2021-22, for a new Diabetes
Challenge Prize to help surface novel approaches to diabetes prevention and promote the development
and testing of new interventions to reduce the risks associated with Type 2 diabetes.
Parliament
On April 10, 2019, the Standing Committee on Health (HESA) released its report entitled A Diabetes
Strategy for Canada. The Government Response to this report was tabled in Parliament on June 23,
2021.
In June 2019, the House of Commons passed a motion (M-173)designating the month of November as
Diabetes Awareness Month.
On February 27, 2020, Member of Parliament Sonia Sidhu (Liberal–Ontario) introduced Bill C 237,
which calls on the Minister of Health, in consultation with stakeholders, to develop a national
framework designed to support improved access to diabetes prevention and treatment to ensure better
health outcomes for Canadians. The National Framework for Diabetes Act received Royal Assent on June
29, 2021. The Act calls on the Minister of Health toprepare a report setting out the framework within
one year of the Act coming into force (June 2022).
PHAC is undertaking a virtual engagement process to inform the development of the framework.
Through this engagement, a range of key stakeholders and Canadians affected by diabetes will have an
opportunity to share their views, experiences and perspectives to support improved access to diabetes
prevention and treatment to ensure better health outcomes for Canadians. An Indigenous-led
engagement process with Indigenous organizations will help identify priorities and ways forward to
address diabetes in the Indigenous population.
FAMILY AND GENDER-BASED VIOLENCE
Issue
The emotional stress, isolation, and economic impacts ofthe COVID-19 pandemic create additional risks
for the safety and wellbeing of vulnerable children and families. Family violence, including all forms of
intimate partner violence, accounts for roughly 40% of violent crime reported to police.
Key Facts
• During the pandemic, risk factors (e.g., depression, parental stress, alcohol consumption) for
child maltreatment and family violence have increased.
• 5% of Canadians reported concerns about violence in their homes during the third wave of the
pandemic, between February and May 2021.
• Spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
Key Messages
• Gender-based violence, including family violence, is a serious public health issue that can have
lasting impacts on both the physical and mental health of Canadians.
• Budget 2021 included more than $3 billion over five years, and close to $200 million ongoing, to
prevent and address gender-based violence, including $2.2 billion over five years and $160.9 million
ongoing to respond to the tragedy of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls.
• Budget 2021 also featured $601.3 million over five years to advance a new National Action Plan
to End Gender-Based Violence. This includes an investment of $50 million over five years to the Public
Health Agency of Canada to design and deliver public health interventions that promote safe
relationships and prevent family violence, including intimate partner violence, child maltreatment, and
elder abuse.
• In response to the COVID-19 pandemic, theGovernment has announced new initiatives to
address family violence; including funding for Kids Help Phone and for shelters and sexual assault
services, income support initiatives and support for non-profit and charitable organizations.
Background
Theconsequences of family violence and gender-based violence can include short-and long-term
mental and physical health effects as well as social and economic costs. These can include: behavioural
problems in children; drug and alcohol use and attempted suicide in teens; chronic diseases, pain and
lack of stable employment in adulthood; and depression and financial problems in older adults. In
addition, spousal violence alone costs Canadian society $7.4 billion annually.
The federal government has invested nearly $200 million starting in 2017-18 until 2022-23, and over $40
million per year ongoing, in the Federal Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence. Budget
2021 included more than $3 billion over five years and close to $200 million ongoing to prevent and
address gender-based violence, including $2.2 billion over five years and $160.9 million ongoing to
respond to the tragedy of missing and murdered Indigenous women and girls. Budget 2021 also
featured $601.3 million over five years to advancetoward a new National Action Plan to End Gender-
Based Violence.
The COVID-19 pandemic has increased risks for the health and safety of vulnerable Canadians, as
children and families face increased stress, and may have difficulty leaving abusive relationships or
accessing support or prevention programs. The Survey of COVID and Mental Health indicates risk factors
(e.g., depression, parental stress, alcohol consumption) for child maltreatment and family violence have
increased. 5% of Canadians reported concerns about violence in their homes during the third wave of
the pandemic, between February and May 2021. Estimates of concerns about family violence in their
own homes were similar for women and men.
Between March and October 2020, the Government announced COVID-19 Initiatives that will help
address pressures on vulnerable families. These include:
• $7.5 million investment to Kids Help Phone to support mental health and crisis support for
children and youth;
• $100 million investment to support women’s shelters and sexual assault centres; and
• multiple economic and financial measures to support vulnerable individuals and families,
including the enhancement of the Canada Child Benefit.
Ongoing Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) Initiatives
Preventing Gender-Based Violence–the Health Perspective
As part of It’s Time: Canada’s Strategy to Prevent and Address Gender-Based Violence, PHAC is investing
more than $8.5 million per year ongoing to support programs preventing teen dating violence and child
maltreatment, and equipping health professionals to provide appropriate care to survivors.
Preventing and Addressing Family Violence–the Health Perspective
As a part of Budget 2021’s investments towards a National Action Plan to End Gender-Based Violence,
PHAC will receive $50 million over five years ($27.9 million in existing funds, $22.1 million in new funds)
to design and deliver public health interventions that promote safe relationships and prevent family
violence.
This commitment enhances PHAC’s previous investment of more than $6 million per year in supporting
the health of survivors of family violence, through guidance and training for professionals, and through
the delivery and testing of health promotion interventions for survivors. These projectsare measuring
their impact on health outcomes such as anxiety, depression and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.
Family Violence Initiative
PHAC is a member of the federal Family Violence Initiative, which brings together 12 departments and
agencies in a multi-sectoral approach to addressing family violence. On behalf of the Family Violence
Initiative, PHAC hosts and coordinates Stop Family Violence, a web-based source of current information
on family violence for health professionals and the public. Stop Family Violence also provides links to
supports and services available in each province and territory.
Family Violence Surveillance
PHAC uses surveys of Canadians about their own experiences, surveys of proxy informants such as child
welfare workers, and administrative data from child welfare case management systems to assess and
monitor the prevalence of child maltreatment and related factors.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health
PHAC’s analyses of surveillance data from the Survey on COVID-19 and MentalHealth are contributing
to the understanding of the wider impacts of COVID-19 on family violence, parenting challenges, and the
risk factors for both.
Other
The Health Portfolio also supports maternal-child health programs that strengthen family relationships
and reduce risk factors for violence; conducts public health surveillance on child maltreatment and other
family violence; and supports analysis to understand the nature and impacts of family violence.
HIV/AIDS
Issue
Community-based organizations and researchers have called on the Government of Canada to increase
funding to address HIV and other sexually transmitted and blood-borne infections (STBBI) in Canada.
National stakeholders are increasing calls for additionalfunding and it is anticipated that their calls will
be amplified around upcoming public events, particularly the 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS
2022).
Key Facts
• In July 2019, the Government of Canada released its Five-year Action Plan on STBBI (2019-2024).
The Action Plan outlines seven priority areas for federal action on STBBI.
• Community partnerships help the Government of Canada advance the work of our Action Plan
and achieve global STBBI targets by providing innovative, tailored approaches to address STBBI that are
free of stigma and discrimination.
• The Community Action Fund (CAF) invests $26.4 million annually to support the community-
based response to STBBI in order to prevent new infections, reduce stigma and discrimination and
increase access to testing and treatment. From this investment, $4 million annually is dedicated to
projects led by Indigenous organizations.
• The Harm Reduction Fund (HRF) invests $7 million annually to support community-based
projects across Canada that will help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share drug-use
equipment such as needles and pipes. These funds complement existing investments under CAF by
focusing on a population that is particularly at-risk of these infections.
• The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) also funds HIV and hepatitis C research. From
2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over $228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63 million on
hepatitis C research.
• The 24th International AIDS Conference (AIDS 2022) willbe held in Montreal from July 29–
August 2, 2022. This will be the first time a hybrid in-person and virtual format will be utilized, due to
the COVID-19 pandemic. Canada has hosted the conference three times in the past: Montreal in 1989,
Vancouver in 1996, and Toronto in 2006.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to working with domestic and international partners
toward the global goal of reducing the health impacts of AIDS and other sexually transmitted and blood-
borne infections by2030.
• The contribution of community-based organizations is central to Canada’s ability to achieve
global targets. Community-based organizations play a critical role in engaging Canadians living with or
affected by HIV and those at risk of infection.
• The Government of Canada remains committed to reducing barriers and ensuring that
Canadians have equitable access to prevention, testing, care, and support for HIV and other sexually
transmitted and blood-borne infections, and that these resources are reaching those who need them
most.
If pressed on funding
• In 2021, the Government of Canada invested $88.5 million to address HIV and other sexually
transmitted and blood-borne infections initiatives in Canada.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada invests $26.4 million annually through the HIV and Hepatitis
C Community Action Fund to support community-based programs across Canada to address HIV,
hepatitis C and other sexually transmitted.
• Through the Harm Reduction Fund, the Agency also invests $7 million annually to support
projects that help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share inhalation and injection drug-use
equipment.
Background
The Pan-Canadian Framework for Action on Sexually Transmitted and Blood-Borne Infections (STBBI)
In 2018, the Pan-Canadian Framework for Action on STBBI was released by federal, provincial and
territorial ministers of health. The Framework provides a comprehensive multi-sectoral approach to
reduce the impact of STBBI in Canada as well as to contribute to globalefforts to end these infections as
major health concerns.
Government of Canada Five-Year Action Plan on STBBI
In July 2019, the Government of Canada released its own Five-year Action Plan on STBBI (2019-2024),
which outlines a renewed and expanded collaborative approach to implementing the Framework for
Action on STBBI within the federal mandate. The Action Plan encompasses the work of ten federal
departments, reflecting a whole-of-government approach. The Action Plan aims to accelerate federal
efforts toprevent, diagnose and treat STBBI, and address barriers to care. The Action Plan is based on
the latest evidence and reflects priorities identified by partners and stakeholders.
The Action Plan outlines seven priority areas for federal action on STBBI: 1) Moving toward Truth and
Reconciliation with First Nations, Inuit, and Métis peoples; 2) Stigma and discrimination; 3) Community
innovation-Putting a Priority on Prevention; 4) Reaching the undiagnosed-Increasing access to STBBI
testing; 5) Providingprevention, treatment and care to populations that receive health services or
coverage of health care benefits from the federal government; 6) Leveraging existing knowledge and
targeting future research; and 7) Measuring impact-monitoring and reporting on trends and results.
COVID-19 Impacts on STBBI
Key populations disproportionately impacted by STBBI were disproportionately impacted by the COVID-
19 pandemic, specifically health care providers’ ability to deliver STBBI-related services and people’s
access to such services were adversely impacted. However, the pandemic presented an opportunity to
address STBBI through innovative measures. STBBI service providers in Canada have demonstrated
resilience and innovation by developing new service delivery models including new remote services that
met the challenges created by the pandemic. In an online 2020 survey, new approaches to service
delivery were reported across the country including: mobile outreach for HIV, hepatitis C and other STI
testing services; delivery of harm reduction supplies by outreach including mobile vehicle and home
delivery; and self-serve pick-up and drop-off of harm reduction supplies at service windows or curbside
depots.
Community Funding
HIV and Hepatitis C Community Action Fund (CAF)
Through the CAF, PHAC invests $26.4 million annually to support community-based responses to STBBI
in order to prevent new infections, reduce stigma and discrimination and increase access to testing and
treatment. From this investment, $4 millionannually is dedicated to projects led by Indigenous
organizations.
The CAF supports integrated approaches to disease prevention, increasing the effectiveness of
prevention initiatives and supporting a more efficient community-based response by addressing
common transmission routes, risk behaviours, affected populations, and stigma associated with STBBI.
Harm Reduction Fund (HRF)
Through the HRF, PHAC invests $7 million annually to support community-based projects across Canada
that will help reduce HIV and Hepatitis C among people who share injection and inhalation drug-use
equipment. These funds complement existing investments under the CAF by focusing on a population
that is particularly at-risk for these infections. The funding helps community-based organizations
implement or enhance harm reduction measures by providing: education resources for people who use
drugs; support for peer-based outreach and navigation initiatives; and training for health providers.
Investments in the HRF also support objectives within the Canadian Drug and Substance Strategy.
Funding to Support Researchers
Canada also recognizes the importance of funding research that creates new knowledge and resources
that improve the health of Canadians that are affected by HIV and STBBI. Understanding how the social
determinants of health affect those impacted by HIV and other STBBI will allow Canada to create more
equitable approaches that help us reach our global targets. From 2016-17 to 2020-21, CIHR funded over
$228 million on HIV/AIDS research and more than $63 million on Hepatitis C research.
Additional STBBI Investments
• From 2017-2022, Indigenous Services Canada allocated $37.5 million over five years and $11
million ongoing for STBBI programs and services for First Nations and Inuit communities.
• $5 million over five years under the new Innovative Diagnostics Program at the National
Microbiology Laboratory.
• $6 million over five years (2019-2024) to support research to investigate the introduction of new
testing technologies in Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research.
Long-Term Funding for the Public Health Agency of Canada
Issue
To enable Canada’s response to the COVID-19 pandemic, the Government of Canada (GC) was required
to make significant short-and medium-term investments to increase Public Health Agency of Canada’s
(PHAC) capacity as the lead federal Agency in the COVID-19 response. A PHAC renewal exercise, which is
already underway, will help inform longer-term financial needs.
Key Facts
• The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) 2022-23 Main Estimates are $8,494.9 million
which represents a net decrease of $256.1 million over the 2021-22 Main Estimates of $8,751.1 million.
The main reason for the net decrease is due to minor reductions in temporary funding to address the
COVID-19 pandemic, including the procurement of COVID-19 vaccines and therapeutics; acquisition of
protective gear and medical equipment; surge capacity; border and travel measures and isolation sites;
and other criticalcapabilities.
• The Economic and Fiscal Update 2021 announced an investment of $1 billion for the
procurement of new COVID-19 therapeutics in 2022-23. It also included an investment of $412 million in
2022-23 to support ongoing COVID-19 pandemic responseactivities such as strengthened surveillance,
laboratory research, emergency management operations, and human resources capacity. This builds on
previous investments for the Agency’s surge capacity of $660 million, as announced in the Fall Economic
Statement 2020.
Key Messages
• We recognize the importance of ensuring that the Public Health Agency of Canada has the
resources required to sustain its pandemic operations, including purchasing and distributing vaccines,
therapeutics, personal protective equipment, implementing border measures to protect Canadians, and
advancing a broad range of public health issues.
• The Government is focused on ensuring that Canada continues to respond to the evolving
situation across the country and will ensure appropriateresources are available.
• In addition, with federal partners, we are turning our attention to assessing the pandemic
response and learning from this experience. This work will inform our approach to pandemic
preparedness, including the important role ofthe Public Health Agency of Canada.
If pressed
• The government is investing significantly to ensure that PHAC has the immediate funding it
needs to respond to the pandemic.
• These investments will continue to benefit Canadians now and into the future.
Background
Given the unpredictable trajectory of the pandemic, PHAC’s expanded role is likely to continue for the
foreseeable future. Several recent internal and external reviews have provided insights on activities that
are essential undertakingsof a highly effective public health agency.
Since the start of the pandemic, the Agency has assumed new functions to support Canada’s pandemic
response, pushing it beyond its traditional mandate. While some of these new functions are time-
limited, otherswill need to continue for the foreseeable future. PHAC will not be in a position to snap
back to pre-pandemic operations, but will be poised to learn from the lessons of COVID-19.
Preparatory activity to support the renewal of the Agency has already begun. The PHAC renewal is a
rigorous exercise that will identify current and future public health needs and priorities. It will also guide
longer-term PHAC financial needs and funding requests. However, the renewal exercise will take time
and will involve many stakeholders.
Long-term funding decisions for PHAC are anticipated to support the transformative change that many
experts have called for, both before and during the pandemic. Long-term stable funding would enable
PHAC to apply lessons from the pandemic, and tackle some long-standing issues, such as modernizing
systems to improve data interoperability, negotiating stronger data sharing protocols with provinces and
territories and strengthening the National Emergency Strategic Stockpile, among other priorities.
NEW BRUNSWICK NEUROLOGICAL SYNDROME OF UNKNOWN CAUSE
Issue
The province of New Brunswick (NB) has completed its investigation of a cluster of individuals who
exhibited signs and symptoms consistent with a neurologicalsyndrome of unknown cause (referred to
as a cluster). On February 24, 2022, NB held a press conference and published two reports which
concluded that there was no such syndrome.
Key Messages
• The Government is committed to protecting the health and safety of Canadians.
• Our thoughts are with the patients and families of those involved. We understand the impacts
that this investigation has had on them.
• The Government welcomes the recommendations from the Government of New Brunswick.
• We will continue to work closely with the provinces and territories, partners and stakeholders to
monitor and understand the risks to human health from neurological diseases. We will build on any
lessons learned during this investigation.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada will work to build collaborations with Public Health New
Brunswick and other federal and provincial partners to enhance and modernize the national Creutzfelt-
Jakob Disease surveillance system. The Agency supports the creation of a federal, provincialand
territorial working group for this purpose.
If pressed
• The Public Health Agency of Canada supports the investigation’s findings that this cluster does
not represent a neurological syndrome of unknown cause.
Background
New Brunswick has completedits investigation
The Province of New Brunswick (NB) has completed an investigation related to a group of individuals
who have been experiencing signs and symptoms of an atypical neurological syndrome. Several cases of
illness have been referred to the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease
Surveillance System (CJDSS) which conducts prospective national surveillance for all types of human
prion disease in Canada.
On March 5, 2021, the office of the NB Chief Medical Officer of Health (CMOH) issued a memo to health
professionals in the province to notify them of this cluster of progressive neurological syndrome of
unknown cause and encourage them to notify Moncton Hospital’s Mind Clinic if they have patients who
may be part of this cluster. The memo also instructed healthcare professionals to refer suspected cases
of CJD to the CJDSS as usual.
The NB investigation includes three components:
1. Clinical oversight committee–Announced by the NB Minister of Health in June 2021, to
investigate possible diagnoses of the syndrome through review of case files. The Government of NB
committed to ongoing communication with family members/patients and transparency. The committee
released a Final Report and Recommendations, and an Oversight Committee Report on February 24,
2022 which concluded that there is no evidence of a shared common illness or a syndrome of unknown
cause. The following recommendations were made:
Public Health New Brunswick (PHNB) may request a clinical review of cases by a second
specialist physician prior to including cases in a cluster of unknown etiology. If the two physicians do not
agree, the case should be presented to a board of specialty doctors or an oversight committee for a
decision.
The Reporting and Diseases Regulation under the Public Health Act should be amended to
require a suspect case of any existing or new variant of human or animal prion disease be reported to
Public Health.
PHNB should continue to build on collaborations with PHAC and other federal and provincial
partners to improve and modernize the national CJDSS and to establish or improve processes related to
outbreak investigations, including those where prion disease has been excluded.
2. Epidemiological questionnaire–Co-developed with PHAC, NB conducted 34 telephone
interviews with affected patients and/or family members (of the 48) to collect data on possible common
features among cases. NB released an epidemiologic report of their findings on October 27, 2021, which
concluded that no specific behaviours, foods, or environmental exposures were identified as potential
risk factors.
3. Specialized clinic, The Mind Clinic–Established by Horizon Health Network at the Moncton
Hospital aimed at treating and supporting patients and their families.
Public Health New Brunswick (PHNB) interviewed 34 of the 48 cases/proxies using a hypothesis-
generating questionnaire related to demographics, food, environmental, occupational, recreational, and
family/close contact exposures. The most commonly reported foods consumed included lobster and
wild berries; however, PHNB considered those to be unlikely contributing factors, as those foods are
typical of the region and likely originated from varied sources. PHNB also indicated the lack of
individuals reporting similar symptoms in neighbouring provinces or states as further evidence that
these and other commonly reported exposures are unlikely to have contributed to the development of
neurological symptoms.
The work of the oversight committee is now complete andthe oversight committee found that out of 48
cases, none fulfilled the full criteria of the case definition. In light of these findings, the committee
concluded that although some of the cases have presentations with unusual symptomology, they do not
appear to have a common illness with an unknown etiology and there is no evidence of a cluster of
neurological syndrome of unknown cause.
Public Health NB has updated a webpage for public communication, which includes information on the
investigation, epidemiology, actions, and Q&As. PHAC provided extensive input to NB on the proposed
content.
Additional information on the Public Health Agency of Canada’s Federal Role
PHAC’s CJDSS sensitized NB to the possible existence of an epidemiological cluster in 2020.PHAC
continues to provide support to NB, including providing laboratory testing and neuropathology, to
detect known forms of human prion disease. Prion diseases are rare, fatal neurological conditions
caused by abnormal proteins. In humans, the most prominent and consistent clinical feature of prion
disease is rapidly progressive dementia. Autopsy results to date have been negative for known prion
diseases. Epidemiological surge capacity has also been provided to NB. As part of the next steps, PHAC
will beimplementing the modernization of the CJDSS over the next two years.
PHAC will continue to build on collaborations with PHNB and other federal and provincial partners to
monitor and understand risks to human health from neurological diseases. With respect to laboratory
services, PHAC’s National Microbiology Laboratory offers cerebrospinal fluid testing for CJD consisting of
detection of the disease-associated form of the prion protein. In addition, sequence analysis of the prion
gene can be performed ifblood or other tissues are available. These tests can, in some circumstances,
all but rule out CJD. Neuropathology examinations, considered the "gold standard" for ruling in or out a
prion disease diagnosis, are performed on deceased patients at the University of Ottawa, which is
retained on contract with PHAC to deliver these services. To date, neuropathology results on the small
number of deceased patients have all been negative for prion disease.
PAN-CANADIAN HEALTH DATA STRATEGY
Issue
COVID-19 has highlighted new and existing issues that make it a challenge to collect, access, share, and
use health data for the benefit of Canadians. 'Health data' includes public health, health system and
population health data. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report Pandemic Preparedness,
Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada create a pan-Canadian
Health Data Strategy (PCHDS) to address foundational issues related to the collection, access, sharing
and use of health data in Canada. In his mandate letter released December 16, 2021, the Minister of
Health was tasked with working with the provinces and territories to create a world-class health data
system for Canada. To achieve this, the Government ofCanada is following the advice of the Auditor
General and creating a PCHDS through federal, provincial and territorial partnership with advice from an
Expert Advisory Group.
Key Facts
• There are persistent and important gaps in data collection, access,sharing and use that cost
lives and negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making.
• These gaps reduce health outcomes for Canadians and contribute to health inequities.
Key Messages
• Reliable, timely andrelevant health data are crucial to inform decision-making during public
health events and to improve health outcomes for Canadians in the longer term.
• The Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces, territories and Indigenous groups,
is developing a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy to improve Canada’s collection, access, sharing and
use of health data and lay the foundation for a world-class health data system.
• This work is being informed by expert advice and will assist Canada’s public health response to
COVID-19, equip Canada to deal more effectively with future public health events, and achieve better
health outcomes for Canadians through the better use of health data.
If pressed on public engagement
• Canadians should have a say in howtheir health data is used, so consultation and engagement
are key for this work.
• Our Government will be engaging broadly on the strategy to hear Canadians’ views on how
health data can serve them better, both during and between public health events.
If pressed on privacy
• Our government knows that Canadians value the privacy of their health information and want it
to be appropriately safeguarded.
• Canadians also expect that their data would be used to inform public health measures, stimulate
researchon new treatments and improve our health care systems.
• Our government’s approach to strengthening health data collection, access, sharing and use
recognizes Canadians’ rights to have their personal information protected while benefiting from the
insights that can be generated by sharing it.
Background
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy
Health data (which encompasses public health, health system and population health data)
are collected by numerous organizations and governments. However, as SARS and COVID-19 have
demonstrated, there are persistent and important gaps in data collection, access, sharing and use that
cost lives and negatively impact personal, health professional and system-wide health decision-making.
Overall, these impacts reduce healthoutcomes for Canadians.
In December 2020, the Government of Canada, in collaboration with provinces and territories, began
developing a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy. In the May 2021 Office of the Auditor General report,
Pandemic Preparedness, Surveillance, and Border Control Measures, it was recommended that Canada
create a pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy (PCHDS) to address foundational issues related to health
data in Canada. The November 2021 Speech from the Throne underlined the importance of improving
data collection across health systems to inform future decisions and ensure the best possible health
results for Canadians. In the December 2021 Office of the Chief Public Health Officer report, A Vision to
Transform Canada’s Public Health System, itwas recommended that Canada create a world-class public
health system and noted that the PCHDS is an actionable idea to improve public health tools. The
December 2021 Mandate Letter for the Minister of Health acknowledged the need for a health data
systemthat is timely, usable, open-by-default, connected, and comprehensive. In the letter the Minister
was tasked with taking steps to create a world-class health data system.
The goal of the Strategy is to identify commonly-supported, implementable solutions to address
persistent barriers to the use of critical health data. Once identified, and when supported by provinces
and territories, Canadians will be better served by their own health data, accelerating the
transformation towards person-centred health care systems and strengthening public health decision-
making during and between health emergencies.
Pan-Canadian Health Data Strategy Engagement
Canadians should have a say on how their health data is used, therefore engagement is key for this
work. PHAC has engaged with stakeholders and will be reaching out to Indigenous groups and the public
to inform them of the federal/provincial/territorial (F/P/T) process of co-developing a PCHDS and to
seek their input on how health data can serve them better, both during and between public health
events.
Informed stakeholder consultations started in summer 2021 and continued into fall 2021. Public
engagement is planned for spring 2022, and PHAC is working with Indigenous Services Canada to
coordinate Indigenous engagement in 2022. In addition, a presentation to the Conference of Deputy
Ministers of Health is targeted for spring 2022.
Expert Advisory Group
A PCHDS Expert Advisory Group (EAG) was established in fall 2020 to provide advice and guidance to
inform F/P/Tco-development work. Specifically, the EAG provides advice on:
• strategic direction for the use of health systems, population, and public health data to improve
the health of Canadians;
• principles to guide the creation, collection, storage, and use of data; and
• a practical and phased roadmap for the implementation of measures to sustainably address
areas of greatest opportunity and impact.
On June 17, 2021, the EAG published their first report describing the systemic barriers to effective
health data managment. Their second report, published on November 30, 2021, contains
recommendations on how to overcome these barriers and build a health data foundation in Canada that
optimizes the use of health data for better health outcomes and more effective public health event
management.
While these reports do not directly recommend the creation of a new health data agency, they
dohighlight the need for stronger and more coordinated governance models and legislation to improve
health care delivery, health outcomes and public health response measures.
The EAG is expected to publish their third, and final report in spring 2022. The third report will build on
the recommendations cited in the second report and present a roadmap of actions for achieving a
world-class health data system.
Indigenous Services Canada (ISC) Health Data Investments
PHAC is working directly with ISC to find alignment and synergies with Indigenous health data initiatives
announced in Budget 2021. Access to reliable and culturally relevant data on Indigenous peoples is
critical to building a complete portrait of Indigenous lived experiences, unmasking inequalities, and
ensuring delivery of effective policies and programs. Engagement on the pan-Canadian Health Data
Strategy will enable alignment with Indigenous-led data strategies, which can further self-determination
by providing First Nations, Inuit, and Métis Nation governments and organizations with the data they
need to support their communities.
SEASONAL INFLUENZA
Issue
With broader reopening, community transmission of seasonal influenza could occur later this winter or
spring.
Key Facts
• The influenza (flu) season in Canada usually occurs from mid-November to mid-May.
• Since the COVID-19 pandemic was declared, verylow levels of influenza have been reported
following the implementation of public health measures and individual practices to reduce the spread of
COVID-19, which likewise reduced spread of other respiratory pathogens.
• In a typical year in Canada, seasonal influenza leads to an estimated 12,200 hospitalizations and
3,500 deaths.
Key Messages
• The health and safety of Canadians is the Government’s top priority.
• The flu shot is the most effective way to prevent the flu and flu-related complications, such as
pneumonia. That is why the Government of Canada works with the provinces and territories to provide
flu vaccines to Canadians every year during flu season.
• Getting the flu shot not only protects you—it also helps to protect your family and friends,
young and old, your community, and especially those at higher risk of flu-related complications.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada recommends that everyone 6 months and over get the
annual flu shot, especially people at high risk of complications from the flu and people who can pass on
the flu virus to those at high risk.
Background
Annual Seasonal Influenza Campaign
The Public Health Agency of Canada’s (PHAC) Seasonal Influenza campaign aims to dispel the myths
about the seasonal flu vaccine and promote the flu shot and other measures to help Canadians protect
themselves and others.
Influenza Surveillance
Canada participates in national and international activities to detect and monitor the spread of influenza
in humans and animals. PHAC maintainsFluWatch, Canada’s national surveillance system that monitors
circulating flu viruses, activity levels, outbreaks, and hospitalizations.
Low seasonal influenza circulation occurred while stringent COVID-19 public health measures were in
place since thespring of 2020. For the winter and spring season of 2022, the return of influenza
transmission could occur in the context of increased reopening. This season to date, there has been a
return of persistent sporadic activity, but no community circulation ofinfluenza thus far. Vaccination
campaigns can contribute to mitigation from intensified seasonal influenza transmission, when
vaccination coverage is higher.
Influenza Vaccine Development and Supply
The World Health Organization issues recommendations each year on the composition of the influenza
vaccines for the southern and northern hemispheres. These recommendations are used by national
vaccine regulatory agencies and pharmaceutical companies to develop, produce and license seasonal
influenza vaccines.
The provinces and territories (P/Ts) and some federal departments (Correctional Service of Canada,
Royal Canadian Mounted Police, and Department of National Defence) order the majority of their
influenza vaccine through Public Services and Procurement Canada’s Bulk Procurement Program. The
P/Ts use their discretion to make decisions regarding their influenza vaccination programs, including
eligible populations, vaccine types and quantities.
The P/Ts have collectively ordered approximately 17.5 million doses of influenza vaccine for the 2021-
2022 influenza season, which is almost 10% higher than doses actually ordered and delivered in 2020
(16 million).
PHAC has secured a vaccine reserve of approximately 800,000 doses that can be drawn on by P/Tsif
needed to supplement their orders if demand exceeds forecasts.
Flu Vaccine Coverage
The Seasonal Influenza Vaccination Coverage Survey collects information every year about the uptake of
the influenza vaccine in Canada. Each flu season, this survey is used to estimate coverage among all
adults, as well as among individuals at higher risk of complications including seniors aged 65 years and
older and adults aged 18-64 years with chronic medical conditions.
In the 2020/21 flu season:
• Overall, influenza vaccination coverage among all adults (40%) was similar to the previous seasons
(42% in 2018/19 and in 2019/20);
• Only 41% of Canadian adults aged 18-64 years with chronic medical conditions received an influenza
vaccine;
• Vaccination coverage amongseniors (70%) is closer to the national goal of 80%; however, no
improvement has been observed in the last 3 years.
Recommendations for Influenza Vaccination
The National Advisory Committee on Immunization (NACI) recommends that everyone 6 months and
older, without contraindications, receive an annual flu shot.
Receiving the influenza vaccine will not provide protection from COVID-19, but it can reduce the chances
of being co-infected with influenza and COVID-19 at the same time. This can lead to serious
complications. Preventing influenza will also help to reduce stress on the health care system during the
COVID-19 pandemic.
Additional PHAC guidance on the administration of seasonal influenza vaccine in the context of the
COVID-19 pandemic has been developed to support influenza vaccine programs and primary care
providers in offering influenza vaccine this fall. This includes advice on who should receive the influenza
vaccine, what to do if someone seeking vaccination is showing symptoms, and simultaneous
administration of influenza vaccines with COVID-19 vaccines.
NACI currently recommends that all seasonal influenza vaccines may be given at the same time as, or at
any time before or after administration of COVID-19 vaccines for individuals 12 and older. This was to
facilitate influenza vaccine programs in the fall and winter months.
At this time, NACI recommends that children receive the Pfizer-BioNTech COVID-19 vaccine (10 mcg) at
least 14 days before or after another vaccine. This is a precautionto help to determine if a side effect
that may arise is due to the COVID-19 vaccine or another vaccine. There may be circumstances when a
dose of a COVID-19 vaccine and another vaccine need to be given at the same time however this should
be determined with a healthcare provider.
NACI will continue to monitor the evidence base, including ongoing and anticipated studies investigating
influenza vaccines administered at the same time as, or any time before or after, COVID-19 vaccines and
update its recommendations as needed.
SENIORS AND HEALTHY AGING
Issue
The Health Portfolio works with a wide range of partners on health promotion, disease prevention and
research to support healthy aging as a public health priority. While chronicdiseases remain the leading
cause of death among seniors, older adults are also among those most at risk of getting COVID-19 and
developing severe complications. Efforts are underway to keep seniors safe and continue to support
them in their homes, communities and care facilities.
Key Facts
• Seniors are the fastest growing age group in Canada
• $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years–starting in 2017–directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• PHAC invested $75 million in the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in New Brunswick.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada is committed to keeping seniors healthy, safe and socially
connected, and helping them maintain their independence and remain in their homes as long as
possible.
• The government is providing $6 billion in federal funding over 10 years directly to provinces and
territories to support better home and community care, including palliative care.
• The COVID-19 pandemic has hadunprecedented consequences for older Canadians with the
majority of COVID-19 deaths occurring among adults aged 65 years and older, approximately 80% in
2020.
• To support Canadians during COVID-19, our Safe Restart Agreement with provincial and
territorial governments included $740 million to support at-risk populations, including increasing
infection prevention and control measures to protect people living in long-term care, and those
receiving home care and palliative care.
• In addition, the Governmentof Canada, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research
(CIHR), has invested over $450 million over the past five years to support research in the area of seniors’
health including projects to support older Canadians through the COVID-19 pandemic.
• Through our $75 million investment in the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in New Brunswick, we
are testing innovative solutions to support healthy aging.
Background
In December 2021, the Prime Minister mandated the Minister of Health to, during the UN Decade of
Healthy Ageing (2021-2030), promote seniors’ physical and mental health to enable older adults to live
longer at home. The Minister of Health was also asked to negotiate agreements with provinces and
territories to support efforts to improve the quality and availability of long-term care homes and beds.
COVID-19 Initiatives
Older adults, especially those with underlying medical conditions, and those residing in long-term care,
have been disproportionately affected by COVID-19. The Public Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) has
released guidance, information and awareness resources to support older adults during the COVID-19
pandemic, including: Infection Prevention and Control for COVID-19: Interim Guidance for Long Term
Care Homes; and awareness resources for vulnerable populations, including a website with information
specific to seniors and COVID-19.
Budget 2021 provided funding of $100 million over three years to support the mental health of
populations disproportionately affected by COVID-19,including older adults.
The COVID-19 pandemic has highlighted the desire of Canadian seniors to stay in their own homes and
communities as long as possible. Through Budget 2021, the Government of Canada committed $90
million over three years to the newAge Well at Home initiative.
Age Well at Home will provide funding opportunities to seniors-serving organizations to provide
practical supports to help vulnerable seniors stay at home longer. This initiative will also support
regional and national projects that help expand services that have already demonstrated results in
helping seniors stay in their homes. These investments will complement provincial and territorial efforts
to support seniors by mobilizing community organizations and volunteers.
Health Portfolio Initiatives
PHAC monitors and reports on the health of older Canadians, and promotes their health and wellbeing.
Key areas of work include:
• promoting age-friendly communities, where older adults and community leaders work to create
supportivephysical and social environments
• promoting fall prevention approaches by increasing public awareness, and improving the
availability of data to inform public health decision-making
• raising awareness of seniors’ mental health, including substance use,and working with partners
to develop resources for seniors, families and health professionals.
Healthy aging initiatives can prevent illness and injury, reduce the impact of existing health conditions,
help people recover from ill health and frailty, increase independence, and improve quality of life.
In June 2019, A Dementia Strategy for Canada: Together We Aspire was released. Budget 2019
announced $50 million over 5 years, starting in 2019-20, for initiatives to support key elements of the
strategy’simplementation. This is in addition to on-going annual funding of $4 million for the Dementia
Community Investment to support community-based intervention research projects that optimize the
health and wellbeing of people living with dementia and family/friend caregivers, and increase
knowledge about dementia and related risk and protective factors.
In 2018, the Government of Canada provided $75 million to support the Healthy Seniors Pilot Project in
New Brunswick. This project is testing innovative solutions that support healthy aging. Thirty-nine
projects were announced in February 2021 and resultsof these projects will be shared with jurisdictions
across Canada.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) invested more than $450 million to support research
on aging between 2015-16 and 2019-20, including research related to mobility, dementia, falls
prevention, late life issues and palliative care, age-friendly communities, and technological innovations.
Since 2009, CIHR has supported the Canadian Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA), a national, long-term
study to help better understand the determinants of healthy aging. Given the unique challenges
presented with COVID-19, the CLSA has focused their efforts to support older adults in this challenging
time. In 2020, the CLSA launched a COVID-19 research project to gather the lived experiences ofolder
adults during the pandemic to generate evidence to further assist the government-wide response. In
addition, in collaboration with PHAC, CIHR provided an additional $1.2 million grant to the CLSA to
support the collection of COVID-specific data to assess the urgent issues and the long-term impacts of
the pandemic on older Canadians. Finally, CIHR, alongside national and provincial partners, including
Healthcare Excellence Canada, invested a total of $3.4 million to support the implementation and
evaluation of promising practices and policy interventions to improve pandemic preparedness within
long-term care homes.
International Initiatives
In December 2020, the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 2021-2030 to be the United
Nations Decade of Healthy Ageing. Globally, the impact of COVID-19 on older adults has underscored
the importance of healthy aging.
SUICIDE PREVENTION
Issue
Suicide is a significant public health issue that affects people of all ages and backgroundsacross Canada.
The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides people across Canada with suicide crisis
support from trained responders via phone, in English and French, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
Key Facts
• In 2019, suicide was the 9th leading cause of death among all Canadians, and the 2nd leading
cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind unintentional injuries (Statistics Canada).
• Between 2017 and 2019, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada.
This is equivalent to 12 suicide deaths, on average, every day.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is supporting the implementation of a fully operational pan-
Canadian suicide prevention service, which provides 24/7 toll-free crisis support.
Key Messages
• The Government of Canada recognizes the importance for all Canadians to have access to
critical mental health resources and suicide prevention services.
• Budget 2019 announced $25 million over five years, starting in 2019–20, with $5 million per
year ongoing, to develop and sustain a pan-Canadian suicide prevention service, in order to provide
people across Canada with access to bilingual, 24/7, crisis support from trained responders, using the
technology of their choice: voice, text or chat.
• The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently makes available suicide crisis support over the
phone to anyone in Canada, 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
• The Government of Canada also supports the implementation of a three-digit number for
suicide prevention that is easier to remember and therefore improves access to crisis support for people
across Canada.
If pressed on timing for the Implementation of a three-Digit Number for Suicide Prevention Crisis
Support
• The Government of Canada is closelyfollowing the Canadian Radio-television and
Telecommunications Commission proceeding which will help determine the timing and resources
necessary for implementing a three-digit suicide prevention number.
• Launched in summer 2021, the public consultationwill build a comprehensive public record
about implementing a three-digit suicide prevention number in Canada. The public consultation
reopened on November 30, 2021 and closed on January 31, 2022.
• This record will help the Commission determine the need for a three-digit number. It will also
help identify barriers, and should any be identified, determine how best to address them.
If Pressed on COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports
• The Government is providing over $14.8 million over 36 months to Kids Help Phone to provide
crisis supports for children and youth during the pandemic.
• In addition to investments in suicide crisis services, the 2020 Fall Economic Statement
announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres acrossthe country, which
are experiencing a surge in demand for crisis support during the COVID-19 pandemic.
• The Public Health Agency of Canada is also providing additional funding for the Canada Suicide
Prevention Service to support the increased demand for crisis support at this time.
Background
Between 2017 and 2019, there were approximately 4,500 deaths by suicide per year in Canada, which is
equivalent to 12 people dying by suicide every day. In 2019 suicide was the 9th leading cause of death
among allCanadians, and the 2nd leading cause of death among individuals aged 15 to 34, behind
unintentional injuries. According to preliminary data, there were 3,839 deaths by suicide reported in
2020. The 2020 data is provisional and incomplete, and could potentially increase by 5 to 15% over the
next year. This delay is due to the length of time that coroners and medical examiners sometimes
require to complete their investigations. At this time, caution should be used to arrive at any conclusions
regarding suicide trends during the pandemic (Statistics Canada). There is no single cause that fully
explains or predicts suicide; a combination of factors are associated with suicide, such as mental illness,
physical health, personal issues and loss, childhood abuse andneglect, and exposure to trauma.
Three-Digit Number for Suicide Prevention
In the Minister of Mental Health and Addiction’s Mandate Letter, the Prime Minister asks the Minister
to deliver on the commitment of implementing a three-digit suicide prevention number.
It is expected that the implementation of a three-digit number forsuicide crisis will build upon the
Government’s current support of the existing pan-Canadian suicide prevention service. The Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) is investing $21 million over 5 years ($4.2 million per year) for the
Centre for Addiction and Mental Health (CAMH), with their partners, to implement and sustain this
service. In addition, $800,000 per year is allocated to PHAC to cover the oversight, administration,
reporting and evaluation activities associated with the Contribution Agreement with CAMH.
The Canada Suicide Prevention Service currently provides people across Canada with suicide crisis
support from trained responders via phone (1-833-456-4566), in English and French, 24 hours a day,
seven days a week. Calls to the service are answered by trained responders from a network of 11
community-based distress centres across Canada and a back-up hub of responders.
On December 11, 2020, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of a motion sponsored by MP
Todd Doherty (Conservative, British Columbia) calling on the federal government to act immediately to
set up a national 988 number to consolidate all existing suicide crisis numbers.
The Canadian Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission (CRTC) is responsible for
establishing anythree digit abbreviated codes. The CRTC launched a regulatory proceeding on June 3,
2021 to consult on a proposed three-digit hotline. The public consultation closed on September 1, 2021,
resulting in 247 interventions submitted by stakeholders and membersof the general public. These
interventions are currently available online, and parties were able to file replies to these interventions
before October 1, 2021. Following a petition from stakeholders representing persons with disabilities,
the CRTC reopened the consultation in November 2021 to allow for new interventions in accessible
formats, such as video. The public consultation closed on January 31, 2022. These interventions and
replies will become part of the public record that the Commission will examine to make its
determinations. The CRTC is unable to comment on anticipated timelines for releasing these
determinations. As highlighted in Budget 2021, the government is committed to ensuring funds are
available to support the creation of this three-digit number.
COVID-19 Mental Health Crisis Supports: Through the 2020 Fall Economic Statement, the Government of
Canada announced a $50 million investment to bolster the capacity of distress centres. PHAC is
administering an initial round of grants to 57 distress centres in winter/spring 2021-22. A second
solicitation closed on October 6, 2021 for recipients with remaining or emerging needs and for eligible
organizations not included in the first round of funding. Funding approval for successful applicants is
being finalized. In addition, $2 million of this funding is supporting the development of resources to
assist distress centres in meeting the needs of diverse and vulnerable populations.
Motion 174–A National Suicide Prevention Action Plan: In April 2018, MP Charlie Angus (NDP, Timmins-
James Bay) sponsored motion M-174, calling for the Government to establish a national suicide
prevention action plan. On May 8, 2019, parliamentarians voted unanimously in favour of M-174,
though it is non-binding. The proposed actions in the plan are aligned with the Framework. The Public
Health Agency of Canada (PHAC) will facilitate coordination and collaboration on elements of the action
plan with relevant departments, agencies and key stakeholders through its conveningrole on the
Framework. An update on M-174 was included in the December 2020 Progress Report on the Federal
Framework for Suicide Prevention. Efforts to develop the Action Plan will be included in the December
2022 Progress Report as part of legislated reporting of the Federal Framework for Suicide Prevention.
Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health and Survey on Mental Health and Stressful Events: PHAC is
currently conducting surveillance to understand the impact of COVID-19 on suicide and self-harm. The
2020Survey on COVID-19 and Mental Health has shown that during the early stage of the pandemic, the
percentage of Canadians reporting suicide ideation since the pandemic began was not significantly
different from the percentage reporting in 2019. Risk factorsof reporting suicide ideation during the
pandemic included being under 65, Canadian-born, a frontline worker, reporting pandemic-related
income/job loss or loneliness/isolation, experiencing a highly stressful/traumatic event during one's
lifetime, and having lower household income and educational attainment. Continued surveillance of
suicide and risk/protective factors is needed to inform suicide prevention efforts.
THALIDOMIDE
SYNOPSIS
• The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) application process was launched
on June 3, 2019 and will remain open for a period of five years. The CTSSP is currently helping to support
124 survivors.
• To date, 235 applications have been submitted to the administrator and are at various stagesof
the three-step probability based medical assessment process. Applicants denied at any step of the
process have until June 3, 2024, to provide additional information to support their submission.
• Although the new approach for determining eligibility aligns with international best practices, in
2021, four claimants filed judicial review applications in Federal Court challenging the administrator’s
decision denying their application for eligibility under the program:
• two are challenging the date of birth criteria. While one application is before the Court, the
other is in abeyance pending resolution of the first; and
• two are claiming the administrator’s decision to deny their application was unreasonable and
that reasons provided were unlawful.Both are before the Court.
• The class proceeding known as Wenham v Attorney General of Canada, filed notice appealing
the June 28, 2021 Court decision that dismissed their motion claiming there was a breach of Settlement.
The appeal focusses on the reasons provided for denial.
• In February 2021, a small group of confirmed thalidomide survivors, who refer to themselves as
the Thalidomide Survivors Task Group, filed a Charter Claim against the Crown (Ontario Superior Court).
The claim alleges that the Crown breached the individuals’ rights with respect to the provision of
services to individual plaintiffs, mismanagement of the impact of thalidomide on the plaintiffs, and the
overall funding and management of the CTSSP.
POTENTIAL QUESTION
• What will theGovernment do to support individuals who believe they are thalidomide survivors
but have been denied?
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government is committed to supporting Canadian thalidomide survivors. We want to help
them live the rest of their lives with dignity.
• The Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program uses a probability-based medical
assessment process to determine eligibility based on international best practices.
• The application period will remain open for five years, closing on June 3, 2024. Individuals who
believe they are thalidomide survivors are encouraged to apply.
• Applicants who are missing information or who are denied at any of the three steps of the
assessment process may submit additional information to the third-party administratoruntil June 3,
2024, to support their request.
IF PRESSED ON HOW THE DATE OF BIRTH CRITERIA WAS ESTABLISHED…
• The CTSSP recognizes that it is possible some individuals may have accessed thalidomide before
and after it was authorized on the Canadian market. As such, the date of birth parameters are based on
the global market availability of thalidomide (West Germany October 1, 1957) and a five year period
following the removal of the drug from the Canadian market (March 2, 1962).
• The CTSSP will consider individuals born in Canada between December 3, 1957 and December
21, 1967, and whose date of birth coincides with maternal ingestion of thalidomide in the first trimester.
This 10-year eligibility period factors in possible premature birth at 22 weeks gestation and possible
post-term delivery at 42 weeks gestation.
IF PRESSED ON INDIVIDUALS WITH CONGENITAL MALFORMATIONS WHO WERE BORN OUTSIDE THE
DOB PERIOD…
• Sadly, to this day, a number of children are born with spontaneous or otherwise unaccountable
malformations similar to thosecaused by thalidomide.
• According to the World Health Organization, congenital malformations may be the result of one
or more genetic, infectious, nutritional or environmental factors. Approximately half of all birth defects
cannot be linked to a specific cause.
IFPRESSED ON CURRENT LITIGATION…
• It would be inappropriate to comment further as these remain open before the Court.
Nevertheless, the Government continues to work toward providing support to Canadian thalidomide
survivors who may have been previously overlooked.
BACKGROUND
Early History
• Thalidomide, developed as a non-addictive sedative, was approved by the Department of
National Health and Welfare (now Health Canada) and prescribed off-label to treat morning sickness in
expectant mothers.
• Government records show that thalidomide was authorized for use in Canada in sample form on
June 23, 1959. It was licensed for prescription use on April 1, 1961 and remained legally available in
Canada until March 2, 1962, when it was removed from the market due to its side effects.
• In 1991, the Government of Canada finalized an Extraordinary Assistance Plan (EAP) of $8.5M
for persons born with disabilities as a result of thalidomide.
Thalidomide Survivors Contribution Program (TSCP) (2015)
• The TSCP used a documentary evidence-based process, developed in 1991 for the Extraordinary
Assistance Plan for Thalidomide Victims, to determine eligibility. Supports included a tax-free, lump sum
payment, ongoing annual payments based on level of disability, and access to an Extraordinary Medical
Assistance Fund (EMAF) to cover medical expenses such as specialized surgery and home or vehicle
adaptations not otherwise covered by provincial/territorial health care plans.
• Among the 193 individuals who applied to the TSCP, 25 new survivors were confirmed.
Canadian Thalidomide Survivors Support Program (CTSSP) (2019)
• The CTSSP uses a probability-based medical assessment process that considers date and place of
birth, congenital malformations, and any available evidence of maternal use of thalidomide during the
first trimester of pregnancy.
• Eligible applicants will receive an ex gratia payment of $250,000, and ongoing tax-free
payments. The EMAF increased from $500,000 to $1,000,000 per year to account for an anticipated
increase in the number of recognizedsurvivors.
• Survivors supported by the TSCP were transferred to the CTSSP, continue to receive their
benefits and received an ex gratia payment of $125,000 to equalize the ex gratia payments to survivors
under the two programs.
• The total number of confirmed Canadian survivors is 124.
Media
• The April 2019 CTSSP announcement generated a low level of mixed media attention. There has
been nothing notable since then.
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH SUPPORT FOR COVID-19RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Canadians and people around the world are expecting the international research community to
quickly develop and rollout safe vaccines and therapies to deal with the COVID-19 pandemic and return
to a more normal life.
KEY FACTS
• As of February, and since the beginning of the pandemic, CIHR and partners have invested
beyond$393 million on 923 research projects through 32 competitions.
• Funds were provided through competitions such as the initial Rapid Research response (e.g.
testing andvaccines), the COVID & Mental Health Initiative, knowledge syntheses, and emerging
research gaps and priorities, and more recently expanding towards long-term health impacts.
KEY MESSAGES
• Research is central to our domestic and international effortsto address COVID-19 and the
Canadian research community has risen to the challenge at an unprecedented pace.
• Through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), our government has been working
hand in hand with domestic and international partnersto find solutions to this pandemic.
• I have confidence that these initiatives led by CIHR will contribute to the evidence we need to
help Canada address this public health crisis.
IF PRESSED ON DETAILS OF THESE INVESTMENTS…
• Since March 2020, CIHR has moved quickly, working with partners, to invest more than $393
million in more than 900 research projects, which focus not only on vaccines, but also on other
therapeutics, testing, and transmission dynamics, and other COVID-19 related priority areas as they
emerged.
• This includes support for the creation of new research evidence to address the substance use
and mental health needs of Canadians during these difficult times.
• Enabled by this investment, CIHR and partners acrossCanada collaborated to inform the
implementation of promising interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness
within long-term care facilities.
• I am also pleased to say that CIHR’s investments towards COVID-19 research have committed to
supporting research that addresses the impact of the pandemic on the well-being of Indigenous Peoples,
enhancing Indigenous community-led research and knowledge mobilization
• Further, these investments support research that will increase our understanding of persistent
and emerging gaps and priority areas–including variants of concern and Long-COVID–that continue to
provide decision makers with rapid evidence from which guidance can be developed and evaluated.
BACKGROUND
COVID-19 Rapid ResearchResponse at a glance:
Canada’s research community is contributing to both the global and domestic response to COVID-19 and
is well-poised for significant discoveries.
The Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR), as Canada’s health research fundingagency, has
moved at an unprecedented pace to mobilize the research community and deliver programs while
maintaining rigour in funding the most outstanding research.
CIHR and its federal and provincial partners accelerated their timelines to invest $55.3M that translated
into 100 research grants from the initial COVID-19 Rapid Research Response competition in March 2020.
This included support for research into vaccines, diagnostics, transmission dynamics, therapeutics and
clinical management, and research into coordination, governance, and logistics; public health response
and its impact; social dynamics, communications, and trust; and, transmission dynamics.
In April 2020, CIHR received an additional $114.9M in funding for additional countermeasures against
COVID-19, which:
• enabled researchers to accelerate the development, testing and implementation of medical and
social countermeasures to mitigate the rapid spread of COVID-19 and its negative consequences on
people, communities, and health systems;
• supported CIHR’s COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative;
• secured Canadian participation in domestic and international clinical trials to increase the
understanding of the efficacy and effectiveness of vaccines, therapeutics, mental health supports and
clinical management approaches to COVID-19.
CIHR’s COVID-19 Rapid Response funding opportunities also enabled partnerships between industry
leaders (e.g. Medicago, Inovio), and Canadian researchers.
Additionally, CIHR–in partnership with PHAC-fundsthe Canadian Immunization Research Network
(CIRN), a national network that undertakes coordinated, collaborative, and multi-disciplinary vaccine
and immunization-related research. This includes examining various biomedical research questions and
aspects of the vaccine life cycle including safety, short-and long-term effectiveness and protection, as
well as social issues like hesitancy and uptake.
CIHR has also invested in research to better understand and address the impacts of the pandemic on the
opioid crisis in Canada. With a $1M investment from CIHR, CRISM (a CIHR funded network) produced
national guidance documents to enable the development and dissemination of national guidelines
related to prescribing, dispensing, and delivery of opioids and othernarcotics during the COVID-19
pandemic to support people who use drugs.
CIHR also invested $2.2 million to fund the Operating Grant for the Evaluation of Harm Reductions
Approaches to Address the Opioid Crisis in the Context of COVID-19. This investmentis funding five
research grants that would address harm reduction approaches to the opioid crisis and to better
understand its compounding intersection with the COVID-19 pandemic.
To inform the next steps of the COVID-19 response in long-term care, CIHRand partners have invested
$3.4M to support evidence-informed implementation and sustainability of promising practice
interventions and policies designed to improve pandemic preparedness within long-term care, in
collaboration with Healthcare Excellence Canada.
CIHR launched two Indigenous COVID-19 Rapid Research Funding Opportunities, with a total investment
of approximately $8 million, to support:
• bold, innovative, Indigenous community-led, strengths-based, solutions-focused research
projects that focus on a wide range of topics and use diverse methods, forming a strong base to study
and understand the experiences of First Nations, Inuit, Métis, and Urban Indigenous communities
throughout the COVID-19 pandemic.
• enable rapid and timely distinctions-based, and Indigenous community-led research and
knowledge mobilization that is responsive to the unique circumstances and the current phase of the
COVID-19 pandemic in First Nations, Inuit, Métis and Urban Indigenous communities in Canada.
Building on thepriorities from CIHR’s COVID-19 investments, CIHR launched several additional rapid
response competitions to support emerging priorities. This includes investments:
• to support collaboration and rapid response to the need for synthesized Canadian knowledge
and evidence across the full breadth of Canada’s COVID-19 pandemic response (including public-health
measures, clinical management, health-system arrangements, and economic and social impacts).
• to expand existing national and international clinicaltrial networks to coordinate research on
interventions to prevent, detect, manage, and/or treat COVID-19.
• to accelerate research and lead the formation of a variant network to coordinate and align
efforts in this field.
• in a Canadian Network for Emerging Variants Research to enable the rapid support of research
activities required to swiftly characterize and assess the individual and population health threats of
emerging variants of concern.
• to address persistent evidence gaps such as variants of the virus, vaccine development and
uptake, testing, mental health, and the ways in which the COVID-19 pandemic is having specific impacts
on women, racialized populations, and Métis, Inuit and First Nations Peoples.
CIHR also worked with partners to fundresearch on vaccine confidence to improve public understanding
of vaccines and help Canadians to make evidence-based decisions, especially among populations that
are hesitant about vaccines, and to help improve vaccine uptake among populations experiencing
systemic inequities, conditions of marginalization, Indigenous (First Nations, Inuit, Métis and/or Urban
Indigenous) communities and/or among populations who are historically under-vaccinated.
CIHR also invested in 70 projects to improve our understanding of, response to, and recovery from the
co-occurring stressful and traumatic events that stem from the current COVID-19 pandemic, and/or
restricted conditions associated with public health measures in Canada in response to the COVID-19
pandemic, with respect to children, youth and families in Canada.
CIHR is also investing in a series of rolling competitions designed in an iterative way in consultation with
partners. These investments are targeting key emerging research priorities and gaps to contributeto
Canada’s ongoing response to the pandemic in a flexible and rapid way. The first competition was
launched on March 3, 2021 and funded 69 projects for a total of $26.3 million the second competition
was launched on July 27, 2021. The total funding amountavailable for these competitions is
approximately $119M.
Further, the Government of Canada, under the leadership of CIHR, is establishing a Centre for Research
on Pandemic Preparedness and Health Emergencies. The Research Centre will allow CIHR to support
real-time knowledge translation and knowledge mobilization for use by the research community and
decision-makers alike, as well as to invest $15 million per year to build capacity and fund research into
emergent priorities in pandemic preparedness.
CIHR-FUNDED MENTAL HEALTH AND ADDICTIONS RESEARCH
ISSUE
• The Government of Canada has committed to work with the provinces and territories to
increase the availability of high-quality mental health and addiction services forCanadians, particularly
in the context of the current COVID-19 pandemic.
KEY FACTS
• Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413 million in mental health and
behavioural disorders research, over $146 million in research on addictions, and over $23 million dollars
in research related to suicide prevention.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to develop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our government continues to recognize the importance of funding innovative and timely
research that will improve healthoutcomes for people experiencing challenges related to mental health
and substance use.
• That is why, over the last five years, through the Canadian Institutes of Health Research, we
have invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural disorders research and over $146
million in research on addictions.
• This includes investments of $13.5 million in the COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative,
supporting research to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19.
• Additionally, in Budget 2021, we committed $45 million over two years to develop evidence-
informed national mental health service standards.
BACKGROUND
Mental Health
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $413 million in mental health and behavioural
disorders research. This represents more than 1700 projects led by experts across the country.
For example, CIHR, in partnership with the Graham Boeckh Foundation, is supporting ACCESS Open
Minds, a national project that is transforming the way youth aged 11-25 access mental health care by
developing and testing evidence-informed approaches. There are currently 17 sites operating in 7
provinces and one territory. These sites have transformed youth mental health services in diverse ways
based on local context. For example, in Ulukhaktok, a remote community in the Northwest Territories
where professional service providers are not always available, the site is evaluating a model where lay
health workers are trained to provide support to youth in distress.
Between 2016-17 and 2020-21, CIHR invested over $23 million dollars in research related to suicide
prevention. This research will lead to the discovery of new, effective solutions for better prevention.
The impacts of COVID-19 on mental health, substance use, and addiction are also being measured,
offering new evidence-based treatments and services to all Canadians. Recent findings identified that
substance use is increasing during COVID-19, and that treatmentdisruptions can cause relapse,
withdrawal and the restart of risky injection behaviours. While caregivers themselves and older
Canadians require additional supports.
COVID-19 and Mental Health Initiative (CMH)
The mental health of Canadians has worsenedduring the pandemic. In April 2020, CIHR launched the
CMH initiative to provide timely evidence to decision makers on mental health and substance use
responses in the context of COVID-19. CIHR launched four funding opportunities under this initiative,
supporting a total of 101 projects for a total investment of $13.7M from CIHR and partners, including:
• Rapid synthesis and knowledge-to-action funding opportunity for current evidence on mental
health service needs, delivery and guidelines, practice and related issues, in the COVID-19 context.
• $1M directed grant to the Canadian Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM) to
undertake urgent activities to support people who use drugs, decision-makers and care providers in light
of COVID-19.
• COVID-19Mental Health & Substance Use Service Needs and Delivery funding opportunity to
advance research on understanding rapid system transformations, developing innovative adaptations of
services and/or delivery and matching access to service with needs.
• $191K to four CMH grantees to accelerate rapid research related to emerging SARS-CoV-2
variants and generate timely evidence relevant to biological, clinical, health system, and public health
strategies.
Budget 2021
Highlights with respect to mental healthresearch and services from Budget 2021 include:
• $45 million/2 years, starting in 2021-22, to Health Canada, PHAC, and CIHR to help develop
national mental health service standards, in collaboration with provinces and territories, health
organizations, and key stakeholders.
Substance Use
CIHR supports researchers across Canada that aim to address various issues related to substance use
and has invested more than $146 in the area between 2016-17 and 2020-201.
In 2014, CIHR established a national research network in problematic substance use called the Canadian
Research Initiative in Substance Misuse (CRISM). CRISM is composed of four large regional nodes (British
Columbia, Prairies, Ontario, Québec/Atlantic) that connect researchers, service providers, decision
makers and people with lived experience from across Canada. CRISM is recognized as a critical network
that responds to the policy and evidence needs of decision-makers. CRISM activities include:
• The OPTIMA Study (2016-ongoing)–a national multi-site clinical trial involving over 270
participants recruited from all four CRISM Nodes to compare and evaluate two models of care for the
treatment of opioid use disorder. (~$4.4 million over 4 years).
• National Treatment Guideline–CRISM has developed a National Guideline for the clinical
management of opioid use disorder, which was published in the Canadian Medical Association Journal
on March 5, 2018.
• Implementation Research Program–On September 14, 2017, CIHR announced a new
investment of $7.5million over six years for CRISM to conduct a national research program for effective
implementation of evidence-based interventions into clinical and community.
On April 16, 2021, CIHR launched CRISM Phase II: Regional Nodes funding opportunity. This funding
opportunity represents a total investment of $17M over 6 years, beginning in 2022-2023, and looks to
build and expand on the successes of the Initiative’s first phase by increasing the number of Regional
Nodes to enhance geographic coverage while maintaining the “Network of Networks” and expanding
capacity.
In addition to priority-driven investments to CRISM, CIHR also invested $1.5 million to support
evaluation of interventions implemented across Canada in response to the opioid crisis through the
Evaluation of Interventions to Address the Opioid Crisis Funding Opportunity.
In March 2020, CIHR supported 7 projects on methamphetamine and related psychostimulant use,
totaling $700,000. This funding supports research in diverse areas including effectiveness of existing
treatment options, harm reduction strategies, sociocultural impacts of methamphetamine use and
epidemiology of methamphetamine use and associated disorders.
In March 2022, CIHR announced $2M in funding to support 20 one-year catalyst grants on alcohol. These
projects will strengthen the evidence base and expand alcohol research in key areas, foster alcohol-
related research capacity, and inform the development of future larger scale research projects.
Best Brain Exchange (BBE)
In November2020, CIHR hosted the ‘Innovations in Virtual Care for Mental Health and Substance Use’
BBE in collaboration with the British Columbia Ministry of Health, British Columbia Ministry of Mental
Health and Addictions, and Michael Smith Foundation for Health Research. This BBE brought together
provincial policy and decision makers, researchers and implementation experts, non-governmental
organizations and other key stakeholders to gain an understanding of how virtual care can meet the
unique and evolving mentalhealth and substance use service needs of British Columbia’s diverse
population during and after the COVID-19 pandemic.
CONSIDERATIONS
• The Prime Minister released the new mandate letters on December 16, 2021. The Minister of
Health’s mandate letter included a commitment to work with the Minister of Mental Health and
Addictions and Associate Minister of Health and with the support of the Deputy Prime Minister and
Minister of Finance to establish a permanent, ongoing Canada Mental Health Transfer, to help expand
the delivery of high-quality, accessible and free mental health services, including for prevention and
treatment.
The Minister of Mental Health and Addictions and Associate Minister of Health’s mandate letter named
many priorities that will support the mental health of Canadians and require timely and high-quality
mental health and substance use research, including:
• Develop mental health standards, with a particular focus on equity;
• Advance a comprehensive strategy to address problematicsubstance use in Canada, supporting
efforts to improve public education to reduce stigma, and supporting provinces and territories and
working with Indigenous communities to provide access to a full range of evidence-based treatment and
harm reduction, aswell as to create standards for substance use treatment programs.
CANADIAN INSTITUTES OF HEALTH RESEARCH
ISSUE
• Health researchers continue to be supportive of the recommendations made in Canada’s
Fundamental Science Review report (2017). Many stakeholders have called for increased funding for
fundamental science and research in Canada.
KEY FACTS
• In Budget 2018alone, the federal government committed nearly $4 billion over five years to
support the next generation of Canadian researchers. This included $354.7 million over five years, with
$90.1 million per year ongoing, for the Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its
support for fundamental research.
KEY MESSAGES
• Our Government recognizes that investing in research and supporting Canadian researchers is
pivotal to addressing health issues facing Canadians, and the current pandemic has reminded us all of
the importance of having access to research evidence.
• Over the last 5 years, we made historical investments toward research.
• In Budget 2018 alone, we committed nearly $4 billion over five years to support the next
generation of Canadian researchers.
• This included $354.7 million over five years, with $90.1 million per year ongoing, for the
Canadian Institutes of Health Research (CIHR) to increase its support for fundamental research.
IF PRESSED ON BUDGET 2021 INVESTMENTS…
• Budget 2021 further committed to funding important research areas including clinical trials,
pediatric cancer, diabetes, mental health, and women’s health in addition to research on COVID-19–to
name a few.
• With these continued investments, our Government demonstrates its commitment to support a
vibrant, equitable and diverse research community that will help us address the major health challenges
of tomorrow.
BACKGROUND
Budget 2018
Budget 2018 provided Canada’s federal granting agencies with investmentsin fundamental science:
o CIHR: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o NSERC: $354.7 million over 5 years, $90.1 million ongoing
o SSHRC: $215.5 million over5 years, $54.8 million ongoing
To accelerate Canada’s transition to a more modern approach to research, Budget 2018 also proposed
$275 million over five years, starting in 2018–19, and $65 million per year ongoing to create a new tri-
council fund to support research that is international, interdisciplinary, fast-breaking and higher-risk.
This investment has resulted in launch and implementation of the New Frontiers in Research program.
Budget 2018 also provided support for the Canada Research Chairs program-$210 million over five
years, starting in 2018–19, with $50 million per year ongoing (including $82 million for CIHR, $82 million
for NSERC and $46 million for SSHRC). The purpose of this investment will be to better support early-
career researchers, while increasing diversity among nominated researchers, including increasing the
number of women who are nominated for Canada Research Chairs.
Support for Canadian Researchers in response to the pandemic
In April 2020, the Government of Canada announced comprehensive support of nearly $9 billion for
post-secondary students and recent graduates. As part of this investment, the government extended
expiring federal graduate research scholarships and postdoctoral fellowships, and supplemented
existing federal research grants, to support students and post-doctoral fellows, by providing $291.6
million to the federal granting councils.
In May 2020, the Government of Canada announced $450 million in funding to help Canada's academic
research community during the COVID-19 pandemic.
Budget 2021
In order to grow Canada’s bio-manufacturing sector,Budget 2021 invested a total of $2.2 billion over 7
years into multiple initiatives. As part of this investment, $250M will be used to create a new Clinical
Trials Fund, managed by CIHR, which will support research teams and infrastructure across the country
to conduct clinical trials. These trials will test new drugs, treatments, and interventions to prevent,
detect, treat or manage various diseases or medical conditions.
In addition, $250M will be allocated to create a Tri-Council Biomedical Research Fund. This new fund will
support bio-innovation-related research that straddles the health and natural sciences and connects
these efforts to industrial and health system partners to enhance key bio-innovation capabilities.
Budget 2021 also committed $20 million over 5 years starting in 2021-22, to CIHR to support a new
National Institute for Women’s Health Research. The creation of a National Institute for Women’s
Health Research will advance a coordinated research program that addresses under-researched and
high-priority areas of women’s health and ensure new evidence improves women’s care and health
outcomes.
Finally, Budget 2021 committed $30 million dollars over two years to CIHR to fund targeted research
into pediatric cancer. This funding will support promising research projects with the greatest potential
for fighting pediatric cancers, and will establish research networks across Canada to address knowledge
gaps in pediatric cancer research. These investments will also help improve health systems and health
outcomes for pediatric cancer patients and their families.
Mandate Letters
The Minister of Health’s December 2021 mandate letter includes commitments related to supporting
and strengthening the Canadian research ecosystem in collaboration with the Minister of Innovation,
Science and Industry to: advance the Biomanufacturing and Life Sciences Strategy; invest in the study of
the long-term health impacts of COVID-19; move forward with a uniquely Canadian approach modeled
on the Defense Advanced ResearchProjects Agency; and develop a plan to modernize the federal
research funding ecosystem.
The Minister of Innovation, Science and Industry’s mandate letter also included commitments focused
on strengthening the Canadian research ecosystem, such as improving support for Black and Indigenous
researchers, and adding 1,000 Canada Research Chairs.
