Created: 2024-04-02T14:01:41.645281
Name: Health_Product_InfoWatch:_February_2024
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/medeffect-canada/health-product-infowatch/february-2024.html
Package ID: b5b25ed2-6ac1-48da-88d3-732db5279ec3
Keywords: ['Health product', 'infowatch', 'February 2024', 'pharmaceuticals', 'biologics', 'medical devices', 'natural health products']
Notes: The following is a list of health product advisories, type I drug recalls and summaries of completed safety reviews published in January 2024 by Health Canada.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Health Product InfoWatch: February 2024 - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Drugs and health products MedEffect Canada Health Product InfoWatch Health Product InfoWatch: February 2024 Download the alternative format (PDF format, 336 KB, 3 pages) Health Products and Food BranchMarketed Health Products DirectorateHealth Product InfoWatch Editorial Team ISSN: 2368-8025 Cat.: H167-1E-PDF Pub.: 230000 Contents Health products mentioned in this issue Monthly recap of health product safety information New health product safety information Product monograph update Allergenic Extract Pollens and Allergenic Extract Non Pollens (allergenic extracts for diagnostic use only) Scope Reporting Adverse Reactions Helpful links Suggestions? Health products mentioned in this issue Pharmaceuticals and biologics Allergenic Extract Non Pollens Allergenic Extract Pollens Colistin (colistimethate sodium) Natural and non-prescription health products Pediatrix Acetaminophen Oral Solution for children Other Unauthorized health products Monthly recap of health product safety information The following is a list of health product advisories, type I drug recalls and summaries of completed safety reviews published in January 2024 by Health Canada. Colistin (colistimethate sodium) This safety review evaluated the risk of pseudo-Bartter syndrome associated with colistin (colistimethate sodium)-containing products. Health Canada’s review of the available information found a link. Health Canada is working with the manufacturers to update the Canadian product monograph for colistin (colistimethate sodium)-containing products with a warning about reported cases of pseudo-Bartter syndrome. Summary Safety Review: Colistin (colistimethate sodium) Pediatrix Acetaminophen Oral Solution for children Teva Canada Ltd. recalled one lot of Pediatrix Acetaminophen Oral Solution after routine product testing found a higher than acceptable amount of acetaminophen in the affected lot (approximately 185mg/5mL rather than the approved and labelled 160mg/5mL). Advisory: Pediatrix Acetaminophen Oral Solution for children Unauthorized Health Products Health Canada advised Canadians about various unauthorized health products being sold at retail locations across Canada or online that may pose serious health risks.Advisory: Unauthorized sexual enhancement products New health product safety information The following topics have been included to raise awareness and encourage reporting of adverse reactions. Product monograph update The following safety labelling update, which was recently made to the Canadian product monograph, has been included for your awareness. A complete list of safety labelling updates for pharmaceuticals is available on Health Canada's Product monograph brand safety updates page. Canadian product monographs can be accessed through Health Canada's Drug Product Database. Allergenic Extract Pollens and Allergenic Extract Non Pollens (allergenic extracts for diagnostic use only) The Warnings and Precautions and Patient Medication Information sections of the Canadian product monograph for Allergenic Extract Pollens and Allergenic Extract Non Pollens marketed by ALK-Abelló Pharmaceuticals, Inc. have been updated with the risk of anaphylaxis following false negative food allergen skin test results. Key messages for healthcare professionals:Footnote 1 There have been post-market reports of false negative skin test results, associated with anaphylaxis from subsequent exposure to the allergen. Based on the patient’s clinical history, and if there is a high index of suspicion, healthcare providers should confirm negative skin testing with serologic testing by measuring specific serum IgE or with a medically-supervised oral food challenge. There is currently a stop sale in place for the non-standardized peanut extract and for the non-standardized pecan extract products marketed by ALK-Abelló Pharmaceuticals, Inc. Scope This monthly publication is intended primarily for healthcare professionals and includes information on pharmaceuticals, biologics, medical devices and natural health products. It provides a summary of key health product safety information published in the previous month by Health Canada, as well as a selection of new health product safety information meant to raise awareness. New information contained in this issue is not comprehensive but rather represents a selection of clinically relevant items warranting enhanced dissemination. Reporting Adverse Reactions Canada Vigilance Program Telephone: 1-866-234-2345 Fax or mail: Form available on MedEffect Canada For more information on how to report an adverse reaction, visit the Adverse Reaction and Medical Device Problem Reporting page. Helpful links MedEffectTM Canada Recalls and Safety Alerts Database New Safety and Effectiveness Reviews Canada Vigilance Adverse Reaction Online Database Drug Product Database Medical Devices Active Licence Listing Licensed Natural Health Products Database The Drug and Health Product Portal Drug Shortages Canada Medical Device Shortages COVID-19 Vaccines and Treatments Portal Suggestions? Your comments are important to us. Let us know what you think by reaching us at:infowatch-infovigilance@hc-sc.gc.ca Health Product InfoWatch Editorial Team Marketed Health Products Directorate Health Canada Address Locator 1906C Ottawa ON K1A 0K9 Reference Footnote 1 Allergenic Extract Pollens and Allergenic Extract Non Pollens (allergenic extracts for diagnostic use only) [product monograph]. Mississauga (ON): ALK-Abelló Pharmaceuticals, Inc., 2024. Return to footnote 1 referrer Page details Date modified: 2024-02-29 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy