Created: 2018-03-05T20:00:15.747689
Name: Drug_Product_Database_-_All_Files
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/drugs-health-products/drug-products/drug-product-database.html
Package ID: bf55e42a-63cb-4556-bfd8-44f26e5a36fe
Keywords: ['dpd', 'drug product', 'pharmaceutical drugs', 'biological drugs', 'brand name', 'drug identification number', 'din', 'company', 'active ingredient', 'route of administration', 'product monograph', 'pm', 'pharmaceutical form', 'package sizes', 'therapeutic classification', 'ahfs', 'atc', 'active ingredient group number', 'aig', 'pharmaceutical standard', 'veterinary species', 'search tips', 'terminology', 'data extracts', 'faq', 'frequently asked questions', 'dpd online query']
Notes:         The Drug Product Database (DPD) system captures information on Canadian human, veterinary and disinfectant products approved for use by Health Canada. 
To facilitate the use of the drug product data, multiple Drug Product files are available.
Users can access the complete data set through the “Drug Product” file. 
Subsets of the data can be accessed in the “Drug Product By …” files. The data in these files are filtered based on the current drug product status. For example, only drug product data for Approved products will be found in the “Drug Product By Approved Status” file.

-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Drug Product Database: Access the database - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Drugs and health products Drug products Drug Product Database: Access the database Access the database Access the extracts Contact us More information For industry information about COVID-19, visit our COVID-19 Drugs and vaccines section. Access the database Search the Drug Product Database (DPD) to find drugs authorized for sale by Health Canada. The DPD is updated nightly and includes: availability of the drug in Canada product monograph (PM) for human drugs labels for animal drugs Generic drug manufacturers must update their PM to ensure it aligns with the Canadian Reference Product. The Product Monograph Brand Safety Updates table provides updates on safety information in PMs of brand name pharmaceutical drug products. Search the Drug Product Database Page details Date modified: 2015-06-18 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy