Created: 2025-02-14T18:21:21.501888
Name: Bill_C-368_at_HESA-_Standing_Committee_on_Health
Original URL: https://open.canada.ca/data/dataset/bff0ebc2-297a-49e5-ac39-3e95ab76cfaa/resource/fffe72b9-4172-4c15-b024-f2c4db64c1f7/download/bill-c-368-at-hesa-standing-committee-on-health-eng.pdf
Package ID: bff0ebc2-297a-49e5-ac39-3e95ab76cfaa
Keywords: ['Natural Health Products', 'Health', 'Parliamentary Committee appearance']
Notes: Minister Hollands briefing binder for his appearance at HESA on Bill C-368.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Unclassified / Non classifié
Bill C-368 at HESA-Standing Committee on Health
Minister Holland Binder
October 29th, 2024
Bill C-368 at HESA-Standing Committee on Health
Minister Holland Binder
Table of Contents
1. Questions and Answers
2. Key Facts
Questions & Answers
BillC-368 (natural health products)
Q1.What is the objective of Bill C-368, and how does it propose to amend the Food and Drugs Act?
A1.On December 5, 2023, Bill C-368 An Act to Amend the Food and Drugs Act (natural health
products) was introduced in the House of Commons by Conservative MP Blaine Calkins. Bill C-368
seeks to amend the Food and Drugs Act (FDA) by removing “natural healthproducts” from the
definition of “therapeutic product”. The bill reverses the regulatory oversight provided by Bill C-47,
Budget Implement Act 2023, which brought NHPs under the purview of the Protecting Canadians
from Unsafe Drugs Act (Vanessa’s Law).
The preamble of the bill clarifies a purpose that natural health products are not therapeutic
products within the meaning of that Act and therefore are not subject to the same monitoring
regime as other drugs.
Q2. What is Vanessa’s Law, when was it first introduced, and why?
A2. The Protecting Canadians from Unsafe Drugs Act (also known as Vanessa’s Law) received Royal
Assent in November 2014 and amended the FDA to give Health Canada additional transparency,
post-market monitoring, and compliance and enforcement tools for therapeutic products, such as
prescription and over-the-counter drugs, biologic drugs, and medical devices. While NHPs were
initially intended for inclusion in Vanessa’s Law, there was a strong effort from a minority of
stakeholders to remove them. As a result, NHPs were ultimately scoped out of Vanessa’s Law in
2014, and Health Canada had to rely on voluntary action by industry when health and safety issues
associated with NHPs occurred.
For example, Vanessa’s Law grants the Minister of Health with the powers to 1) order recalls; 2)
require a product label or package change if necessary; and 3) impose tougher fines and penalties
for non-compliance, etc. Additional authorities such as adding terms and conditions to licences, or
requiring mandatory reporting of serious adverse drug reactions and medical device incidents by
healthcare institutions may also be enabled for NHPs with the development of regulations in the
future.
With the experience gained through 20 years of regulating these products, we have seen
considerable evidence of non-compliance with the Natural Health Product Regulations, resulting in
health and safety risks to Canadians. For years now, Health Canada hasstressed that its inability to
take swift action on NHPs when health and safety issues are identified, like the ability to mandate a
recall of unsafe or non-complaint NHPs, was problematic and needed to be addressed.
It cannot be overstated that while NHPs are often perceived as low-risk, these products are not risk
free, especially if used improperly and without appropriate regulatory oversight. Some products
also include addictive substances, such as nicotine replacement therapies.
Q3. Why was Vanessa’s Law extended to cover NHPs, and what gaps did it address?
Unclassified / Non classifié
A3.Prior to the extension, NHPs were the only type of health product exempt from key post-market
tools which were available for all other health products that Health Canada regulates, such as
drugs and medical devices.
For years, Health Canada had stressed the importance of exploring legislative amendments to
strengthen its ability to deter and address non-compliance, as was possible for other health
products. The existing tools can be effective in situations when the regulated party is cooperative
and takes swift action. However, they are ineffective at obtaining compliance and mitigating risk
when a regulated party refuses to cooperate or partake in voluntary mechanisms.
For example, existing authorities to issue a stop sale order, licence suspension, or licence
cancellation prohibits future sales of the harmful product in question; a recall order goes further
and targets already sold and distributed products, getting themcorrected or removing them from
retailers or wholesalers. For the same reasons that the Minister shouldn’t need to rely on
companies to voluntarily suspend and cancel their product licences, the Minister shouldn’t need to
rely on companies to voluntarilyrecall their products when there is a serious or imminent risk of
injury to health.
In 2023, Health Canada extended Vanessa’s Law to NHPs to protect the health of Canadians by
enabling Health Canada to take swift action if a serious risk to health is suspected or identified with
NHPs on the market, consistent with other health products and food. For example, these
amendments allowed Health Canada to order a recall of a product or add warnings on labels to
support safe use, if necessary, which it couldn’t do before. To mandate a recall for example, these
new authorities will only be used ifa serious risk to health is identified and if a company refuses to
partake in voluntary mechanisms.
Q4. Has Health Canada observed safety issues with NHPs over the years?
A4. From 2004 until December 2021, Health Canada received reports of over 8,000 adverse
reactions in which NHPs use had a suspected role, of which over 5,000 were serious. More recently,
for a two-year period beginning in 2021, Health Canada received 1,019reports of adverse reactions
in which NHPs had a suspected role, of which 772 were serious (e.g., required hospitalization or
were life threatening). And these are only the reports which Health Canada received. Adverse
reactions are known to be significantly underreported both in Canada and internationally.
It is important to note, adverse reaction reports are suspected associations with the reported NHP;
they often don’t include enough information for Health Canada to determine if the reaction was the
result of using a specific health product. In 2021, Health Canada reviewed four Canadian adverse
reaction reports of liver injury associated with products containing Artemisia annellua, a common
type of wormwood; however, the adverse reaction reports did not contain sufficient information for
Health Canada to conclude a causal link between the product and the reported risk.
See Key Facts Document for more information
Q5. How would Bill C-368 impact Health Canada's current approach to regulating NHPs (mandate
recalls, label changes, adverse event reporting, etc.)?
A5.The adoption of Bill C-368 would repeal the Vanessa's Law provisions for NHPs, and thus
significantly weaken Health Canada's ability to protect consumer safety. Without the ability to issue
mandatory recalls, unsafe products could remain on the market for longer periods, significantly
increasing the risk of serious harm or injury to Canadians. This would leave consumers vulnerable
to potentially severe health risks that could otherwise be swiftly addressed.
Furthermore, the loss of authority to enforce label changes would mean Health Canada could not
compel manufacturers to update safety warnings or dosage instructions, even when serious risks
to injury are identified. Similarly, it would prevent Health Canada from enacting additional
Vanessa’s Law authorities currently pending legislation to be enacted. This includes authorities
such as adding terms and conditions to licences, or requiring the mandatory reporting of serious
adverse drug reactions and medicaldevice incidents by healthcare institutions. Doing so would
greatly reduce Health Canada’s ability to track patterns of harm or emerging health risks associated
with an NHP in the future.
Q6.How would Bill C-368 affect Health Canada's ability to respond to health risks for NHPs
(timeframes for action, enforcement capabilities, industry compliance, etc.)?
Unclassified / Non classifié
A6. Bill C-368’s rollback of Vanessa’s Law would slow Health Canada’s ability to respond quickly to
health risks, as it would no longer have the authority to mandate certain corrective actions such as
recalls or label changes. Currently, with Vanessa’s Law, Health Canada can take action swiftly
when a serious risk to injury is identified, enforcing immediate recalls or safety warnings without
needing to wait for companies to act voluntarily.
Under Bill C-368, Health Canada would lose this capacity for immediate enforcement, meaning
that unsafe products could remain on the market until companies choose to take action. Moreover,
without the ability to impose penalties or enforce recalls or labelchanges, Health Canada's
enforcement capabilities would be severely reduced, making it harder to manage the risks that exist
for Canadians. In addition, companies might be less motivated to adhere to safety regulations
promptly, knowing that there would be fewer consequences for non-compliance. This would
increase the risk of prolonged consumer exposure to unsafe products.
Q7. What is the impact of Bill C-368 on Nicotine Replacement Therapy Ministerial Order?
A7. On August 28, 2024, Health Canada published a Ministerial Order in the Canada Gazette, Part II
using the authorities introduced through Bill C-69 for the first time following growing concerns that
the popularity of new and emerging orally administerednicotine replacement therapies that are
natural health products was leading to recreational use by people who do not smoke, and, in
particular, young people under 18 years of age.
This order introduced supplementary rules to reduce the appeal of, access to, and use of these
products by young people for unintended uses while maintaining access for adults wishing to quit
smoking. Health Canada has seen the impacts that vaping had on youth in Canada and the
increased interest in newer products that have emerged, such as nicotine pouches.
Health Canada shares the strong concerns expressed by health care professionals about youth
using new nicotine replacement therapies like pouches recreationally, and the Department acted
quickly to prevent youth access and appeal to these products. If BillC-368 is implemented
however, the new Ministerial authorities introduced through Bill C-69 would no longer apply to
NHPs. Removing NHPs from the Food and Drugs Act’s definition of therapeutic products would
mean that Health Canada could no longer have these safeguards in place for young people to
reduce their exposure to nicotine and addiction, and leave them exposed in a way that will
significantly impact their future health.
Q8. How does Bill C-368 compare with the recommendations outlined in the 2021 CESD Audit and
subsequent 2022 PACP report?
A8. Bill C-368 contradicts the recommendations made in both the 2021 CESD Audit and
subsequent 2022 PACP Report, which called for stronger post-market oversight for NHPs. For
example, the CESD audit specifically remarked that Health Canada did not have theauthority to
order a change to a label or force a mandatory recall of a natural health product for any reason,
including when a product presents a serious or imminent risk of injury to health.
The audit made a number of recommendations, including the need to strengthen post-market
oversight for NHPs. This was reinforced by the Standing Committee on Public Accounts in 2022,
who specifically requested that Health Canada revise the fines and penalties currently in place for
NHPs. This is an important point, as the lack of a proper deterrent has led to high levels of non-
compliance within the NHP industry. For decades, the maximum fine a company could receive for
an infraction was $5,000, a fundamental misalignment and less effective as a deterrent for
noncompliance when compared to the $5,000,000 maximum fines for all other health products.
These reports emphasized the need for regulatory tools, the majority of which were addressed by
Bill C-47 but would be reversed under Bill C-368. By removing NHPs from the scope of vanessa's
law, Bill C-368 directly undermines these key recommendations, leaving gaps in consumer
protection and reducing Health Canada’s ability to ensure the safety of NHPs.
Q9. What are examples of how Vanessa's Law could improve NHP safety?
A9.With the authorities conferred by Vanessa’s Law. Health Canada has been able to better protect
consumer safety, gathering better post-market safety information. For example, 18,990 mandatory
reports of serious adverse events for drugs and medical devices submitted by hospitals from
Unclassified / Non classifié
December 2019 to November 2022. In addition, 964 notifications following information issued by a
foreign regulator concerning the safety of a product regulated in another jurisdiction were received.
Vanessa’s Law has supported health products safety. For example, in August 2020 following a
safety review for ulipristal (a drug used to treat uterine fibroids) that took place after data was
received involving liver injury, the Minister had questions pertaining to the risk benefit balance for
some patients and whether the risk could be effectively mitigated. This work was facilitated by
Vanessa’s Law.
Another example is the use of authorities under Vanessa’s Law which permitted Health Canada to
standardize and strengthen the post-market oversight of prescription opioids, allowing for earlier
identification of risks, and to put in place targeted risk minimization activities to prevent or
decrease prescription opioid-related harms in Canada, and to better inform Canadian patients
about the safe use of opioids and their associated risks. Terms and Conditions Letters were issued
to approximately 50 opioid MAHs for more than 100 opioid products, which enabled risk
minimization measures for these products.
Q10.Which industry stakeholders, such as CHFA and NHPPA, have been most vocal in supporting
Bill C-368, and what are their main concerns with the current regulatory framework under
Vanessa’s Law?
A10.A small stakeholder community vocally opposed the amendments included in Bill C-47. These
included the Canadian Health Food Association (CHFA) who initiated a lobbying campaign called
“Save our Supplements”, and the Natural Health Products Protection Association (NHPPA), who
launched the “Pressure your MP” initiative.
While these associations represent a minority in the stakeholder community, they have aggressively
lobbied against Government reforms on NHP regulations by spreading misinformation online and
encouraging the public to send pre-drafted letters to MPs, officials, and senior-level public
servants. The two associations’ efforts to mobilize thousands of Canadians have been successful,
with MPs reporting receiving flyers and other correspondence from constituents stating their
disapproval of Health Canada’s recent efforts to modernize the regulation of NHPs.
Furthermore, the campaigns have received vocal support from the CPC, which has emerged as
strong proponents of these associations’ efforts, and encouraged further public opposition through
townhalls, Parliamentary committee tactics, and media interventionsto oppose these measures. A
large number of Parliamentary petitions have also been tabled in the House of Commons as a
result of this mobilization, all of which have been sponsored by CPC MPs in the 44th Parliament.
The stakeholders’ primary concerns include that Health Canada is overregulating NHPs, which will
lead to increased costs for consumers and fewer products being available. Profitability should rely
on commercializing products that comply with the regulations, and therefore any concerns on this
front are only a problem in cases where industry is not compliant.
Q11.How are stakeholders within the broader healthcare sector reacting to Bill C-368?
A11.Stakeholders across the healthcare sector strongly support maintaining robust regulation for
NHPs. Patient safety organizations and professional bodies emphasize the importance of Health
Canada's role in ensuring that unsafe products are swiftly removed from the market and that safety
information is regularly updated.
Key healthcare professionals, including the Institute for Safe Medication Practices (ISMP), the
Canadian Pharmacists Association (CPhA), or the Healthcare Excellence Canada / Patients for
Patient Safety Canada, have emphasized the need for continued oversight to ensure patient safety.
Overall, the broader healthcare sector has remained consistent in its commitment to minimizing
health risks and ensuring patient safety two strong regulatory frameworks for NHPs.
To contribute to the Committee’s study of Bill C-368, the Canadian Medical Association submitted
a written brief in September 2024 stating the Association had strong concerns with Bill C-368. The
CMA argued against removing NHPs from the definition of therapeutic products as this would
effectively eliminate oversight of the NHP industry and expose Canadians to unnecessary risks.
With respect to the impacts of Bill C-368 on the recent measures put in place to better regulate
nicotine pouches, prominent health stakeholders such as the Canadian Cancer Society and the
Canadian Lung Association have raised strong concerns with youth access and appeal to these
products and welcomed the introduction of new measures which were announced in August to
Unclassified / Non classifié
help prevent youth harms. Health stakeholders are expected to express concern with any impacts
stemming from Bill C-368 on recent federal action on nicotine pouches.
Q12.Stakeholders claim they were caught off-guard by Health Canada’s regulatory changes. How
has Health Canada engaged with stakeholders in the past?
A12.Since the introduction of the Self-Care Framework, Health Canada has signalled its intention
to improve NHP labelling, examine a cost recovery approach for NHPs, and consider post-market
tools for NHPs such as fines and penalties and the ability to requirea recall. This was also
communicated in Health Canada’s response to the 2021 CESD Audit, which is available both
directly within the Audit or in the Department’s public Management Response and Action Plan. This
was again communicated at PACP in response to their study of the Audit and subsequent 2022
report.
Health Canada has consulted extensively in developing and implementing Self-Care Framework
initiatives. Leading up to and following the launch of the fee proposal for NHPs in May 2023,Health
Canada held multilateral meetings and technical sessions with stakeholders, including key industry
associations. In May 2024, Health Canada held a full-day engagement session with stakeholders
regarding the revised fee proposal.
In June 2024, Health Canada engaged with key industry stakeholders to discuss the next steps in
advancing the Self-Care Framework. Health Canada is currently engaging and consulting
stakeholders on monograph updates, labelling implementation, and revised GMP and Quality
Guidance.
Q13.What are the key Parliamentary positions on the Bill?
A13.The positions on Bill C-368 differ across party lines, and the key parliamentary positions are as
follows:
Conservative Party (Sponsor): CPC are the primary proponent of Bill C-368 arguing that NHPs
should not be regulated as pharmaceuticals, as the current oversight under Vanessa's Law places
unnecessary burden on industry. They claim this regulation increasescosts and limits product
availability, maintaining that NHPs are generally safe and require lighter regulation.
During the second reading of Bill C-368, the major issues that the CPC raised included: the need for
freedom of choice in healthcare, the importance of not tampering with NHP industry, the lack of
safety issues with products, the protection of small and medium-sized business from
overregulation, and the need to preserve innovation and not stifle business in Canada.
At a recent parliamentary study of federal regulatory modernization initiatives where NHPs were
raised (September 2024 at OGGO), CPC expressed the concern of financial implications of new
regulations on small and medium-sized businesses; implications on Canadians who rely on NHPs;
the industry being caught off-guard; and the importance of Bill C-368 to maintain consumer
accessibility to NHPs.
New Democratic Party: While the NDP acknowledges the need for consumer safety, they have
expressed concerns about over regulating the industry. They are also opposed to the way Bill C-47
was introduced (via the Budget Implementation Act), arguing this approach has not provided the
opportunity for comments and amendments.
During second reading of Bill C-368, the major issues that the NDP raised included: the historical
significance of NHPs for thousands of years across many cultures, the robustness of the existing
framework, the use of omnibus legislation and need for fulsome stakeholder testimony, the
impacts on small businesses, and the inappropriateness of regulating NHPs like pharmaceutical
products.
At a recent parliamentary study of federal regulatory modernization initiatives where NHPs were
raised (September 2024 at OGGO), NDP raised the issue of a lack of data on NHP risks and
acknowledged that Vanessa’s Law could help obtain high quality data. NDP also questioned how to
determine a balanced definition of drugs.
Bloc Québécois: The Bloc Québécois has mixed views, and while they oppose heavy regulation that
could negatively impact Quebec's industry, they have not taken a clear stance. They may seek to
modify the bill to balance industry interests with consumer safety.
During second reading of Bill C-368, the major issues raised by the Bloc Québécois were: potential
negative impacts on small and medium-sized businesses, the need to maintain choice of
Unclassified / Non classifié
alternative health products, methodological issues and missing data on risks, and need for more
consultation.
At a recent parliamentary study of federal regulatory modernization initiatives where NHPs were
raised (September 2024 at OGGO), the Bloc Québécois raised the issues of clear and flexible
regulations and a balance between safety and access to NHPs.
Key Facts Document
Bill C-368 (natural health products)
Size and Scope of the NHP Industry
50,000+–Estimated number of NHPs currently on the market.
136,000+–Number of Natural Product Numbers (NPNs) issued by Health Canada since 2004,
spread across 8,900 companies.
$13.2 billion–The size of the Canadian NHP market in 2021, according to a Deloitte report, with
exports growing from $0.7 billion (2007) to $3.6 billion (2021)
12,000–average number of NHP product applications received by Health Canada annually.
7,500–average number of new NPNs issued per year by Health Canada.
1,800–average number of NPN amendments per year by Health Canada.
60%–Proportion of NHPs sold by small and medium enterprises, with the majority being Canadian-
owned and family-run.
Consumption Habits and Demographics
73%–Proportion of Canadians who reported using NHPs in 2023.
57%–Proportion of Canadians who report daily use of NHPs in 2023.
52%–Proportion of Canadians whose interest in NHPs increased during the COVID-19 pandemic,
driven by a focus on self-care.
$700 million–Estimated spending by Canadians on vitamins and herbs alone for the 2015-2016
period.
78%–Proportion of people aged 45 to 65 years old who reported using NHPs, representing the
highest prevalence of supplement use across age groups.
80%–Proportion of women who reported using NHPs (compared to 66% of men).
48%–Proportion of people aged 65 + years old who reported using homeopathic products daily,
compared to 61% who reported using traditional medicine daily.
79%–Proportion of parents and other caregivers who reported using NHPs daily, representing one
of the most likely groups (alongside 79% of members of the 2SLGBTQI+ community, and 78%
members of an ethnocultural group) when compared with other Canadians’usage of NHPs.
Product Type and Licensing Breakdown
12,000–Licenses issued for homoeopathic products.
17,500–Licenses issued for Traditional Chinese Medicines
2,000–Licenses issued for Ayurvedic medicines.
783–Number of active domestic site licenses issued by Health Canada, including
358 for manufacturing (including 6 sterile manufacturers)
399 for packaging
467 for labeling
447 for importing (including 30 sterile product importers)
50–Average number of new license holders per year.
51%–Proportion of site license holders in Ontario (398), making it the highest in Canada. The full
breakdown for provinces and territories include:
398 for Ontario, 168 for Québec, 144 for British Columbia, 39 for Alberta, 10 for Manitoba, 9 for
Nova Scotia, 7 for Saskatchewan, 4 for Newfoundland and Labrador, 3 for Prince Edward Island,
and 1 for New Brunswick.
Unclassified / Non classifié
39%–Percentage of site license holders who have held their license for at least 10 years.
Safety Issues and Adverse Reactions Reporting
8,000+–Reports of adverse reactions involving NHPs since 2004, with 5,000+ being reports of
serious adverse events(e.g.,hospitalization or life-threatening).
772 Serious Adverse Reactions–From the 1,019 reports of adverse events received by Health
Canada between 2021-2023.
170+–Number of voluntary recalls of licensed hand sanitizers during the COVID-19 pandemic
(either due to incorrect labeling, use of unsafe ingredients, or inadequate product testing).
18,990–Total number of mandatory reports of serious adverse reactions from hospitals (2019-
2022), with 5,471 medical device incidents and 13,149 serious adverse drug reactions.
964–Number of safety notifications received by Health Canada from foreign regulators about
NHPs and other products regulated in other jurisdictions (2019-2022).
Government Audits, Reports, and Pilots
2021 Commissioner of the Environment and Sustainable Development (CESD) Audit, and 2022
Standing Committee of Public Accounts (PACP) Report, identified significant gaps in Health
Canada’s post-market oversight of NHPs:
88% of a sample of 75 NHPs reviewed were found to have misleading advertising.
56% of the same sample of 75 NHPs had incorrect or incomplete labeling, creating risks for
consumers.
1 in 4 of the 75 NHPs reviewed did not display their Natural Product Number (NPN).
$5,000–maximum penalty for NHP non-compliance (at the time), compared to $5,000,000 for
therapeutic products under Vanessa’s Law.
2021 Pilot Good Manufacturing Practices (GMP) Risk-Based Inspection Program conducted by
Health Canada:
36–Total number of sites (18 manufacturers and 18 importers of non-sterile NHPs) inspected over
six-month period starting March 2021 to assess compliance with regulations.
42%–Percentage of inspected sites found to have serious non-compliance issues.
7 days–Average amount of time spent by inspectors when inspecting each site.
2021 Pilot Risk-Based Advertising Monitoring Program conducted by Health Canada:
3,800–Number of product advertising verified for compliance, including products web links, over
the pilot’s 6-month period.
1,695–Number of authorized products found to be making false or misleading cancer-related
claims.
263–Number of unauthorized products found to be making false or misleading cancer-related
claims.
Product Safety Issues and Noncompliance
Contamination with Foreign Matter or Dangerous Ingredients:
Metal Fibre–In 2024, a company recalled various multivitamins and supplements sold under a
variety of brand names due to the potential presence of metal fibres.
Fibreglass–In 2022, a company recalled one lot of TUMS Peppermint Regular Strength tablets after
some tablets were found to contain fragments of fibreglass and other material, including paper and
aluminum foil.
Lead–In 2021, Health Canada seized unauthorized health products sold as natural health
products at an Ayurvedic clinic that had unacceptable levels of heavy metals (arsenic, lead,
mercury).
Benzene–Some of the 170+ voluntary recalls of hand sanitizers due to safety issues were found to
contain benzene, which is classified as a human carcinogen, ethyl acetate, which may cause dry
skin, and methanol, which may cause dermatitis, eye irritation, upper respiratory system irritation
and headaches (2022).
Labelling Issues and False or Misleading Advertisement:
Unclassified / Non classifié
Inaccurate Dosing–6 reports of adverse reactions from August 2018 to March 2020 were attributed
to dosing errors in Canadian patients taking mineral supplements. The lack of clear dosing
instructions resulted in safety issues and led to hospitalisations.
2021 GMP Pilot Inspection Program: Health Canada found instances of non-compliance in all 36
inspections. Problems were significant enough at 15 of the inspections that Health Canada
informed the companies that the Department was considering suspending, orin some cases
immediately suspending, their site and/or product licences.
Undisclosed Ingredient: In February 2021, a teenager was hospitalized for 10 days due to severe
kidney issues [hypercalcemia, acute kidney injury, and nephrocalcinosis] after consuming an
authorized natural health product. Product testing detected dangerous levels of undisclosed
Vitamin D.
Misleading Brand Name: In 2023, Health Canada was notified of reports from consumers
describing confusion with the brand name of an infant probiotic drop that falsely implied the
presence of vitamin D in the product.
Advertising Unauthorized Benefits: In 2021, Health Canada addressed reports of false, misleading,
and deceptive advertising of hand sanitizers with respect to COVID-19 claims. The same year, a
monitoring pilot revealed that more than half of unauthorized products we're making unauthorized
cancer claims.
Noncompliance with GMP and Lack of Cooperation
Unsanitary conditions: Health Canada has found numerous facilities operating under unsanitary
conditions. As an example, in March 2024, following notification of unsanitary conditions at a
company’s premises, Health Canada conducted an unannounced visit atthe facility. Inspectors
identified serious deficiencies, including inadequate pest management and a lack of
ventilation/filtration systems that resulted in cross-contamination of products.
2021 GMP Pilot Inspection Program: Health Canada found instances of non-compliance in all 36
inspections. Problems were significant enough at 15 of the inspections that Health Canada
informed the companies that the Department was considering suspending, orin some cases
immediately suspending, their site and/or product licences.
Refusal to Recall Unsafe Product: In September 2021, Health Canada tested a sample of PURE75
hand sanitizer as part of a compliance monitoring project. Testing of the product identified
methanol levels above Health Canada’s acceptable limit. Methanol is poisonous to humans.
Despite Health Canada request for a recall, company refused to comply and kept the product
available for sale for a sustained period before eventually taking action.
