Created: 2024-09-04T13:50:35.777284
Name: _Tricks_to_not_get_sick:_Food_safety_for_kids_(video)
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/video/tricks-not-get-sick-food-safety-kids.html
Package ID: c2c9959f-b443-4a2f-a83a-a5b2cb1171c6
Keywords: ['Tricks', 'to not get sick', 'Food safety', 'for kids video']
Notes:  Tricks to not get sick: Food safety for kids (video)
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Tricks to not get sick: Food safety for kids (video) - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Health-related video gallery Tricks to Not Get Sick: Food Safety for Kids With described video Transcript Video Gallery Transcript In a colorful animated kitchen, a hand turns on a portable speaker and turns up the volume. Music starts Animated characters help clean, separate, cook and chill food from a grocery bag. Singer: I said– I said clean, separate, cook and chill Clean, separate, cook and chill (I said) Clean, separate, cook and chill Clean, separate, cook and chill! When it comes to making food You gotta know the trick Here’s things to do So you don’t get sick First you gotta clean Your veggies and your hands Wash those germs away They’re not in your plans. You need to separate Different types of food Treat raw meat and veggies Like they’re having a feud. If you’re helping to cook Best to do it right Make sure it’s up to the temp Before you take a bite. Now it’s time to chill (Uh-huh) Put that food away Pack it in the fridge And move on with your day. Clean, separate, cook and chill Clean, separate, cook and chill (I said) Clean, separate, cook and chill (and chill) Clean, separate, cook and chillllllllll! Text appears: Get more tricks, Canada dot C-A slash food safety. Logo for the Government of Canada. Page details Date modified: 2022-09-20 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy