Created: 2024-01-31T18:52:24.001893
Name: Report_an_incident_involving_a_consumer_product_or_cosmetic:_Fire_and_safety_authorities
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/consumer-product-safety/report-incident/fire-safety-authorities.html
Package ID: c4c5e924-f72f-4c8e-83a3-e588dd4d43ca
Keywords: ['consumer products', 'cosmetics', 'report an incident', 'reporting injuries', 'safety concerns']
Notes: What to report and how to use the fire and safety authority report form.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Report an incident involving a consumer product or cosmetic: Fire and safety authorities - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Health Product safety Consumer products and cosmetics Report an incident involving a consumer product or cosmetic: overview Report an incident involving a consumer product or cosmetic: Fire and safety authorities Overview Report an incident - consumers Report an incident - industry Report an incident - fire and safety authorities Reporting other issues, contact us Resources On this page What to report How to use the fire and safety authority report form What to report If you're a provincial, territorial or municipal authority such as a fire official or electrical safety regulator, you may report a safety issue with a consumer product related to: gas leak product defect other incident types shock or electrocution fire, smoke or overheating carbon monoxide detection activated smoke or carbon monoxide alarms When submitting your report, you will be asked for: your contact information the date and type of incident a description of what happened any documents or photos that may be of value the product's brand, name, description and certification marks Submit a fire and safety authority incident report What happens after you submit your report How to use the fire and safety authority report form Saving your form: You should save your form as an .hcxs file on your computer after you have completed and submitted it. Include the case and submission numbers in the file name to help you easily find your form again. These numbers are created once you click the "Proceed to Submit" button in the form. You may save your incomplete form at any time and upload it later to complete and submit. Viewing your form: To view a form saved in the .hcxs format, follow these instructions. Click the following link: Submit a Fire and Safety Authority report Scroll down the empty form on-line to the section titled "How to view/edit your previous Consumer Product Fire & Safety Authority Report - Section 9” and follow the instructions. Submitting the form: What happens when you click on <Submit Online>: The form will check that all mandatory fields are filled in and in the required format. If you DO have errors on your form, you will see an interactive list of your errors at the top of the form. Click on each hyperlinked error message to be taken to the exact field in the form that you need to change. Once your form passes that check, a pop-up message appear with the heading "Confirmation" and the message "Confirmation: Online submission was successful. Assigned Case Number(s) is/are: YYYY-###### and assigned Submission Number is: yyyy-mm-dd-#####." That case number and submission number will also appear at the bottom of your form. Maximum file size If your completed form including attached digital files is larger than 70MB you will see an error message and be unable to submit. If this happens to you, follow these steps: Submit attached digital files up to 70MB on your first form. Note the case number you receive when you submit that form. Go to the "Additional Documents" web form and attach the additional digital files and enter the case number. Page details Date modified: 2024-11-28 About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy