Created: 2024-09-09T12:30:18.075505
Name: Food_Additives_e-Notice
Original URL: https://www.canada.ca/en/health-canada/services/food-nutrition/food-safety/food-additives/notice.html
Package ID: c8783936-4d07-4938-a6e1-2081e4ab80e6
Keywords: ['Food Additives', 'e-Notice']
Notes: Join Health Canada's Food Additives e-Notice, a free service to stay on top of issued advice as well as regulatory and scientific developments in the area of food additives in Canada. Consumers, health professionals, as well as the food industry, can subscribe to Food Additives e-Notice. You will receive the latest food additives developments as they are issued by Health Canada. With the current amendments taking place to the Food and Drug Regulations, these updates should help keep key stakeholders and Canadians current with our progress. We encourage you to share this address with your colleagues.
-------------------------------
Extracted Text:
Food Additives e-Notice - Canada.ca Skip to main content Skip to "About government" Skip to section menu Language selection Français fr / Gouvernement du Canada Search Search Canada.ca Search Menu Main Menu Jobs and the workplace Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business and industry Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation You are here: Canada.ca Departments and agencies Health Canada Food and nutrition Food Safety Food Additives: Overview Food Additives e-Notice Join Health Canada's Food Additives e-Notice, a free service to stay on top of issued advice as well as regulatory and scientific developments in the area of food additives in Canada. Consumers, health professionals, as well as the food industry, can subscribe to Food Additives e-Notice. You will receive the latest food additives developments as they are issued by Health Canada. With the current amendments taking place to the Food and Drug Regulations, these updates should help keep key stakeholders and Canadians current with our progress. We encourage you to share this address with your colleagues. Disclaimer: This tool is provided as an information dissemination service only. Health Canada will not assume responsibility for any system failures or omissions of notifications. Visit the Food Additives webpage to view the complete list of topics related to this subject. Subscribe to Food Additives e-Notice To subscribe, submit an email to foodadditives-subscribe-request@list.hc-sc.gc.ca with the email subject containing only the text "Subscribe". You will receive a confirmation e-mail from Food Additives e-Notice. You must reply to this confirmation e-mail in order to activate your e-Notice subscription. Cancel your Food Additives e-Notice Subscription If you are already a subscriber and wish to cancel, submit an email to foodadditives-unsubscribe-request@list.hc-sc.gc.ca with the email subject containing only the text "Unsubscribe". You will receive a confirmation e-mail from Food Additives e-Notice. You must reply to this confirmation e-mail in order to cancel your e-Notice subscription. Note: If you're having problems subscribing or unsubscribing, contact bcs-bipc@hc-sc.gc.ca. Page details Date modified: 2023-10-20 Section Menu Food Additives: Overview Caffeine in Foods ARCHIVED - Food Additive Dictionary Lists of Permitted Food Additives Sugar Substitutes ARCHIVED - Health Canada Requests Information from Industry on the Use of Aluminum-Containing Food Additives ARCHIVED - Health Canada Review of Dietary Exposure to Aluminum Questions and Answers Regarding Health Canada's Proposal to Amend the Food and Drug Regulations to Permit the Use of the Enzyme Asparaginase in Certain Food Products White Blush on Cocktail Carrots Food Additives e-Notice Your subscription request to the Food Additives e-Notice has been submitted Your cancellation request to Food Additives e-Notice has been submitted. Change your Food Additives e-Notice Subscription Enzymes used in Food Processing Food Processing Aids Monosodium glutamate (MSG) and other sources of glutamate in foods Priority Scheduling and Expedited Handling of Submissions that have the Capacity to Enhance Food Safety Food Additives - Submission Preparation Food additives: Food colours Food additives: Sweeteners About this site Health Canada Contact us Government of Canada All contacts Departments and agencies About government Themes and topics Jobs Immigration and citizenship Travel and tourism Business Benefits Health Taxes Environment and natural resources National security and defence Culture, history and sport Policing, justice and emergencies Transport and infrastructure Canada and the world Money and finances Science and innovation Indigenous Peoples Veterans and military Youth Government of Canada Corporate Social media Mobile applications About Canada.ca Terms and conditions Privacy